





























































Hansard: June 06, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1581 
 June 6, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
a petition to retain the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. And this 
petition recognizes that the Living Sky Health District is 
considering closing the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. And 
that health care in many areas has already been gutted due to 
provincial government policy. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from Guernsey and from 
the Lanigan area. 
 
I so present them. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
today that pleads with the government not to allow the Lanigan 
and Watrous hospitals to close. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Lanigan and 
Jansen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closures of 
hospitals in the province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Lanigan and Lockwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Jones: — I’d like to present a petition requesting that 
smoking be banned in all public places. These petitions were 
collected by the youth of Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
stand today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens concerned about the future of the Lanigan and Watrous 
hospitals. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 

Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Lanigan, Guernsey, and Drake. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Harper: — To present a petition requesting that smoking 
be banned from all public places. These petitions are collected 
by the youth of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people in my constituency and around the province concerned 
about the high price of fuel. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the petition is signed by people from Climax, Swift 
Current, Kincaid, Preeceville, and Shamrock. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of people in Saskatchewan who are concerned about 
the crisis in health care. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And this is signed by residents of Lanigan and Radisson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present . . . people of Saskatchewan concerned about 
the possible closure of the Lanigan and Watrous hospital. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

The community involved in this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from the community of Lanigan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to read a 
petition from citizens concerned about hospital closures: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 



1582 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2000 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Signed by the citizens from Lanigan, Burr, and Drake. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Saskatoon, Regina, Foam 
Lake, Davidson, and Aylesbury. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too stand to read a 
petition from citizens concerned about hospital closures. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The petitioners are from the communities of Humboldt, 
Lanigan, and Drake, and there’s a few from Saskatoon who are 
concerned about citizens in Lanigan. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding cellular coverage. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 
 

These citizens come from Cymric, Duval, and Govan. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present on behalf of citizens concerned with poor cellular 
telephone coverage. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 
 

And the signatures to this petition come from the communities 
of Duval, Strasbourg, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the 
closure of the Lanigan and Watrous hospital: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And the signatures on this petition are from Davidson and 
Lanigan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible closures 
of the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from Watson, Lanigan, 
Saskatoon, Creelman, and Drake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
responsibility that I rise as well to present a petition to retain 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the good citizens of 
Allan and Young, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Petitions of citizens of the province on the following matters, 
petitioning the Assembly: 
 

To halt the amalgamation of municipalities; 
 
To reduce fuel taxes; 
 
To not confiscate municipal reserve accounts; 
 
To provide reliable cellular service in Prud’homme, Bruno, 
Vonda, and Cudworth; and 
 
To ensure the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 



June 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1583 

shall on day no. 59 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment and Resource 
Management: who is presently leasing the Blackstrap ski 
lodge and hill; and what is the cost of the lease; and how 
long have they been leasing the property? 

 
And while I’m on feet I would also like to give notice that on 
day no. 59 that I would like to ask the Minister of Environment 
and Resource Management: 
 

Have there been any grants made available to the 
Blackstrap ski resort in the last fiscal year? 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a notice of a written 
question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 59 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of SaskWater: what was the cost to the 
government for the minister’s recent flight to Lucky Lake 
for an announcement dealing with the Pak-Wel 
Investment? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, 29 grade five students sitting in the west gallery 
from the constituency of Regina Wascana Plains and the school, 
W S. Hawrylak School. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to be in W. S. Hawrylak 
School on a number of occasions and been warmly welcomed. 
So I’m going to ask all members to do that today. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher Ms. Carol Borowski and parent 
chaperones and some student chaperones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s another reason why Ms. Borowski would 
be a special person to this Assembly because she is also the 
mother of one of our very hard working pages, Charla 
Borowski. I would ask all members and Charla to join with me 
in welcoming Ms. Borowski and the grade five students from 
W. S. Hawrylak School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a school 
group here today. It’s my first one since I’ve been here in the 
legislature. 
 
This group is sitting here in the east gallery. They’re from 
Schell School from the town of Holdfast. There’s 21 grade 5 
and 6 students here. 
 
I would like to introduce their teacher, Ms. Lynn Ledingham; 
chaperones Chris and Louise Rogoschewsky, Bridget Kascey, 
and Rod Measner. 
 
I want to welcome them here as I know all the members will. 
And I hope that they find their visit here a most entertaining and 
educational, and afterwards I will try and answer, if they have 

any questions on the proceedings here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are two groups 
that I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the members 
of this Assembly here today. The first group I’d like to 
introduce on behalf of the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in your gallery are 18 students from the Eastend 
School in Eastend, Saskatchewan. They are accompanied by 
their teachers, Shelley Morvik, and Marie Hanson. And also 
with them for the ride are bus drivers Kurt Humphrey and 
Dennis Elhard, the brother of the member for Cypress Hills, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’ll leave it to the members gathered to pick out which one 
might be related to the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Also while I’m on my feet, while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the members of 
the Assembly, 15 students from Wymark School in my 
constituency. They are seated in the east gallery. 
 
And they are accompanied by their teacher, Sandra Crooks, and 
also several chaperones have joined them, Ken Martens, 
Darlene Dyck, Marlene Wieler, and Jake Schlamp. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I had a chance to meet with this group just 
prior to question period. They had excellent questions, and I 
enjoyed my time with them. 
 
I’d ask all members of the Assembly to join in welcoming both 
of these groups of students from southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Privatized Health Care Results in 
Bankruptcies in United States 

 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
this side of the House, we support publicly funded medicare 
because we believe and experience has shown that this is the 
most efficient and fair way to deliver health care. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if we needed any further proof, there’s a 
new study out of the United States which reveals where 
privatized health care leads. 
 
The study, to be published next month in a finance journal, 
Norton Bankruptcy Law Advisor, tells us that 500,000 
Americans in 1999 filed for bankruptcy because of heavy 
medical bills. Forty per cent of all personal bankruptcies in the 
US (United States) were the result of medical bills. 
 
It will come as no surprise that those hardest hit were the 
elderly women and single-parent families headed by women. 
These families, the studies quote, are just one serious illness 
away from financial collapse. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, we have our problems with health care. 



1584 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2000 

There are serious issues which must be addressed. But these 
statistics prove that no matter what Premier Klein, Stockwell 
Day, and the Saskatchewan Party may say, America-style 
privatized health care is not the way to go. 
 
This study comes at a good time, Mr. Speaker. Those who 
accuse the defenders of medicare as being nostalgic for the 
good, old days should be advised as to the cruel reality of what 
they advocate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Retirement of Dr. Roy Holm 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
would like to congratulate Rev. Dr. Roy Holm on his 
retirement. 
 
It was 40 years ago that Rev. Holm graduated from the 
seminary in St. Louis, Missouri, and came to serve as pastor of 
St. Peter’s Lutheran Church in Estevan and St. Luke Lutheran 
Church in Midale. 
 
After 18 years of service, he moved to Regina where he became 
district president, a position he held for 22 years and he chaired 
his final meeting as president last night in Yorkton. I have the 
highest regard for Rev. Holm, and I know he is no stranger to 
this Assembly. 
 
And I ask all members to join me in wishing Rev. and Mrs. 
Holm all the best. God bless them both. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Decoration Day Ceremony 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, today is the 66th anniversary of 
D-Day. The day when Allied troops from Canada, Britain and 
United States hit the beaches of Normandy and began the 
liberation of Europe — the beginning of the end of World War 
II. On this day, I know we’ll take a moment to remember those 
brave soldiers from all nations who fought and fell on that 
longest day. 
 
There’s another ceremony associated with D-Day, less known 
but equally as important — Decoration Day. It occurs on the 
Sunday closest to June 6. On this day, members of the Royal 
Canadian Legion across the nation meet to clean veterans’ 
gravesites and take part in a brief, solemn ceremony in 
remembrance at those sites. 
 
I was happy on Sunday to represent the Premier and the 
Government of Saskatchewan at Decoration Day in Regina held 
at Riverside Memorial Park. I was proud to join with legion and 
members and families of the veterans to lay a wreath. A small 
ceremony to honour a great sacrifice. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Mine Rescue and Emergency 
Response Competition 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 27, the 

Provincial Mine Rescue and Emergency Response Competition 
was held here in Regina. At this competition, 18 teams 
comprised entirely of employees from various Saskatchewan 
mines competed in a variety of events, which included a written 
test, a simulated mine disaster, a firefighting competition, and a 
mock emergency situation which required the application of 
complex first aid treatment. 
 
Since my brother was involved with mine safety and rescue 
training and competitions for many many years, I’m well aware 
of the intense training and physically challenging . . . involved 
for the dedicated people who chose to serve on my emergency 
response team. 
 
I’m very proud to say that the team which captured the title of 
overall provincial champions in the soft rock division were 
from PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) Lanigan 
potash mine in my constituency. Mr. Speaker, it would be very 
nice to assure this very competent group of individuals that 
once they’ve done their part in a mine accident, that there would 
be a hospital in Lanigan for the victims to use. 
 
The members of the commendable team are Lloyd Greve, Mike 
Kleiter, Lynn Knaus, Dave Powell, Ken Worobec, Terry Pisio, 
Nola Koberinksi, Knute Olsen, and Doug Hushagen.. 
 
I would like all the members to join me in congratulating this 
outstanding team who are committed to mine emergency 
response. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Scientific Research Station at Eastend T-Rex Centre 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan. I am pleased to inform this House about a major 
announcement made yesterday concerning the Eastend T-Rex 
Centre. The Royal Saskatchewan Museum will establish a 
scientific research station in the recently built centre. 
 
The government has signed a deal with the Eastend Community 
Tourism Authority relocating and expanding the museum’s 
fossil research station in the new centre. The goal of this 
sustainable partnership is protecting the rich fossil resources of 
the south-west Saskatchewan area for future generations while 
providing educational and tourism opportunities. The museum 
will conduct fossil research, collection, and preservation 
activities from the new centre, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition, they will assist with the centre’s exhibits, 
education, and interpretative programs. In addition, the 
museum’s involvement of our government has provided a 1.2 
million capital grant from Economic and Co-operative 
Development to match contributions raised by the community. 
SaskEnergy has also contributed $300,000 for educational 
programming. 
 
The members on this side of the House extend congratulations 
to the Eastend Community Tourism Authority and the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum for their dedication, vision, and 
co-operative approach that has led to the construction of this 
new centre and the agreement around it. 
 



June 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1585 

We also acknowledge the local business of the Eastend 
community for their huge effort in this endeavour. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Volunteer Recognition Awards 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to recognize three special people who were honoured 
recently by receiving volunteer recognition awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the North Central Regional Recreational 
Association have awarded Lorraine Kouznitsoff of Blaine Lake, 
and Raymond and Gisele Desjardins, formerly of Marcelin, 
with volunteer recognition awards. 
 
As well as farming and raising a family, Lorraine has been 
active in the community of Blaine Lake. Active in the 
Doukhobor Church ladies group, coaching girls’ softball, 
president of the figure skating club, and member of the local 
and Wapiti Regional Library Boards, as well as various 
activities for the Blaine Lake Recreation Board has rightfully 
earned her the 2000 Volunteer Recognition Award for Sport 
and Special Services. 
 
Raymond and Gisele received the 2000 Volunteer Recognition 
Award for Special Services. Raymond was chairperson and 
secretary for the Marcelin Board of Trade, held the position of 
Grand Knight and District Deputy in the Knights of Columbus, 
and served on the Marcelin Credit Union board. 
 
Gisele was a teacher’s aide, served on the Marcelin Recreation 
Board, sat on the Marcelin Library Board, and was secretary 
and then mayor of the village of Marcelin. Over 30 years she 
has held various executive positions with the local Catholic 
Women’s League. 
 
Please join me in congratulating these three dedicated 
individuals on the well-deserved recognition bestowed upon 
them. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

World Environment Week 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, June 4 to 
10 is environment . . . pardon me, World Environment Week. 
Yesterday, the United Nations had proclaimed World 
Environment Day. Tomorrow is the second annual Clean Air 
Day. 
 
The common theme of all is community action on clean air and 
climate change, and certainly, Mr. Speaker, community action 
is very important. But community action, like everything else in 
life, starts with one individual and then grows from there. 
 
This 29th annual environmental week is held to help us 
celebrate the commitment of literally thousands of 
Saskatchewan people as they make choices each day to help 
create a cleaner, healthier environment. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, let us celebrate the small victories we’ve 

made for our environment and let us all resolve to be much 
more diligent with our one and only environment, our world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Economy Growing 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Citizens of 
Saskatchewan have reason to be confident with the growing 
economy. Ten thousand more new jobs have been created in the 
first part of this year over last year — 10,000 more new jobs. 
 
Companies are expanding, and compared to the 1980s, more 
and more people are choosing to make Saskatchewan their 
home. Saskatchewan people have shown their confidence in the 
economic stability of this province by spending more on retail 
sales. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in this province have been shopping till 
they drop. Figures from StatsCanada show that Saskatchewan 
sales have increased 9.1 per cent during January through April 
of this year over the same period in 1999. This 9.1 per cent 
more than doubles and almost triples the national per cent 
change of 3.4. 
 
Saskatchewan’s per cent of change is the second best showing 
in the entire country. We play second to only one province, and 
no, it isn’t Alberta. In fact Alberta finishes fourth at 4.7 per 
cent. Ontario finishes behind Alberta at 3.6 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re encouraged by these numbers. The numbers 
prove that what members on this side of the House are saying is 
true. Saskatchewan continues to grow and the people of this 
province are confident in the economy. 
 
Gloom and doom? Not from this side, Mr. Speaker. Only 
optimism. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Wascana Centre Prohibition on Sports 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Well, well, Mr. Speaker, it’s official. The 
Premier has turned into a grumpy old man. He’s now leaning 
out of his office window, shaking his fist, and yelling: hey kids, 
get off my front yard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now have the government telling kids that they 
can’t play a game of pickup football on the lawn of the 
legislature. Mr. Speaker, I think one of the greatest things about 
driving up to this building in the summertime is seeing kids toss 
a football or a Frisbee around and there are many days I’d love 
to join them. 
 
Mr. Premier, this building doesn’t belong to you. It belongs to 
everyone, including those kids. Mr. Premier, will you lift this 
ridiculous regulation or restriction and allow the kids to play on 
the front lawn of the Legislative Building? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1586 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to the 
hon. member opposite that perhaps what he ought to do is have 
a check with his local optometrist because I was not shaking my 
fist at those outside having fun and enjoying the park; I was 
shaking my fist at the Saskatchewan Party and saying they 
should be going. 
 
Rather, our position is that this park is for the enjoyment of all 
the people of Regina and Saskatchewan. We do not like the 
decision taken by the Wascana board. The minister in charge 
has written, or is about to write, requesting that the matter be 
reviewed and that they take a second look from the point of 
view of making it enjoyable even to the occasional and odd 
Saskatchewan Party member who happens to be around. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government is 
raising concerns that the lawn is being damaged. I think that 
was the biggest reason. And I think that’s ridiculous. People 
have been playing ball on the front lawn of the legislature for as 
long as I can remember. And the front lawn looks pretty darn 
good to me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I even understand on Saturdays that some of the 
media like to get together and have a quick game of football out 
on the front lawn. Believe me, these guys aren’t exactly tearing 
up the turf with their blinding speed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if a bunch of middle-aged reporters want to get 
together on a Saturday afternoon and sweat like Elvis, let them 
do it. What’s wrong with that? 
 
My question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, lighten up. Lift this 
ridiculous ban and let the people enjoy the facilities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that I 
am feeling pretty light. I’m not sure that I’m looking as light as 
I should. We are lightened up on this side. I’ve said to the 
member before and I’m going to repeat it in the second question 
and second answer — we believe that this park should be used 
for the enjoyment of all the people, including organized or 
disorganized sports. 
 
In fact I’m told the incident stemmed from the fact that one 
Murray Mandryk, and Mark Wyatt and a few others in their 
weekly or daily football matches were playing and somehow 
the people at Wascana Park viewed that this was an organized 
sports match involving Murray and company. 
 
I want to tell you how light I am about this. I extend a challenge 
to the Leader of the Official Opposition and to all of your 
crowd. We’ll put together a team; we’ll have a nice little 
friendly game outside in Wascana Park. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Converting Paved Highways to Gravel 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Highways. 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Highways revealed that 
his department plans to turn a number of Saskatchewan 
highways back to grid roads. Mr. Speaker, this is a clear 
admission that this government has basically given up on 
maintaining the highway system in this province. They simply 
can’t make up for the nine years of underfunding and neglect 
and instead they start to plan to convert highways to grid roads. 
 
Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan people deserve to know what you 
plan to do with their highway system. Will you table a list of 
the highways that you plan to turn back to gravel? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, the member have heard . . . the member and 
members opposite have heard me say many times that we, on 
this side of the House, have identified highways and 
transportation as a very high priority, that’s why we put $250 
million this year, Mr. Speaker, into our provincial budget — a 
6.6 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it’s interesting though that members opposite even seem 
to be divided. I want to read a quote, Mr. Speaker, for you, out 
of The Leader-Post of April 15, 2000. The member from 
Cypress Hills says the following: 
 

However, there is only so much construction (that) the 
province can complete each year as long as the federal 
government refuses to contribute its share of twinning 
costs, Elhard said. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to remind members also that at an interest 
cost on the public debt that they have created over there, Mr. 
Speaker, of $2 million a day, can you only imagine how many 
roads we could fix and repair and construct each and every 
year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, when you’ve underfunded highways for nine years, 6 
per cent just isn’t going to cut it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, first the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) gave us two-tier health care. Now they’re 
giving us two-tier highway system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week we raised the issue of Highway 18 from 
Bracken to Climax. This highway is so bad the school bus can 
no longer drive on it. The minister said that tenders have been 
let to fix Highway 18. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has learned that the 
contract has now been awarded, but the contract not to repair it 
but to turn Highway 18 back to gravel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you confirm that’s your plan — to turn 
Highway 18 back to gravel — and will you again table a list of 
highways that you plan to turn back into gravel. 
 



June 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1587 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, many people . . . many 
members, I should say, on this side of the House will remember 
1984. You remember how . . . To the public of Saskatchewan I 
say, do you remember how we used to repair roads? It was with 
equipment we had. 
 
I want to refer you to a specific date — May 16 and 17, 1984. It 
was a very significant day. There was an auction sale held that 
day, Mr. Speaker. There were tractors, loaders, graders, trucks, 
trailers, scrapers, asphalt equipment, conveyors, compactors, 
and much, much more. In total, Mr. Speaker, 436 pieces of 
equipment were sold on May 16 and 17, 1984. 
 
That’s how we . . . that’s the equipment that we used to use, Mr. 
Speaker, to repair equipment. On top of them . . . They get rid 
of the equipment, on top of that, Mr. Speaker, what did they do? 
They create a huge debt, an interest cost of $2 million a day. 
Imagine again, I say, how many roads we could repair with that 
amount of money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t think it’s a matter of a shortage of machinery 
and equipment. It’s a short of money to fix the highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning on the radio they were talking about 
a new reality-based TV show where contestants are forced to 
live like it’s the 19th century. I thought they must have stolen 
the idea from this NDP government. People in rural 
Saskatchewan are already being forced to live like it’s the 19th 
century. Hospitals are being converted to health centres. 
Highways are being converted to grid roads. Schools are being 
converted to bakeries. It’s no wonder so many NDP MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) were converted to 
former MLAs in the last election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Highways 
plans to turn highways back to gravel, then he should lay his 
plan on the table and let people of Saskatchewan know what 
highways they are. 
 
Mr. Minister, which highways will remain as highways and 
which ones, once again, are you going to turn back to gravel? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I find this absolutely 
incredulous. He’s saying . . . the member opposite talks about 
shortage of money, and each day — including today — there 
were several petitions, Mr. Speaker, from those members 
opposite to reduce the fuel tax. And I don’t know how they 
expect that we are to, with a reduced fuel tax, pay for more 
construction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a 6.6 per cent increase in 
our budget, up to $250 million. Mr. Speaker, in the last four 
years we’ve seen a 49 per cent increase in our Highways 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We’re doing what we can, Mr. Speaker, 
but we need the federal government at the table as well to assist 
us with much more repair and construction here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Minister, 
you’re not doing either. You’re not lowering the gas tax, and 
you’re not fixing the highways — at least do one or the other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today in Val Marie, local people from the village 
and RM (rural municipality) are out fixing their own highway. 
One of our MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) is out 
there, and I hear the president of the SGEU (Saskatchewan 
Government and General Employees’ Union ) is also out to 
help. 
 
I just hope the government is planning to force the volunteer 
highway crew to join a union. 
 
Mr. Minister, today in Val Marie we may be getting a glimpse 
of the future. If the NDP starts turning highways back to gravel, 
then the next step is to turn maintenance of those grid roads 
over to the municipalities. And I’m sure some of the 
government won’t be giving RMs any extra money to take on 
this responsibility. 
 
Mr. Minister, is this your real plan? To turn highways back to 
gravel, then download them on a municipality? Is it part of your 
plan to turn some of these highways back over to the RMs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, in many ways we really do 
have to admire the spirit of people from the community out . . . 
and even in the area of Val Marie and communities around 
there for what they do. Certainly the people of that community 
have worked together, as they have worked in filling those pot 
. . . in those potholes, as they have worked for the last 10 years 
filling the biggest pothole, Mr. Speaker. That’s the pothole of 
debt that those members have created over the 10 years that 
they were in government. At $2 million a day, Mr. Speaker — 
interest on the public debt — $2 million a day, you can only 
imagine how many roads could be repaired and how many 
roads we could have constructed each and every year . . . each 
and every day, as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maintenance of Highway 349 between 
Naicam and Archerwill 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also 
for the Minister of Highways. The minister has been quick to 
respond saying they’re going to fix Highway No. 18 and No. 4 
when they brought it up in the House. So I thought I would 
mention a highway in my constituency that is in desperate need 
of help. 
 
The Highway No. 349 between Naicam and Archerwill is a 



1588 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2000 

disaster, Mr. Minister. The work done last year was just over a 
kilometre, and already those patches are heaving. The schedule 
for this year will only see 2 kilometres more of the road being 
patched, and there’s over a hundred kilometres more that is 
broken up and extremely dangerous. 
 
I drove a 10-kilometre stretch last week and I counted 90 
potholes, Mr. Minister. Right now your crews are out hauling 
off the real big chunks of asphalt off the road and then they’re 
throwing gravel over the rest of the road. 
 
Is that the idea of fixing the highway? What are you really 
going to do to fix the highways in this area? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I’d remind the 
member — I mean they’ll be able to list highways as they have 
done — but I remind members that we’ve seen a huge increase 
in our Highways budget because we’ve identified that as a high 
priority. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, in maintenance, 
we’ve increased our budget for maintenance 68 per cent in the 
last four years alone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If those members opposite in the 10 years when they were 
government, Mr. Speaker, if they hadn’t created the public debt 
that they created with interest accumulating at $2 million a day, 
can you imagine how many potholes we could fill without that 
amount of debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maintenance of Highway 3 from Glaslyn to Turtleford 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to bring to the attention of the Minister of Highways the 
condition of Highway 3 from Glaslyn to Turtleford. This 
highway is cracked so severely that the highway is actually 
spread out, which brings to the fact that the local residents are 
suggesting that maybe it should be looked at as being twinned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Highway 3 is the main highway into Turtle Lake 
resort area so it sees a lot of heavy traffic of vacationers to that 
area. It is also the main truck route for trucks hauling grain from 
eastern Saskatchewan communities through to Lloydminster. 
This heavy traffic has caused the road to rapidly break down. 
But because the heavy traffic load is so high, it should be a high 
priority in your department. 
 
Mr. Minister, should people planning to vacation at Turtle Lake 
this summer be expected to forget about their vacation and lay 
some pavement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think, Mr. Speaker, that that member 
and those members opposite should apologize when they raise 
that issue. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, when he was in the 
federal House of Commons, spoke in favour of abandoning the 
Crow, and it’s the exact reason that we have the problem that 
that member raises right now. It’s the exact reason why we have 

that problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With the change of goods and services from road to . . . with the 
change of goods and services . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Hon. Minister of Highways, to 
finish your answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — From the amount of noise coming from 
that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, it seems that it bothers 
them a little bit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the member . . . the Leader of the 
Opposition was in the House of Commons, he spoke in favour 
of abandoning the Crow rate. And it’s the exact reason that we 
have the problem that the member identifies. 
 
There has been a huge transition of goods and services from rail 
to road and no wonder that the roads are in the state of repair 
that they are. When they speak in favour of branch line 
abandonment and the Crow rate no longer being provided, 
that’s why we have the problem that the member raises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maintenance of Highway 339 from Avonlea to Stelcam 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, Highway 339 between Avonlea 
and the junction of Highway 39 at Stelcam is another example of a 
highway needing attention from the Department of Highways. The 
minister and members opposite don’t like hearing all of these 
examples but it’s important they recognize roads are the basic 
infrastructure of this province. 
 
And the poor condition of our provincial roadways are hurting 
other areas including agriculture, economic development, and 
tourism. Highway 339 is full of large potholes and chunks of 
loose pavement. It’s travelled daily by several school buses and 
is the only ambulance route from Avonlea, Claybank, Bayard, 
Briercrest, and surrounding communities, to Moose Jaw. 
 
In fact last Thursday the member from Swift Current blew out a 
car tire after hitting a pothole on this road near Briercrest. This 
pothole was flagged or I’m sure the minister would have 
already received this bill. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are your plans for fixing Highway 339? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I want to list three or four 
items that I’ve done here but I’m going to do them together. But 
I hope the public of Saskatchewan is listening to it and I believe 
that they understand, with one auction sale, selling off 436 
pieces of equipment. 
 
They call day after day for fuel tax reduction, Mr. Speaker. 
They accumulated debt over 10 years, of $10 billion, costing us 
$2 million per day of interest costs, Mr. Speaker. Is it a wonder 
that we can’t maintain the roads to the state of repair that they 
should be at, Mr. Speaker, with those factors coming together, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 



June 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1589 

And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
who spoke in favour, Mr. Speaker, in favour of the abolition of 
the Crow rate which has seen huge transition of goods and 
services, Mr. Speaker, from rail to road. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maintenance of Highway 15 from Seaman to Highway 20 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s kind of humorous to hear 
the member opposite use road maintenance and Department of 
Highways all in the same sentence. 
 
I would like to point out the very poor condition of Highway 
No. 15 in my constituency from Semans to Highway 20. My 
office receives numerous complaints about this highway, and 
like many others in rural Saskatchewan, it’s very heavily 
travelled. 
 
I have a copy of a letter that was sent to the minister from 
Kevin Gemmell, a salesman for CJVR Radio in Melfort. He 
travels more than 58,000 kilometres a year on Saskatchewan 
highways and is very concerned that he is constantly paying for 
car repairs due to the poorly maintained highways. In fact he 
wrote to the minister because his car was damaged after 
travelling on Highway No. 15 on May 2. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government, over the last nine years, 
have not adequately maintained the highways of this province, 
and will they start playing catch-up and put Highway No. 15 on 
the priority list? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, after they sell the 
highways equipment and after they accumulate the debt, all of a 
sudden they get smart about what should be done, Mr. Speaker. 
It makes no sense. 
 
I ask the members also, Mr. Speaker, I ask them also if they’ve 
talked to their colleagues. Their colleague, the critic for 
Highways, the member from Cypress Hills, Mr. Speaker, says 
in an article of The Leader-Post on April 15, 2000. He says the 
following, Mr. Speaker, he even acknowledges and says: 
 

However, there is only so much construction that the 
province can complete each year as long as the federal 
government refuses to contribute its fair share of twinning 
costs, Elhard said. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that they get together and talk to 
their Highways critic because I think he understands that we 
can’t do it on our own, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maintenance of Highway 6 between Minton and Ceylon 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the Minister of Highways. Mr. Minister, a 
year ago a highway crew spent several months at Highway No. 
6 between Minton and Ceylon. They surveyed the highway, 
they put up flags, and what little work they did was merely a 

band-aid job. The areas repaired are already breaking down. 
You keep throwing more money at the problems but nothing is 
ever fixed properly. 
 
Mr. Minster, No. 6 is a major north-south route. Many truckers 
use this route to and from the US. Today there are no shoulders 
left on this highway and the potholes are numerous, making it 
very dangerous when meeting semis. One school bus driver 
says she takes the grid road whenever possible because the grid 
is safer than the highway. 
 
Mr. Minister, now at least 18 miles of No. 6 Highway needs to 
be completely rebuilt because of years of neglect. Mr. Minister, 
when are you going to rebuild No. 6 Highway? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, to employees in the 
Department of Highways and Transportation and those out on 
the front lines, I hope they were listening closely to that 
question from that member. 
 
This is the member who said that she was in favour of 
privatizing health care. Here’s the quote, Mr. Speaker, from the 
Weyburn Review. She says: 
 

Why are we not looking at having privatized care in 
Saskatchewan and keeping the money here if that’s what 
we’re going to do. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what the member from Weyburn says. I 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, if that member feels that way about 
health care, it would not surprise me if that member feels the 
same way about highways and transportation, Mr. Speaker. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maintenance of Highways 44 and 31 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the beleaguered 
Minister of Highways as well. Mr. Minister. so far the questions 
from my colleagues have focused solely on one highway in 
their ridings. But sadly, most constituencies have several 
highways that are in need of immediate attention. 
 
I want to mention two highways in my constituency. Highway 
No. 44 from Plato right through to the Alberta border is a 
disaster. Strangely enough, when you reach the Alberta border, 
the highway becomes smooth and unbroken. The other highway 
is Highway 31 from Dodsland to the junction of Highway No. 
21. This road has been neglected for years, but oddly enough 
every election since 1991, it has been staked as if construction 
is going to begin soon. But it’s funny how those stakes 
disappear after I win the seat again, and again, and again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, when will highway construction 
begin on Highway 44 and Highway 31? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I was going to say, Mr. Speaker, to the 
. . . 
 



1590 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2000 

The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I was going to say, Mr. Speaker, to the 
member opposite is that maybe the reason he doesn’t see stakes 
out there is because he’s sold those off as well, but I actually 
don’t see those on this list that they did sell off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is 436 pieces of equipment, Mr. Speaker, 
that they sold on May 16 and 17 of 1984 at an auction sale. All 
of that equipment that disappeared, Mr. Speaker, then was sold. 
A very fateful day, May 16 and 17 of 1984. 
 
Is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, with equipment sold, with the 
amount of debt that’s accumulated, Mr. Speaker, that we cannot 
maintain the road system as we should maintain it, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
And on top of that, if you add to that, Mr. Speaker, the fact that 
that opposition party over there has argued in favour of 
abandoning the Crow rate and the transition of goods and 
services from rail to road, Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder that our 
roads are in the state of repair that they are? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Maintenance of Highway 35 from Francis to Highway No. 1 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Minister of Highways also. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a concern from a constituent of mine and 
she writes: 
 

Because the people of Saskatchewan are paying more and 
more for taxes and gas, the government should fix 
Highway 35 from Francis to the Number 1. 
 
My parents were just driving on this part of the highway on 
June second and found that it would have been far easier to 
drive in the ditch (than drive on our highways.) 
 
The pot holes are being filled but never packed and the 
pavement is breaking away. 
 
Maybe it will take an accident to make this NDP 
government take fixing the highways of this province 
seriously. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I concur. I’ve driven up that highway and it is a 
true danger. Mr. Minister, is this your plan: until an accident 
happens on that highway we’re going to wash our hands of it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, at today’s . . . the amount 
that we invest in highways today, Mr. Speaker, we’re investing 
as a province roughly 87 per cent of the amount of money that 
we collect goes back into highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to remind the public of Saskatchewan, as I’ve done 
in the past, Mr. Speaker, that at roughly $700 million a year . . . 
$720 million a year that we pay towards interest costs, 
amounting to about $2 million a day, that represents roughly, 

Mr. Speaker, 13 per cent of our entire budget that we pay 
toward interest costs. The third highest expenditure, Mr. 
Speaker, each and every year. 
 
If you take the 87 per cent that we get from highways . . . or 
from fuel tax, add the 13 per cent that we collect . . . or I should 
say that we pay towards interest on the debt, that’s 100 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. That extra $700 million, Mr. Speaker, we could do 
a huge amount of construction and maintenance on our 
highways each and every year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maintenance of Highway 40 East and West of Hafford 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, since we’re on the topic of 
highways, I’d also like to direct a question to the minister in 
charge of that department. Mr. Speaker, I would like to raise 
concerns about Highway No. 40. This stretch of pavement 
which runs east and west of Hafford is a growing concern for 
area residents. 
 
Some kilometres west of Hafford have seen patchwork done on 
potholes, but it’s certainly not enough to work . . . to make 
anyone more comfortable travelling down that highway. 
Residents of the area are questioning why it had to get so bad 
before any work is done. 
 
The maintenance work lasts no time at all and in the mean . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’m sitting close to the member 
asking the question, I can hardly hear him. I would ask all 
members to kindly come to order and allow the member to ask 
his question. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Residents of the area are questioning why it 
has to get so bad before any work is done. The maintenance 
work lasts no time at all and in the meantime the parts which 
haven’t had recent maintenance gets worse and worse. 
 
Mr. Minister, will the residents of Hafford see major repair and 
construction work done on Highway No. 40 this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we 
have more roads and highways than Alberta and Manitoba 
combined, Mr. Speaker. As a matter of fact, we have more 
roads here in Saskatchewan than Ontario does with almost . . . 
with over 9 million people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each day they come into the House here, Mr. 
Speaker, with petitions calling for a fuel tax reduction. And 
each day they ask us, as they’ve done today, Mr. Speaker, spend 
more — spend more on roads, spend more on maintenance, 
spend more on construction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope the public of Saskatchewan is listening to 
what these members are saying because the formula that they 
prescribe for us today is absolutely impossible, Mr. Speaker, 
absolutely impossible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1591 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being an open and 
accountable government, we’d like to table the answer to 
question 161. We’re extremely happy to do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 161 is tabled. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Farm Families Finish Seeding 2000 Crop 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the conclusion of 
my remarks this afternoon, I’ll be moving the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly commend Saskatchewan farm families 
for their determination and resoluteness in the face of last 
year’s adversity as demonstrated by the fact that nearly all 
of the year 2000 crop has been seeded in near record time. 

 
Mr. Speaker, spring is a special time for us all. But springtime 
is very special for farmers. As farmers have such a close 
relationship with the land and mother nature, you can gauge, 
you can gauge the readiness of spring by the activities of 
farmers. 
 
And this usually happens fairly early in the whole process, Mr. 
Speaker. As early as February in many cases you’ll notice 
farmers start to move around and start to do their business of 
preparation for spring seeding, gathering the seed, new seed if 
they’re prepared to use new seed that year, or maybe even 
taking some of their own seed to the cleaning plants and getting 
it cleaned and getting it on all preparations ready for spring 
seeding. Then they’ll be bringing in their supplies such as 
fertilizer and herbicides, etc., that they’ll be using for 
springtime. 
 
And as the sun warms and the snow melts and the land greens 
and springtime sets in, you’ll see the increased activity of 
farmers. And I’ve often believed, Mr. Speaker, that if we had 
the opportunity to take a bird’s-eye view of the province of 
Saskatchewan from corner to corner to corner to corner during 
that time in the spring seeding when all farmers in this great 
province of ours are out doing their thing, I think it would make 
a tremendous, a tremendous videotape of . . . choreographic 
videotape that nobody else could describe. 
 
Because you can just imagine the farm machinery moving in 
different directions, doing different jobs, each farmer doing his 
own thing in his own way; it could even be set to music, I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, because I think it is something of beauty 
— real beauty — real beauty, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the time of the spring is one of two particular 
seasons in the farm life and farm economy when the farm 
family really pulls together. 
 
The seeding is a family operation. And it’s not something that’s 
just done by the farmer himself, but it’s done by the entire 
family. And in many cases the teenage children are very much 
involved in the preparation of the land and operating of the farm 

machinery. 
 
But I think there’s also, Mr. Speaker, a part of that family farm 
and farm family that is an unsung hero in many cases and that is 
the spouse in many cases, the wife of the farmer. 
 
She is often overlooked but plays a very, very important role in 
the whole process. Mr. Speaker, the wives of farmers have 
always played the traditional role of preparing the meals and 
taking the meals in many cases out to the fields and keeping the 
farmers and hired men fed and energized for the long hours that 
they put in. 
 
But as circumstances of farming has changed so has the role of 
many of the farm wives. In many cases, Mr. Speaker, many of 
these wives are also involved in off-farm income and off-farm 
jobs. This increases their stress and increases their role in the 
family farm operation at seeding time because not only do they 
maintain their off-farm income and off-farm jobs but they also 
maintain the family life at home, preparing the meals, and 
seeing to it that there is lunches and so on ready for the farmers. 
In many cases these women come home after a long day at the 
job site and they still have their supper to make and supper to 
take out to the field. 
 
So I think in many cases we overlook the importance that 
women play in today’s farming opportunities. And as a result of 
that, Mr. Speaker, we I think miss out on a very valuable part of 
the importance of farming today because it is no longer just a 
one operation — the farmer doing it. But it is truly a family 
operation, particularly in those operations that are quite 
successful. 
 
And as we notice, Mr. Speaker, that over the last number of 
years, and I will say the last 20 or 30 or 40 years, we’ve seen 
significant changes in agriculture. We’ve seen our farmers meet 
many, many challenges. 
 
The challenges of diversification is one that they have met 
head-on, and I’m proud to say that Saskatchewan farmers, 
which are by the far the most efficient farmers in all of the 
world, have met these challenges in a very, very head-on way. 
And we are seeing, as we drive through the great province of 
ours today, Mr. Speaker, a number of crops that we would have 
only imagined be grown 30 or 40 years ago. 
 
We have moved away from the traditional crops of wheat, oats, 
and barley to diversify to chickpeas and lentils and a number of 
other crops, Mr. Speaker. And I believe that many, many of our 
farmers have diversified to the best of their ability, and they 
should be commended for that, Mr. Speaker, because they’ve 
met those challenges head-on. 
 
They’ve met those challenges head-on while facing obstacles 
that are beyond their control. And those obstacles primarily, as 
we have seen, has been farm subsidies in other farming nations 
such as Europe and the United States, farm subsidies by their 
federal governments — their parent governments — that have 
put our farmers for the most part at a disadvantage. 
 
But our farmers have rallied to that by meeting those 
challenges, and I would like to say that also, Mr. Speaker, our 
communities have rallied to that. In some cases we have seen 



1592 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2000 

farmers as individuals do the diversification. But we’ve also 
seen communities diversify. We’ve seen construction of hog 
barn industries across this province. 
 
But I would also like to draw attention to one community in 
particular, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the community of Norquay, 
that about 10 years ago or thereabouts — 8 to 10 years ago — 
looked at the farming situation, and also looked at the fact that 
they believed that they needed to do something to diversify the 
farm economy in your . . . in their area, and to do something to 
encourage young people to stay at home, in their community, 
whether it be on the farm or in their small communities. 
 
So they looked at an alfalfa processing plant. There was a group 
of individuals who studied the options, went through all the 
hoops, went throughout the community, raised money, and 
made an investment in an alfalfa processing plant. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that processing plant is running very 
successfully, is operating in Norquay. And today I believe that 
they’re looking at processing about 36,000 acres of alfalfa in 
that area. 
 
That particular plant has about a million and a half dollar 
payroll into that community. It creates full-time jobs, 
year-round jobs of at least 50 for people who work at that plant 
year-round. And seasonal workers, another additional 30 
seasonal workers are hired on from spring to fall. 
 
(1430) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what that plant has done, it has provided 
economic opportunity right within the community by creating 
50 to 75 jobs, but it’s also offered the opportunity to our 
farmers to diversify into growing alfalfa. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is very important because that is what is 
required if we are going to pursue the opportunity of 
diversification in our province here, which is absolutely 
essential, Mr. Speaker. Because that is what we have to do as 
farmers. 
 
We have to as . . . Farmers have demonstrated their ability to 
recognize their needs, to recognize that agriculture is changing, 
that no longer does agriculture suffice to say that we can 
survive on growing wheat, oats, and barley, the traditional 
crops. Because circumstances have changed and so has the 
atmosphere around agriculture. 
 
And we’ve seen that the low commodity prices and high input 
costs of the traditional cereal grains are driving farmers to look 
at other ways of making their farm operations viable. And we’re 
seeing our livestock in particular expand in this country. 
 
And I can attest to that, Mr. Speaker. And I will draw attention 
to a gentleman who farms north of Stenen, a gentleman by the 
name of Allan Ball. Allan is a young farmer. I say he’s young, 
Mr. Speaker, because he is a year or two younger than me, and 
I’m quite young. In fact I went to high school with Mr. Ball. 
 
And Allan runs an extensive livestock operation. He runs about 
175 bred cows. And this is a family farm operation. He’s 
primarily in charge. He has two sons in university, who when 

school is out they’re out some of them helping him. 
 
But Allan was . . . I was talking to him here just the other day 
and he was expressing his gratitude for the announcement by 
the provincial government this spring of reducing the gas tax 
because he was one of many farmers who used extensive 
amounts of gasoline. 
 
I know that the members opposite will suggest that that was a 
waste of time and a meaningless program, but that’s not 
necessarily the case. I mean, yes, Mr. Ball does run a lot of 
diesel powered equipment, but he also burns a lot of gasoline 
primarily because of his extensive cattle operation. He uses 
gasoline powered equipment, particularly trucks, in the 
movement of bales and the feeding of his livestock. 
 
And he was telling me that he has always exceeded the limit of 
the gas tax cap previously and now he’ll be able to benefit from 
that. So he was quite excited and quite pleased about it, Mr. 
Speaker, because now he believes he’ll be on a level playing 
field with others. 
 
And I had the opportunity also, Mr. Speaker, here, a couple of 
weeks ago on the long weekend, took the opportunity to travel 
out into the rural areas and just stopped in to some of the coffee 
shops and to talk to some of the farmers that were in there doing 
the same as I — having coffee. 
 
And one of the gentlemen I talked to in Norquay was a 
gentleman by the name of Tim Derkatch. Tim is a young 
farmer. Tim is probably 35, 36 years of age. Tim, this year, 
seeded about 3,300 acres into crop. And Tim is one of those 
who has diversified. He is not just growing wheat but he’s 
growing a number of other crops. 
 
But Tim is . . . I had a nice long chat with him and he wanted to 
take the opportunity to express to me and through me to the 
government his appreciation for all the work the government 
put into this spring finding financial assistance for farmers 
because he was one of those who was experiencing some 
difficulty, experiencing some difficulty in finishing paying off 
last year’s bills in order to receive credit and operating lines for 
this forthcoming year. 
 
And he was very, very appreciative of the billion dollars that 
the Saskatchewan government had been able to negotiate with 
the federal government and put together to assist farmers like 
him to be able to see their way through, to be able to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the point of that 
program, as you know, Mr. Speaker, was the Saskatchewan’s 
continued . . . Saskatchewan’s continued participation in AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance), which was for 1999, 
which meant cash flow money for farmers straight through to 
this spring. 
 
But equally as important, Mr. Farmer . . . Mr. Speaker, and I 
think equally as important for many, many farmers was the fact 
that the Saskatchewan government had been able to work out a 
deal with the federal government to instate a $260 million from 
the transportation cost adjustment program. This money flows 



June 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1593 

straight through, Mr. Speaker, to farmers and it’s flowed 
through at a very rapid pace. 
 
So farmers, once the program was in place, simply, for those 
who were in NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account), simply 
had to . . . simply received a form from Crop Insurance, which 
they verified, signed, sent back, and in very short order got a 
cheque in the mail. This was very helpful. This gave farmers 
something they were desperate for, and that is a cash flow, 
some real cash money in their hands to service their debts with. 
 
But equally as important and equally as appreciated was the 
negotiations that the provincial government was able to carry 
out with the federal government to get the federal government 
to agree to establishing a $400 million available under the 
spring credit advance program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That gave farmers the ability to take credit. Basically it’s a cash 
advance against this year’s crop and they were able to secure 
operating lines of credit, or able to secure some commodities 
from their suppliers and so on and so forth, and use this money 
interest-free, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s the key — interest-free, Mr. Speaker. They got that 
money in the spring and they don’t have to pay it back or pay 
any interest on it until this fall. So I think, Mr. Speaker, it is 
very meaningful and very, very helpful to our farmers. 
 
And I know it is because I’ve had them express that very, very 
sentiment to me, myself, here just two weeks ago when I was 
out in Norquay in the coffee shops there speaking to some 
farmers. And I found it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that it wasn’t 
just the young farmers that was expressing this interest and this 
gratitude — it was also the older farmer too. 
 
Because although the older farmers for the most part were fairly 
financially secure and perhaps weren’t those in need so 
desperately of the money, but they recognized the plight of 
many of the younger farmers. And they were very anxious to 
see that that happens to assist those younger farmers in being 
able to secure product and securing operating lines of credit. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move the following 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly commend Saskatchewan farm families 
for their determination and resoluteness in the face of last 
year’s adversity, as demonstrated by the fact that nearly all 
of the year 2000 crop has been seeded in near record time. 

 
Seconded by the member from Prince Albert Carlton. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
indeed a great pleasure for me to stand here today to salute our 
farmers. To salute, Mr. Speaker, the concept of farming. To 
salute the spirit of farming, and all of it that the word farming 
represents. Farmers who are working sometimes with nature, 
Mr. Speaker, sometimes against nature — working to earn a 
living. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to salute the farm family. And that includes 
all farm families, and that includes my family, Mr. Speaker, and 

that includes my neighbour’s families, and it includes, Mr. 
Speaker, all members of the family as was very well alluded to 
by the member from Regina who just spoke previously on this 
motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of us in this Chamber are products of 
agriculture in some way or other. My career started on the farm. 
Farming paid for my education. Farming is ingrained in my 
values. Farming taught me the value of work. Farming taught 
me the value of working with farmers, taught me about 
co-operation. 
 
And today I want to speak about the spirit of farming. And I 
want to give a single person’s perspective of how farming has 
affected our lives, how it’s affected our thinking — how 
farming still affects our thinking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I taught . . . not only did I grow up on a farm, I 
taught in farm communities. There was a short period of time in 
my life when I spent working in agriculture as a hail adjuster. 
Farming, basically, is in our blood, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In my case, there are five generations of farmers in 
Saskatchewan in my family starting with my great-grandfather 
who came here with his son, my grandfather, from Ukraine. I 
don’t know how many generations of farmers there were before 
them. 
 
But throughout the five generations starting with my 
great-grandfather and leading through to my brother and his 
son, who is now getting into farming as well, I’ve noticed that 
even though some ideas change . . . the methodology changes, 
but there is a few things that are constant. One, Mr. Speaker, is 
the love of the land. Another is just the smell of the fresh tilled 
earth. We still enjoy that scent, Mr. Speaker, when we go out 
into the garden and like to put our hands into the dirt. Just 
sometimes . . . I know with getting the idea of the plants to 
grow, but just a good feeling and the nice smell of good 
Saskatchewan earth. 
 
Or whether, Mr. Speaker, other things are constant. The 
satisfying feeling that you get from raising livestock, all the 
way from breeding through birthing right through to feeding, 
whether it be a . . . whether it be beef, or chicken, or some of 
the more diverse animals that our farmers are diversified into. 
 
But after all of that, Mr. Speaker, being on a farm you work like 
the dickens but after doing a day’s work, farmers usually can 
sleep soundly. And I want to congratulate the farmers that I’ve 
known, that I’ve worked for, and that are still working for their 
spirit and for knowing always that by pulling together they can 
bounce back. 
 
It was the farmers of Saskatchewan who really do lead the way 
when it comes to inventing and creating — all the new 
machinery we’ve seen developed right here in Saskatchewan; 
new crop varieties that we saw developed right here in 
Saskatchewan through the generations. 
 
Machineries that . . . some cases have developed and now is 
even extinct. I think of something called the rod weeder, Mr. 
Speaker, which we used to see back in the ’50s and ’60s, and I 
rarely see something like that now. 



1594 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2000 

But at all times they’re grappling with the elements, whether the 
elements are wild oats or frost, or hoppers at one time, or 
insurance systems or international subsidies. There are always 
some elements to grapple with in farmers. It’s a little bit like 
politics — it never ends, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But our farmers have determined to make a go of it. Our 
farmers have determined to do what it takes, and they’ve 
resolved to see the work that is done, and they are always 
planning for next year. 
 
Farming is a bit of an adventure, Mr. Speaker. My 
great-grandfather and his twelve-year- old son, my grandfather, 
immigrated to the Radisson area — unfenced prairies, just 
surveyed, unbroken prairies. They had very few possessions; 
they’d scraped enough just to get to Canada, to be able to buy a 
cow or an ox at that time. 
 
Farming in those days, Mr. Speaker, was labour. But for my 
grandfather and his father and their families, it meant freedom. 
It meant ownership. It meant being a master in your own yard. 
It meant no more crop sharing. It meant no more beholding to 
land barons. It meant no more fear of oppression. But instead 
they were free to build the schools and the roads. They were 
free to earn a living and not to beg on somebody else’s 
benevolence. 
 
The member says where did they come from? My grandfather 
came from Ukraine but it wasn’t known as Ukraine at that time. 
I believe it was known as Galicia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was how the West was won, how Canada was 
won. And I salute that spirit, Mr. Speaker, today — the spirit of 
those pioneers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the value that my great-grandparent’s generation 
brought — freedom, respect for law and order, respect for good 
government, respect for education, and respect for honest work 
— in order that they would make . . . and they came here in 
order that they would make things better for their family. These 
values endure to this day, Mr. Speaker, and we owe it to the 
land and we owe it to farming. 
 
(1445) 
 
I recollect, Mr. Speaker, my grandfather in his late years — this 
was in the ’70s — said to me, you know, farmers weren’t . . . 
farmers are respected now, he said. This was in the ’70s. 
Farmers are respected now. It wasn’t always like that, he said, 
but we came here because that’s what we knew how to . . . what 
to do. And that’s why they embraced education, Mr. Speaker; 
so that their children wouldn’t suffer the indignities of farm 
labour as their previous generations did. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
salute these people who brought dignity to farming here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And when I think of the spirit of my father’s generation, my 
father was born in 1914, he loved to work; he loved to play. He 
loved to tell stories, and he loved to joke — very much like 
many of his generation. 
 
Having been trained on the horse and buggy, he went through a 
transition from horses to steam to gasoline; through the 

depression, back to horses; passed the depression onto gasoline 
and diesel; from the combine from sheaves to swathing. 
 
It was in his generation that things like 2,4-D and DDT 
(dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) were introduced. It was his 
generation that learned to drive motorized vehicles. And it was 
his generation that learned to repair farm machinery, going from 
blacksmithing to machining, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They grew up in an age of scarcity, Mr. Speaker. They hated to 
see waste; they hated to see squander. But they were generous 
in spirit. 
 
They were suspicious of slick business, Mr. Speaker. For 
example, my father rode with his cattle on the train all the way 
to Winnipeg to make sure that they got there safely so that he 
could collect the cheque. 
 
I remember, Mr. Speaker, however some things that don’t 
change. Back in the ’60s during one of the political elections, I 
was a teenager, went to the town hall; the candidates were all 
there. Guess what one of the topics were? What’s going to 
happen to the family farm? And we stood up, and we were each 
all making our statements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ever since then you still have the same concept 
going on. What’s going on to the family farm sometimes has 
changed a bit — now we talk more about what’s happening to 
farm families. 
 
The image maintained though, Mr. Speaker, the image of my 
father and his generation in coveralls, quite often in greased 
coveralls, leather boots, but they were people who did their job 
well. And, Mr. Speaker, they overcame their hardships. 
 
Today it’s a lot different, Mr. Speaker. Today farming is more 
like a business, and the problems are different. They have to 
deal with things about . . . like genetic, genetic modification, 
see and seed, Mr. Speaker. They have to understand words like 
bases when they’re dealing with marketing. They have to deal 
with the largest corporations in the world like Monsanto and 
New Holland. 
 
But it’s still, Mr. Speaker, a family business, and I salute those 
people today who are working in this complex environment. 
They need to be congratulated, they need to be admired for the 
job that they do, Mr. Speaker. That, Mr. Speaker, is what I call 
“The Saskatchewan Way.” 
 
We hear today about the third way, mentioned by Chrétien and 
Tony Blair. Mr. Speaker, when I look about what they say, 
balancing, balancing the right wing with the left wing that is 
what the farmers of Saskatchewan have always done. That is 
known as “The Saskatchewan Way,” Mr. Speaker. It is not the 
third way — it is “The Saskatchewan Way.” And they got it 
from here because it started right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find it rather 
incredible that the members opposite decided to initiate a debate 



June 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1595 

that I feel they don’t know a whole lot about. 
 
It simply amazes me that time and time again, the members 
opposite have attempted to whitewash the fact that there’s an 
agricultural crisis in this province. It appears that they are naïve 
enough to believe that they can simply speak it out of existence 
and it’s going to go away by saying that there is no longer a 
problem. And I find that arrogant, I find it short-sighted, and I 
find it disrespectful to the farmers of this province. 
 
They obviously have no comprehension, they have no vision, 
and they have no idea of what’s going to happen in this 
province when the agriculture industry comes crashing around 
their ears. 
 
The farmers of this province need a lot areas in their industry 
reviewed and addressed to make agriculture sustainable in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. They need the rampant rising costs of 
input addressed; they need the transportation issues addressed; 
they need the stranglehold that the Wheat Board has on them 
that prohibits value-added processing addressed; they need the 
restrictive and costly interprovincial trade barriers addressed; 
they need the crumbling highway system in this province 
addressed; they need the international subsidies on agriculture 
products addressed; and they need the high SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) and rural utility rates addressed. 
 
They need this country’s unsustainable cheap food policy 
addressed; they need the unfair and ridiculously high levy of 
education taxes on their farm lands addressed; they need the 
insanely high and well-hidden taxes on their input costs 
addressed; they need the never ending user fees charged by the 
Department of Agriculture addressed. And first and foremost 
they need a long-term safety net program that’s effective, that’s 
fair, and that’s affordable, and they need that to be addressed. 
 
They certainly, Mr. Speaker, they certainly do not need another 
warm and fuzzy statement by this government that is absolutely 
meaningless, and it’s totally ignorant to what’s actually 
happening to agriculture in this province. The only thing that I 
could agree with the member opposite’s motion is that we 
should commend the Saskatchewan farm families for their 
determination and resoluteness. But the statement should end 
with something like, in spite of the fact that this government has 
done to totally destroy the industry in this province. 
 
Where on earth do the members opposite think that the money 
came from to put this year’s crop in? Please do not suggest that 
it came from the large, profitable CSAP (Canada-Saskatchewan 
Adjustment Program) that they brag about. And please don’t 
suggest that it came from the huge profits of the sales of last 
year’s crops. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, and the members opposite, that 
in many, many cases the monies came from the farmers’ 
savings and their NISA accounts. There was one last hope, one 
last chance. 
 
And in even more cases, Mr. Speaker, I suspect that it’s on the 
line of credit granted to these farmers from the grain companies 
-- the Cargills, the ConAgras, the Wheat Pools, and many more 
grain companies. If the truth was known, Mr. Speaker, I would 
guess that well over half of the seed that went into the ground 

this spring was paid for by the grain companies. 
 
So what’s going to happen this fall when all that money needs 
to get paid back? It’s frightening, Mr. Speaker, when you have 
a member opposite who makes a motion that includes, and I 
quote, “in the face of last year’s adversity.” 
 
Well that’s scary, and they still do not get it. This was not just 
last year’s little problem that’s gone away here. It didn’t begin 
last year and it sure as the heck didn’t end last year. This is a 
full-blown, ongoing agriculture crisis that we have in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. And it’s not going to go away until both 
levels of government wake up and address the issues that I 
mentioned before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the members opposite that 
this crisis did not begin last year. Farmers are passive. Farmers 
are peaceful. And most of all, farmers are optimistic as we’ve 
heard the term, next year’s crop. But it took a lot of pressure for 
those farmers to stage a protest last fall and then carry it 
through into the spring. It took a lot of years of frustration, 
years of being beaten down, and years of disrespect and 
abandonment by this government. 
 
The crisis did not start last year, and it didn’t end last year, Mr. 
Speaker. It began in 1991 when this government came into 
power. 
 
They tore up the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) for 
their own selfish gain of balancing the books and padding their 
slush fund. They closed 52 rural hospitals. They allowed the 
highways to crumble to a deplorable state, and they downloaded 
the funding necessary for education onto the farmers. 
 
And now they’re looking at their final solution which is forced 
amalgamation. Now they get to take control; to take the reserve 
municipal funds; to download the responsibilities such as 
highways onto the property owners. And what a grand idea, Mr. 
Speaker, and let’s just close the rural hospitals while we’re at it. 
 
But what’s this going to mean to our province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, my husband and I farm. We pay enough property 
taxes to pay for our own children’s education plus another 
family with two children. We pay enough taxes on our 
fertilizer, chemical, utilities, machinery, and our income tax that 
last year alone we could support a family of five with an annual 
income of around $25,000. 
 
If we give up, if we walk away . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If we give up, if we 
walk away, who’s going to backfill the tax dollars that we’re 
paying that are going to be lost? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the farmers are supporting an incredible amount of 
industries and businesses in this province. They support the grain 
handlers, the truckers, the machinery dealers, the machinery 
manufacturers, the hardware outlets, the fuel dealer, the retail 
stores. And that is just a few. I don’t know the exact numbers at 
hand, Mr. Speaker, but . . . 



1596 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2000 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask members if they have an 
issue to debate to kindly . . . Order, please. Kindly take your 
conversations behind the bar if you have an issue to debate, and 
allow the member from Watrous to kindly be heard. Than you. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, I don’t 
know the exact numbers off hand, but the agriculture industry 
generates billions of dollars in this province and they deserve 
more respect and more recognition as to their importance than 
this industry has for this province. 
 
Who’s going to pick up the tab when they’re gone? And who’s 
going to employ the thousands of people who are going to 
become unemployed in this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the agriculture crisis is real, it’s ongoing, and it’s 
time that this government woke up to the fact and started to do 
something constructive and meaningful instead of just babbling 
warm and fuzzy little meaningless statements about agriculture. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for my 
colleagues. Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to the debate here 
that we have before us with respect to agriculture and how the 
government seems to want to somehow or another take credit 
for the fact that farmers have completed their seeding 
operations. 
 
I want to remind you that farming has been in . . . farming has 
been taking place in Saskatchewan since the late 1800s and the 
crop has gone into the ground every year since then. And the 
fact of the matter is it has very little to do with you people 
opposite. In fact in spite of the fact that you are the government, 
the crop got seeded. 
 
And the people . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
introduce nine students who are in the east gallery. The teacher 
is Neil Derby, and the chaperone, Darlene Gross. They’re from 
the Simpson School and I would welcome . . . or ask everyone 
to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Farm Families Finish Seeding 2000 Crop 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the crop has been seeded every year 
since the 1800s, late 1800s when the province was broke up. 
And farmers every year since then have seeded crop year after 
year after year. And the reason is very simple — because 
they’re eternal optimists when it comes to agriculture. They 
believe in seeding a crop. 

But the problem is, from time to time they don’t get to harvest a 
crop. It was seeded in . . . the crops were seeded in the thirties, 
in the dirty thirties, and yet farmers all — unfortunately — all 
across this province didn’t get to harvest a crop then. And 
regardless of the fact whether you want to try and take some 
amount of credit for the fact that farmers are seeding their crop, 
you should be trying to do something for the farmers rather than 
putting these flowery resolutions before the legislature. 
 
You should be, if the member from Regina that started the 
debate was truly interested in anything to do with agriculture, 
he’d be working on behalf of farmers with respect to things like 
the long-term safety net. Remember that? Remember that that 
you promised in the . . . in your Throne Speech just a few 
months ago? You promised that you were going to implement 
that before the end of this session. We haven’t heard a word 
about it; not a single thing. 
 
Is there any ideas you have at all when it comes to the 
long-term safety net that you promised in the Throne Speech? 
Not a word about that. 
 
In addition to that, in addition to that, they promised, as I recall, 
they were going to put a special person in charge of discussing 
the future of agriculture in this province as well. We haven’t 
heard a single word about that as well. 
 
I also recall from the NDP government opposite, they promised 
a long-term safety net in the election campaign in ’95. You 
promised a long-term safety net in the election in ’91. We 
haven’t seen it then. 
 
The only thing that you’ve done for agriculture that the member 
from Saskatoon participated in was the removal of the 
long-term safety net program that was in place during that time. 
The long-term safety net that was in place at that time called the 
gross revenue insurance program. And farmers, the member 
opposite voted to destroy it, and she knows very well she did. 
And members opposite on all sides, all over there, voted to 
destroy that program. And the farmers of this province will 
never forget it. 
 
And then they . . . when they start talking about support for 
agriculture when they start talking about support for agriculture, 
that’s why the farmers of this province will never trust the NDP 
again in agriculture, will never support you; and that’s why you 
haven’t a single member on that side of the House, that 
represents more than 50 per cent of the people in their 
constituency, are from an agriculture base. They don’t support 
you, they haven’t supported you, and they never will support 
you again, I predict, for a long, long time because of the things 
that you’ve done in agriculture. 
 
It reminds me back a number of years ago about what has 
happened in agriculture and you look at the member from P.A. 
(Prince Albert) talking about the past in agriculture; I want to 
remind you of some of the things that the people that support 
your party have gone through and discussed over the years. 
 
(1500) 
 
I remember when the concrete terminals were being built, the 
very first ones in Saskatchewan and I think the first one 



June 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1597 

probably was the one in Rosetown, Saskatchewan. And the 
NDP at the time stood up in this legislature and all across this 
province and said it was going to destroy agriculture, it was 
going to be the end of agriculture, we would never see the clock 
turn back, we were going to see people leaving all over the 
place, it was going to completely destroy agriculture. 
 
And now what do we see? We see terminals being built all over 
this province by all of the different grain companies. Every 
single one of them is participating in that today. 
 
And the National Farmers Union was saying that it was going to 
destroy . . . I was at the opening of that elevator, I remember 
very clearly. I was at the opening of the Cargill elevator in 
Rosetown and the National Farmers Union had a protest there. 
They protested, they had placards it was going to destroy 
agriculture, and everything else. 
 
And then they had a barbecue. And so the grain elevator 
manager from Cargill, he went out and invited the National 
Farmers Union to be . . . to come in. And in spite of their 
objections, so-called objections, in spite of the fact that they 
were so opposed to it, they were the first in line for the 
barbecue when it comes to that. The absolute first people in line 
when it came time to take some good out of the day’s events. 
 
And the farmers of this province . . . Mr. Speaker, the member 
also talked about marketing. And that’s where a lot of farmers 
are interested in that right now, Mr. Speaker. This government 
should be placing some emphasis on trying to help farmers 
market their crops rather than hanging on to the past when it 
comes to agriculture. 
 
There’s a very good reason why farmers all over Saskatchewan 
are growing specialty crops, are moving away from the 
traditional grains, and it’s very simple. They have to try, they 
have to try and make things go in their farming operations and 
the marketing system that’s in place today with the Canadian 
Wheat Board simply is not meeting their needs. 
 
And that’s why they’re abandoning it as quickly as they 
possibly can and moving to other crops in an effort to try and 
. . . in an effort to try, I should say, try very much to maintain a 
positive balance in their farming operations. 
 
The farmers of this province don’t like living in the past with 
the NDP. They don’t like living in the past of a marketing 
system that simply is not meeting their needs. And they never 
will agree to that kind of system again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — The NDP solution, the NDP solution in the past 
to agriculture crisis has been things like putting in place a land 
bank where the government owns the land in this province. A 
failed effort, if there ever was one, to try and gain control over 
the agriculture economy of this province. Didn’t work then. We 
are still saddled with land bank land from the ’60s and ’70s that 
your government bought from the farmers of this province, 
driving up land prices for farmers that wanted to buy land and 
expand their operations. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, the farmers of this province don’t 

support the NDP. It goes back a long, long time. There’s never 
been any support in agriculture from you people. You have 
ripped out every kind of safety net that there ever was and 
farmers have not forgotten. 
 
And all you have to do is look at the debate in the legislature 
this afternoon with respect to the highways system as further 
evidence of the decline of the support for agriculture in this 
province. The highways are in a terrible state of repair, and I 
would invite members on the opposite side to leave Regina or 
Saskatoon just once, take a tour of rural Saskatchewan and see 
the state of highways in this province — see the state of 
highways in this province. 
 
You’re talking about the amount of money that you’re putting 
into agriculture in terms of fuel rebates. There’s no fuel rebate 
in place right now; there’s no fuel rebate in place. Yes you can 
. . . can you can get it off at the pump right now, Mr. Minister of 
Finance? No you most certainly cannot. You most certainly . . . 
Is it a benefit for you today? Put your cash up. 
 
It’s the NDP’s solution to everything — put your cash up now 
and we promise we’ll give it back to you a year from now 
maybe. That’s their solution all the way. 
 
Just like your tax increase . . . or tax decrease as you like to call 
it. Reduce the taxes and put up the PST (provincial sales tax). 
That’s been your solution to the tax problems that farmers and 
individuals all across this province — the veiled promise of 
support somewhere down the line for people in this province. 
 
Farmers are saying to you that if you really wanted to help 
them, why didn’t you put the fuel tax rebate in place right now? 
So instead of having to pay it now and hopefully get it back a 
year from now, they would have at least had some support for 
agriculture right now. 
 
The so-called $1 billion support program that you put in place, 
there was more of an effort to try and convince people in urban 
Saskatchewan that you were actually doing something. Four 
hundred million dollars of that was a cash advance on the crop 
that was just seeded in the last few days — $400 million of it 
was just an advance. 
 
So somehow or another farmers are supposed to benefit. 
They’re supposed to be able to get money today on a crop that 
they just finished seeding, and in large numbers across this 
province many of them are worried about the crop that they just 
seeded. On the west side of this province, I’ll have you know, 
it’s very, very dry and farmers are beginning to worry about the 
situation with respect to no rain on that side of the province 
right now. 
 
All up the west side, west central, right up through the 
northwest parts of this province there’s a lot of concern in 
agriculture these days, and there’s concern for very good 
reasons. This government has failed them in terms of a 
long-term safety net; they’ve failed them in terms of highways; 
they’ve failed them in terms of any kind of tax relief; they’ve 
failed them in any kind of support whatsoever. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, the farmers of this province have 
given you people, and they will, I predict in Wood River, give 



1598 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2000 

you once again a failing grade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
gives me great pleasure to rise and enter this debate. I want to 
start off by saying that I personally find it a tad offensive that 
the members opposite continuously go on about how they’re the 
only ones with dirt under their fingernails, so they’re the only 
ones who really truly represent farmers in this province. 
 
You know, it sort of . . . it reminds . . . it’s as if . . . they have 
. . . Following their logic through, they should not be able to 
comment about health care unless they’re surgeons. Well, 
excuse me, it seems to me, it seems to me that all of us in 
Saskatchewan are in this together. 
 
And I would just like to remind the members opposite that on 
this side of the House, while we do not have a majority of rural 
constituencies, we have two northern constituencies with many, 
many farmers in them. We have three rural constituencies — 
Yorkton, Meadow Lake, North Battleford. And we have four 
constituencies that are split urban/rural constituencies, of which 
one of them is mine — Saskatoon Southeast includes a 
significant portion of rural area in it. 
 
Now I will say I know that there are about 50 or 55,000 farmers 
in this province. So the members opposite represent about 25 
constituencies. They probably have on average maybe what? 
Two thousand farmers in their riding? 
 
Now I did a head count; I will admit this. I went to my voters’ 
list and did a head count, and discovered that in my riding there 
are exactly 117 farmers. So that’s only 5 per cent of the number 
that the members opposite have, so they only have to listen to 5 
per cent of my speech. All right? 
 
But I just did want to say just for the record, as a city slicker, 
I’m standing here also representing some farmers — and I’m 
very proud of it. 
 
Now, I think it’s important that city MLAs talk about the farm 
crisis and about agriculture as much as rural MLAs do. Because 
if we’re going to find some adequate solutions to the problems 
that are facing the agricultural industry in this province, it’s 
going to take all of us working together. And the politics of hate 
and division and pretending that they’re the only ones who 
know anything about agriculture simply won’t cut it. We need 
to have the city folk as well as the country folk understanding 
what’s going on here. 
 
We need to be cutting through some of the myths that there are 
in agriculture. Myths that I will admit many of my constituents 
believe. Myths like farming is simple. Well we know it’s not 
simple; it’s an extremely difficult job. It’s complicated. The 
farm machinery is very expensive. It is imperative that people 
know what they’re doing. 
 
Farming is a gamble, a gamble against the weather and against 
markets. Farming is not simple. I would suggest to you that the 
average farmer today needs to be a plant pathologist, a 
geneticist, a biologist, and a chemist; as well as a top-notch 
machinist. 

Another myth about farming is that farming is serene. Well we 
all know that it isn’t. It’s frantic, it’s frenzied, it’s very hectic — 
people work extremely hard. 
 
But there is a myth that we do need to address because it’s an 
unfortunate reality. And that is the reality that the per cent of 
GDP (gross domestic product) in this province derived from 
farming is dropping. Our economy is becoming more 
diversified. We’re seeing major expansion in mining, in the oil 
and gas sector, in manufacturing, and everything. And as that 
happens, we see also the per cent of GDP that is derived from 
farming is dropping. 
 
When I first entered politics 20 years ago, the per cent of GDP 
that came directly from farming in this province was about 15 
per cent. Nowadays it’s down to 14 per cent. And so that 
argument, it seems to me, says, since almost half of the 
Canada’s cultivated land is here in Saskatchewan; it is really 
important that we get the city folk understanding the plight in 
the agricultural industry and not further engage in these politics 
of hate and division. 
 
Our farmers, I think, have met many of the challenges that the 
world has thrown at them. You know, we no longer have King 
Wheat dominating things. Farmers now are growing over 50 
different crops. And they’ve diversified so that up to 10 million 
acres of crop now are coming from things like chickpeas and 
lentils and oilseed. 
 
But unfortunately, farmers are still getting poor returns from 
their farming operations as a result of trade-distorting subsidies 
and the domination of multibillion dollar multinational 
corporations. 
 
I’d like to just quote a few statistics for all members to be aware 
of. Three companies retail and distribute the bulk of Canadian 
gasoline and diesel fuel — something that farmers are 
dependent on. Three companies produce most of the nitrogen 
fertilizer. Nine companies make the pesticides for the farmers. 
Four companies are gaining control of our seed market and that, 
I think, we should be extremely afraid of. And three companies 
produce most of our farm machinery. 
 
It’s the same on the downstream side of the food production 
chain in Canada. Nine grain companies collect Canadian grain; 
two railways haul it, and we’re making very little progress 
unfortunately in the matter of short-line railways. Two 
companies dominate the beef-packing sector, and a handful 
dominate the pork sector. And I’m very proud that Mitchell’s 
Gourmet Foods, my neighbour in Saskatoon, is one of those 
companies. 
 
Three large firms manufacture 87 per cent of the pasta in 
Canada; and four corporations mill 80 per cent of Canadian 
flour. Those are statistics, I think, that should give us all cause 
to pause. 
 
Now I’ve talked so far about farming as if it’s simply sowing 
something in the ground and taking it out. But we also have to 
recognize that we have a major cattle industry in this province 
— $900 million in cash receipts annually in our livestock 
industry and we have, even there in the livestock industry, 
farmers have diversified so we now have 60,000 head of bison, 



June 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1599 

elk, deer, and wild boar. 
 
Now the member from Watrous says that farmers don’t need a 
warm and fuzzy statement about agriculture — they need real 
programs. I want to read into the record the real programs that 
were announced just this year in this year’s budget, when our 
Finance minister announced a number of initiatives to reduce 
costs for farmers and encourage growth in Saskatchewan 
agricultural industry. 
 
First of all, a reduction of the property tax on farmland. This is 
a two-year $50 million program to reduce the property tax on 
farmland by 25 per cent. That’s a substantive program. 
 
Elimination of the provincial sales tax on all farm gasoline. 
Now granted they don’t get it reduced at the pump, but it is 
reduced. 
 
The Minister of Finance also announced ethanol-blended fuel 
initiatives — a five-year incentive to begin this year that will 
rebate to wholesalers a portion of the fuel tax on ethanol 
produced and consumed in Saskatchewan. Good news for King 
Wheat, I would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
As well, in this year’s budget we announced the extension of 
the livestock and agriculture facilities incentive program, and 
this provides a rebate of the provincial sales tax on building 
materials used in the construction of livestock and horticultural 
facilities. And we’re going to extend that for an additional three 
years. Good news. 
 
We also have a forage conversion program. Saskatchewan 
Agriculture and Food will develop a program with the industry 
over the next few months to assist in the conversion of farmland 
to forage production. And that program will be developed and 
available in time for the 2001 seeding. 
 
A couple of other things. Funding for new generation co-ops 
and creation of a livestock monitoring and disease surveillance 
program. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers have survived 
adversity; they have diversified themselves and I am . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 
lapsed. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, unlike the members opposite, I am a farmer. I find it 
very interesting that the hon. member from Regina Northeast 
would commend Saskatchewan farm families for their 
determination and — I’m going to say resolve because I’ve 
never heard of this resoluteness before and I just kind of 
question it — in the face of last year’s adversity. Nearly all this 
year’s crop has been seeded in record time. 
 
I, too, Mr. Speaker, would like to applaud all Saskatchewan 
farmers, but I’m going to give you, as Paul Harvey would say, 
the rest of the story. 
 
We had adverse conditions last year. We have adverse 
conditions this year. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our adverse 
conditions started the day this government took power in 1991. 

They tore up GRIP contracts and used the money to balance the 
budget. The Premier promised a long-term safety net. Well, it’s 
been over eight years and we still haven’t seen one. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, then RRR, Roy’s rural revenge, really 
kicked in. They closed 52 rural hospitals, with possibly more 
closures coming. Mr. Speaker, what kind of an affect does this 
have on rural Saskatchewan? 
 
When people have to drive to larger centres for health care, they 
do one-stop shopping. They buy their groceries, machine 
repairs, etc., in the larger centres. Meanwhile back in 
small-town Saskatchewan, grocery stores close, implement 
dealerships close, and pretty soon there’s nothing left. 
 
On top of this, Mr. Speaker, there’s the conditions of the roads. 
People in rural Saskatchewan are travelling greater distances for 
services, and the highways are deplorable. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
in the Val Marie area, the people are fixing the roads 
themselves, as we speak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the members opposite brag about seeding 
being almost complete, it’s like they think they can take credit 
for this, and all is well on the family farm. Mr. Speaker, I urge 
the members opposite to contact chemical and fertilizer dealers, 
bulk fuel dealers, just to see how much money they have out on 
the books. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the age of the average Saskatchewan farmer 
is now 57 years of age. Mr. Speaker, these farmers would like 
to think about retirement but there is no way they can do it. 
Their children cannot afford to buy the land or machinery, and 
the parents cannot afford to turn it over to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my son farms, along with my husband and myself. 
He also holds down a full-time job, and there is nothing he 
would love more than to commit himself to farming full-time. 
But with commodity prices where they are and input prices 
where they are, and with a growing family, there is no way 
possible for this to happen. 
 
My husband and I cannot turn this over to him at this point as 
we have to have an income on our investment, and we also have 
a daughter. So in our area, we’re doing what everyone else is 
doing, and we just let the kids have access to our machinery, 
and that is their only hope. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government couldn’t care less about farmers 
or the agriculture-related industry. There have been many farm 
rallies, demonstrations here at the legislature. But did they dare 
show their face? No way. 
 
Last December the legislature had a sitting to deal with the 
agricultural crisis. The official opposition asked the government 
to support farmers by way of a payout of $300 million from the 
liquor and gaming fund, or what is presently known as the 
fancy slush fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last vote of the old millennium, this 
administration said no to the farmers of this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on the topic of lousy treatment of 
agriculture in this province, I must mention AIDA. What a 



1600 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2000 

complete flop. Every day my office and the offices of my 
colleagues are flooded with calls regarding this disaster. 
 
Generally farmers who rely solely on farm income don’t 
qualify, while those with off-farm income qualify because they 
can have the inventory while keeping farm receipts down. What 
producers need is a payment based on acreage — fair to 
everyone because it is common knowledge that low commodity 
prices hurt everyone. 
 
Programs like AIDA, and the fact that this government 
destroyed GRIP, are very evident in rural Saskatchewan. An 
election called in the middle of harvest hoping that farmers 
wouldn’t take the time to vote. They did vote and they sent the 
NDP a strong message. While the former member from 
Watrous and former Agriculture minister didn’t manage to keep 
his seat, the Saskatchewan Party harvested more votes in the 
election than either the NDP or the Liberals. 
 
The Premier had a wedding and the Minister of Education was 
the bride. People were shocked; 60 per cent did not want this 
NDP administration to lead the province. Now we will get 
another chance to send a message on June 26 in Wood River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech promised the farmers of this 
province a long-term safety net. Farmers with their high input 
costs need something they can take to the bankers. We’ve been 
monitored and studied to death. No more empty promises. We 
need action and we need it now. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m really 
thankful for this opportunity to give a congratulations to 
farmers. I am not a farmer. I am really happy though that 
farmers are as far along in the process as they are this year. I 
recognize that it’s not all smooth sailing; that many of them are 
extended very far in terms of credit. But I do know that there’s 
hope out there. I’ve talked to the great many farmers over these 
last months and there’s a lot of hope. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I must say that over these last months, I 
found myself often quite disturbed by the narrow-mindedness 
that seems to come across the floor when it comes to the themes 
of agriculture. Many of us over here are not farmers, but many 
of us have a great deal of experience around farm communities, 
rural communities. And some of us actually have a fair bit of 
farm experience as well. 
 
I would like to share with the members opposite a poem that I 
wrote. It is somewhat autobiographical but I hope you’ll listen 
to it. It’s not a big slam at anybody. It’s just where I come from 
in terms of the agricultural issues, because I think it is important 
that we understand and empathize, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

Am I A farmer? 
 
I have no quota book. 
I own no land. 
But, I have touched the earth, 
and the earth has touched me. 
 
I have scratched the soil and planted the seed. 

I’ve watched it grow and turn to gold. 
With swather, combine and truck, 
I have gathered the grain to bins 
and shovelled and hauled it to elevator. 
 
So am I a farmer? 
I’ve tasted the soil and I’ve fed the soil. 
I’ve branded the calf and I’ve wielded the knife. 
I’ve been in 4-H and learned some skills. 
I’ve raised a filly and trained her well. 
I’ve herded cattle, milked cows, gathered eggs and fed the 

pigs, 
And yes, I’ve slaughtered, and butchered 
and thanked God for the food. 
 
I’ve battled barn fires and prairie fires. 
I’ve ached and cried with family and friend 
over losses no one should have to face. 
I’ve written letters and called for help. 
With compassion and pain, I’ve buried farmers: 
men, women and children whom I have loved and cared 

for. 
I’ve prayed and sang and danced and worked and played 
and lived with farmers for most of my life . . . 
 
Am I a farmer? . . . no . . . 
But yet, I may understand. 
For I have learned, and I have compassion, 
and I have always loved the land. 
 
I touch the earth, and the earth touches me. 

 
No, I don’t have all the answers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. I don’t have all the answers. We 
don’t. Nor do the folks in the opposition. But we are working to 
try and make sure that this farm economy thrives along with the 
rest of the economy. 
 
We are putting in place, with the best of the resources that we 
have as a province, programs that have helped and will continue 
to help, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am glad that farmers found the 
resources to pay off debt so that they could get ahead and plant 
again this year. 
 
And I hope and I pray that the conditions will be right, that the 
markets will be right, so that the farmers of this province will 
have a future — a good future. And I will do what I can and I 
know the members in this caucus will do what they can to make 
sure that this whole province and every sector of our economy 
thrives. 
 
We will do our best for farmers whether we have been elected 
by farmers or by city people. I am convinced of that and I am 
committed to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I will thankfully 
— for all the resources — I will thankfully continue to learn 
about the issues of agriculture. 
 
I’ve been so impressed by the willingness of the farmers in my 
constituency to help me out when I don’t understand something. 
I use that telephone. I get on the phone and I call them. I ask 



June 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1601 

them for advice. There are farmers all through this province that 
I have known over many years, relatives and friends, that are 
willing to help me gain an understanding so that I can do a good 
job. And I work towards that deeper understanding all the time, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The other thing that I am so thankful for is the Department of 
Agriculture with staff who have the resources, who have the 
knowledge and the ability to help us get a handle on these 
issues. When I’ve had questions that I didn’t understand, I 
couldn’t get a clear understanding from some of my farm 
friends, I’d call the department. There were briefings available. 
There were notes available. There were people who I could 
meet with to gain a deeper understanding. 
 
There are times when I have learned from members in the 
opposition as I’ve listened to them talk. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 
expired. 
 
Members, according to rule 17(2), it says, and I quote: 
 

At the expiration of sixty-five minutes, there shall be a 
period not exceeding ten minutes to be made available, if 
required, to allow Members to ask questions and comment 
briefly on matters relevant to the contents of the speeches 
and allow Members who spoke in the debate to respond to 
questions raised. 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I would have a question for the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle. It was a very touching and heartfelt, I think, poem 
that you’ve come up with. And I want to congratulate you from 
this side of the House. 
 
However, while all that is well and good, the farmers in this 
province . . . And you will remember this, and I’m sure the 
farmers in this province remember this, that you made 
commitments to them in your last Throne Speech. One of those 
commitments was that you were going to put forward a plan, a 
vision — a long-term safety net. 
 
I’m wondering, in your caucus and with discussions with the 
Minister of Agriculture, can you tell the farm families, and the 
people of Saskatchewan for that matter, when you’ll be 
presenting that plan to the province? 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you for the question. I don’t have a 
specific date. I know that work is going on in that venue. I 
know that there have been some very, very effective 
conferences. You, I think some of your members were a part of 
that conference in the fall looking at a focus. There are plans 
also underway and work is happening with the federal 
government as well to develop a good, strong, safety-net 
program. 
 
But in terms of a date, we do not have a date that we’re going to 
let the plans out. But we are . . . We will have a plan brought 
forward, and I’m confident that that plan will provide hope for 
the farm families, not just hope but substance that will enable 
them to move ahead. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the member for Watrous. My question is: does 
the MLA believe that members who claim 35 cents a kilometre 
for government use on their vehicles should also take advantage 
of price-discounted farm plate and tax-exempt fuel when using 
their vehicles for MLA use? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — My vehicle is also used on the farm. 
However, I do not use tax-exempt fuel for my vehicle. I buy my 
fuel from the pumps and I have receipts to prove it. And I also 
claim it when I put in for the fuel rebate for the farm for my 
husband and myself. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So the 
question is if a member is claiming 35 cents a kilometre to help 
to offset the cost of insurance of vehicles as well as wear and 
tear, should they also be taking advantage of the 
price-discounted farm plate when the vehicle is clearly used and 
marked as . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Members, I’m going to 
point out that under rule 17(2), this is an opportunity to allow 
members to ask questions and comment briefly on matters 
relevant to the contents of the speech, speeches. 
 
Members, I was listening. I did not hear a direct reference to 
this particular matter. I’m ruling the question out of order. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. My question, I guess, should be 
perhaps more broadly phrased. I appreciate the admonition for 
that. 
 
The question is one of fairness, and the question is: what are 
those things that can be done? And how do we make sure that 
the representatives in this House do in fact represent the people 
who elect them and not take advantage of special situation. 
Would the member care to offer a comment on that? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — No. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 9 — Decrease in Social Assistance Caseloads 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. At the 
conclusion of my remarks, I will move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the continuing decrease in 
social assistance caseloads in Saskatchewan, and the 
reduction in child poverty in Saskatchewan in the past 
decade and advocate that high priority be given to further 
. . . 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I apologize to the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Southeast. You cannot move the motion 
that is in another member’s name. We are private members’ 
motions. 



1602 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2000 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And my apologies to 
the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure this afternoon to move the 
following motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the continuing decrease in 
social assistance caseloads in Saskatchewan, and the 
reduction in child poverty in Saskatchewan in the past 
decade and advocates that high priority be given to further 
steps to reduce poverty in our province. 

 
And at the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving that 
motion, seconded by the hon. member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to begin my remarks this afternoon 
by saying a few words about the impact of poverty in our 
communities across this province and across the country, and 
the importance of making the kind of progress that our 
government is making in tackling poverty in Saskatchewan and 
the importance of continuing that work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by quoting from a recent 
publication by the Canadian Council on Social Development 
entitled Urban Poverty in Canada. And on page 16 of that 
publication, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Canadian Council on 
Social Development says, and I quote: 
 

Poverty is not simply a problem for people who have fallen 
on hard times. Its scope is much wider than that, and it 
should be a concern to all Canadians. Poverty rates are 
indicators of the health of citizens and the state of 
institutions. As well, poverty rates are predictors of things 
to come -- poverty has detrimental impacts on the 
long-term health of children. Unhealthy children will, in 
time, affect the health of the nation. Current poverty rates 
show that all sectors still have much work to do to address 
the problem of poverty in urban Canada. 

 
And this report, Mr. Deputy Speaker, goes on to talk about how 
urban poverty in Canada is on the rise — in fact, sharply on the 
rise, Mr. Deputy Speaker; and that the number of metropolitan 
sectors, the number of neighbourhoods, urban neighbourhoods 
across Canada in which high concentrations of families are 
affected by poverty has escalated dramatically over the last 
couple of decades, Mr. Deputy Speaker, up 60 to 70 per cent in 
terms of the number of neighbourhoods that have levels of 
poverty in them that are double the national poverty rate. 
 
And this has to be concern to all Canadians, and it’s of great 
concern to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’ll be making 
specific references to this report again later on. 
 
But I come back to the fundamental point that this statement 
that I quoted from is making, and that is that poverty rates are 
really an indicator of the health of the nation, the health of our 
communities, and the health of our children, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And therefore any level of poverty is, in my mind, 
unacceptable. 
 
Now I made reference in the motion that I’m introducing this 
afternoon that one of the things that we want to recognize is the 
progress we are making in this area as well as the work that 

remains to be done. 
 
And one of the areas of progress, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a 
reduction in the social assistance caseload in this province, in 
fact a very significant reduction that I think members of the 
public and other members of the Assembly will find of interest. 
And I want to talk a little bit about the progress that’s been 
made over the last six years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1994, in April 1994 to be exact, we had 
83,013 persons in this province who were relying on the 
Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, in other words they were 
receiving social assistance. Today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
has been reduced to 62,988 persons. So in other words a 
reduction of almost 20,000 people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s 
a very significant accomplishment by this government. And 
those almost 63,000 people live in just over 34,000 households 
to put that in perspective. 
 
So we’re looking at almost 20,000 less people relying on the 
Saskatchewan Assistance Plan today than did six years ago, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and that’s a significant accomplishment. 
 
And I might say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that comes in the 
face of a number of major changes in federal policy that have 
impacted on this province. And one of those of course has been 
the decision by the federal government to cut back Employment 
Insurance benefits to the point where we have a lot more people 
in Saskatchewan who would have been eligible a decade ago for 
Employment Insurance, but are now, because of the federal 
cutbacks, forced onto the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So we’ve made this kind of progress even in 
the face of those federal policy changes. And I think that’s a 
significant accomplishment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in all, we are now in a situation as a result 
of this progress over the last six years where we rank third best 
in Canada in terms of the numbers of persons who are reliant on 
social assistance in their province. About six and a half per cent 
of our population, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is dependent on social 
assistance. And as I say we are . . . we have the third best 
ranking in the country. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things that I’m proud of is 
that our government has accomplished these decreases in 
numbers of persons relying on the Saskatchewan Assistance 
Plan without reducing benefits or forcing people off social 
assistance as many other jurisdictions have done, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So these improvements have not been accomplished at the 
expense of those who are poor. These are improvements that 
have been made working with those who are poor and 
improving their lives, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And that is very significant, and a very different approach from 
our neighbouring . . . from many of our neighbouring provinces 
including, of course, the province of Alberta, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, who’s taken, I think, a much more callous approach to 
working with those who are living in poverty in their 
communities. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to . . . I wanted to talk for a 



June 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1603 

moment about how some of these accomplishments have been 
implemented. And I want to begin by noting that one of the 
significant things that marks Canada from many other countries 
in the world is our medicare system. And I wanted to make just 
brief reference to this because our medicare system is not the 
reason why we’ve seen an improvement in the social assistance 
caseloads. We’ve had our medicare system in place for many 
years. 
 
But it’s a reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why those who are less 
fortunate in this country are still in a far, far better situation than 
they would be if they lived in a country like the United States. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we heard in the Assembly earlier today 
that one of the reasons . . . we heard in the Assembly earlier 
today the consequences for families in the US that are not 
covered by medicare. And we had presented to us the statistic 
that 500,000 Americans file bankruptcy last year, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, due to being unable to pay their medical bills — 
500,000 Americans; 40 per cent of bankruptcies in the US are 
as a result of not having medicare coverage. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s something that can’t happen to 
someone living in Saskatchewan or living in other parts of 
Canada. It’s one of the very important things that differentiates 
us from our neighbours to the south. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about some of the 
programs that we’ve launched in the last few years, as a 
government, that have improved the circumstances of those 
who are poor in this province. And one of the major 
accomplishments of this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
that we have reduced unemployment in the Saskatchewan 
economy very significantly. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a result of that, we have many 
more people who have an opportunity to participate in the 
economy now than was the case six years ago. And this 
progress continues even in the current year, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I just want to draw the attention of all members to the fact, for 
instance, that if you look at our levels of employment in 
Saskatchewan in terms of full-time jobs between March of last 
year and March of this year, we have 17,100 more full-time 
jobs in this province than we had a year ago. 
 
Well that’s a very significant accomplishment. We also, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, have an unemployment rate that is only 5.2 per 
cent in comparison with the national unemployment rate of 7.3 
per cent. So our unemployment rate is consistently a couple of 
percentage points lower than the national rate. And that is also 
another significant accomplishment of the private sector and 
our government working together to keep unemployment in this 
province low. 
 
(1545) 
 
We have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 478,100 people working in 
Saskatchewan — an increase over the same time last year of 
15,000 persons. And we have 10,200 fewer unemployed people 
this year at this point in time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, than we did 
a year ago. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it doesn’t matter how you look at the 
problem, and I’ve just looked at it from four perspectives, we 
are making significant headway in this province under our 
NDP-Liberal coalition government. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in addition to the progress that’s 
been made in terms of reducing unemployment and creating job 
opportunities for our residents in this province, we’ve also 
introduced a number of important redesign initiatives in terms 
of social programs that impact those on social assistance. 
 
And some of the initiatives that have been taken include the 
introduction of the Saskatchewan Child Benefit, the 
introduction of the Saskatchewan employment supplement and 
the introduction of family health benefits for low-income 
people who do not qualify for social assistance but who are 
trying to make a living in the workplace, and who, prior to the 
introduction of the family health benefits, were not eligible for 
those benefits while people on social assistance were. 
 
So we’ve extended family health benefits beyond those on 
social assistance to low-income working people. We’ve 
provided an employment supplement to low-income working 
families with children. And of course we’ve introduced the 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit. The combination of those three 
initiatives, Mr. Speaker, has been to remove another 1,500 
people from the social assistance rolls of this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, those people, those families, primarily 
families with children, are all significantly better off financially 
than they were before the introduction of these programs. And I 
might say, Mr. Speaker, that when we — I’m confident that 
when we see the latest Statistics Canada poverty rates for this 
province, which reflect the introduction of these programs, 
we’re going to see a further decline in poverty in Saskatchewan 
especially poverty among families with children. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to bring to the attention of all 
members of the Assembly that we’re now in a circumstance in 
which there are over 40,000 low-income families who are 
receiving the Saskatchewan Child Benefit. Many of those are 
families of course on social assistance. But many others are not, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 8,800 on-reserve families are 
receiving the Saskatchewan Child Benefit. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got each month about 5,900 
families in this province who are receiving the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement. And we’ve got 23,000 families with 
children who are receiving the family health benefits. So in 
total, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in these families there are 45,000 
children receiving the family health benefits. 
 
So we’ve extended these programs very significantly, and the 
introduction of the employment supplement and the 
introduction of family health benefits and their extension 
beyond persons on social assistance to other low-income 
working families is making a significant impact in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So those are some of the 
initiatives that have been introduced. 
 
In addition, when you’re looking at why we’ve had that 
significant reduction in social assistance caseload, one of the 
things that one has to look at is what has been done in terms of 



1604 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2000 

post-secondary training opportunities in this province, and for 
training and employment programs in general. 
 
And here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to bring to the attention 
of all members of the Assembly what the Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development has said about our 
work here in Saskatchewan. The OECD (Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development) in a recent review of 
social assistance programs in Canada, identified that 
Saskatchewan is committed to taking the best route to get 
people off assistance and onto employment. 
 
And what is that best route, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well first of 
all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan does not endorse 
workfare which demands unpaid work in exchange for benefits. 
We don’t believe in that approach, unlike many other provinces, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Rather, Mr. Speaker, we are working with 
people to make the transition to real jobs and real wages. 
 
Clients on social assistance in this province who are capable of 
working want to work, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s what we 
believe. And they are expected to pursue all opportunities for 
independence. Our government helps them take steps to 
overcome whatever barriers to employment they are 
encountering, whether these are social or educational. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the fiscal year 1999-2000 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training provided over 
15,000 training and employment service opportunities for 
current or former social assistance recipients. And this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, has been part of the key to reducing the social 
assistance caseload in this province — it’s been the extensive 
support that’s been provided by Post-Secondary Education and 
Skills Training. 
 
That department, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is also providing career 
and employment services for low-income people in 20 locations 
around the province. These are the Canada-Saskatchewan career 
and employment service centres. So clearly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there’s a lot happening on that front, a lot that doesn’t 
often enough get public attention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and of 
course that’s part of the reason for the motion before us now. 
 
And I want to just say that it’s my view that education is a key 
barrier to overcome for many persons who are on social 
assistance. Approximately 70 per cent of all persons who are on 
assistance and who are believed to be employable by 
Saskatchewan Social Services have less than a grade 12 
education, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And one of the goals of our 
government is to change that and support those people in 
getting a decent education and being able to get off welfare. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to say that in addition to the 
employment supports that I’ve already mentioned, SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
and regional colleges are also offering a variety of literacy and 
academic upgrading and adult education programs which I 
think have made a very important contribution to getting the 
caseload on social assistance down. 
 
We’ve introduced the JobStart, Future Skills program which 
links training to employment by providing employees with . . . 
by providing employers with wage subsidy assistance for 

on-the-job training or retraining or providing funding for quick 
skills training leading to employment. 
 
And we have a very extensive apprenticeship program in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we’re providing 
on-the-job and technical training leading to journeyman 
certification in 46 trades. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is some of the work that is 
taking place. I think there’s some other very important 
initiatives that our government is undertaking that I also want to 
make reference to that are making a difference. And one of 
them is the work that is being done by our community 
development units in the Department of Social Services. And 
these units are working particularly in Regina and Saskatoon 
and Prince Albert. 
 
They’re working with community-based groups to build their 
capacity to address poverty issues in their neighbourhoods. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think, in my home community of 
Saskatoon, of the work that the community development unit in 
the Department of Social Services has done in supporting Quint 
Development Corporation to launch many new job 
opportunities in the Pleasant Hill, Riversdale, Caswell, King 
George neighbourhoods, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think of the work that the Department of Social Services is 
doing in Prince Albert with the women against poverty group 
and the New Beginnings Co-op, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Work 
that’s being done in those communities to provide housing for 
low-income families. 
 
I think that the work that the Regina Department of Social 
Services unit is undertaking in terms of working with a 
women’s bakery co-op in Regina, that is working in 
conjunction with the Regina Food Bank to better the lives of 
low-income residents in the city of Regina. 
 
And those are just three examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the 
kind of work that the Department of Social Services community 
development unit is doing to help low-income people improve 
their lives. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in addition to all those initiatives, in 
addition to all those initiatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is 
also some important new work that the government has 
launched on the social housing front. And I want to particularly 
make reference to this, and I’m very proud of this new initiative 
that we’re taking, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because what we’ve 
seen in Canada in the last decade is basically the federal 
government pulling out of its responsibilities for providing 
social housing. 
 
We used to have a circumstance in this country in which the 
federal government would pay for 75 per cent of the 
construction costs of new social housing, and the provinces 
would pay for 20 per cent of those construction costs, and 
municipalities would pay for 5 per cent. And unfortunately in 
1996 Ottawa pulled out all their funding for new construction of 
social housing in Canada. 
 
And one of the very positive initiatives in the budget that our 
provincial government introduced in March, Mr. Deputy 



June 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1605 

Speaker, is that we are saying in that budget that even if the 
federal government is not going to invest in social housing, we 
are going to invest in social housing. We'll do it without 
Ottawa. And we have announced that we are going to be 
spending another $6 million in the coming year on new social 
housing construction. 
 
And with the exception of the Government of British Columbia, 
we’re the only government in Canada that is taking that course, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m very pleased to see those steps 
being taken. 
 
Five million dollars of that six million dollars, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is contained in the new Centenary Capital Fund, and 
the other million dollars can be found in the Department of 
Municipal Affairs. 
 
So while it’s not enough money because the federal dollars 
aren’t there to help, we’re willing to go it alone and work with 
municipal governments in terms of developing new social 
housing for low-income families in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to make reference to two other 
initiatives that our government has taken before I talk about 
other steps that might be taken in the future to tackle poverty. 
And that is the . . . first of all the work that we’ve done in terms 
of reducing social worker caseloads so that social workers can 
spend more time working with those who are still on social 
assistance in the province. 
 
And here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to point out that since 
1994-95 our government has been able to reduce social worker 
caseloads from an average of 210 down to an average of 170. 
And the caseload is still high, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we’re 
moving in the right direction. And what that’s doing is it’s 
giving social workers a little more time to work with high-needs 
clients. And we need to keep moving in that direction, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but we have made a start. 
 
And I also want to say that we’ve made a start in terms of our 
initiatives around pay equity, and this is particularly important 
for women in the workplace. And where we’ve primarily made 
headway so far is in the public sector, in the Crowns, and in the 
health care sector in this province. 
 
Those are three key sectors in which pay equity programs are 
being introduced which will result in women . . . in women’s 
salaries in those sectors increasing, especially women working 
in low-pay jobs or women working in jobs where they were 
doing equivalent work to men but weren’t getting paid at wage 
rates comparable to their male counterparts. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in many areas we’re making 
headway. And to summarize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve 
reduced the number of people who are reliant on social 
assistance in this province by almost 20,000 in the last six 
years. 
 
(1600) 
 
And we’ve done that through a combination of introducing the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement and therefore boosting 
the income of low-income working people with children in the 

home. We’ve done that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, through a variety 
of post-secondary training and employment opportunities. 
We’ve done that through significantly reducing the overall 
unemployment rate in the economy and significantly increasing 
the number of people who are working in Saskatchewan. We’ve 
done that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, through expanding pay equity 
opportunities for women in this province. 
 
We have done that in a wide variety of ways. Not in any one . . . 
not through any one program, but through a wide variety of 
initiatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we’ve done that by 
working with low-income people and the organizations who 
represent them in their neighbourhoods, particularly in urban 
Saskatchewan, to help them create new opportunities for 
themselves. 
 
And the work that the community development units in 
Saskatchewan Social Services have done are important. And all 
of these programs together is what’s made the difference, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I’m proud of the progress that is being 
made. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of this good work has begun 
to reflect itself in the statistics that the Canadian Council on 
Social Development is keeping in terms of rates of child 
poverty in the country. And the latest figures that we have from 
the Canadian Council on Social Development only 
unfortunately goes back to 1997. So we don’t have the most 
recent statistics which I think, in light of the comments that I’ve 
been making this afternoon, will further improve the statistics 
that I’m about to cite. 
 
But the significant thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction in the country — the only 
jurisdiction in Canada — to reduce the level of child poverty in 
its province. And that’s an important accomplishment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I want to quote the record across the country because 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the decade from 1987 to 
’97, reduced the number of children living in poverty by 8 per 
cent. And that is clearly as a result of the initiatives of this 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Meanwhile, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Newfoundland, there was 
no reduction; in Prince Edward Island, there was no reduction; 
in Alberta, there was an increase in child poverty of 2 per cent; 
in New Brunswick, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was an increase 
of 10 per cent; in Manitoba there was an increase of 11 per cent; 
in Quebec, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was an increase of 30 per 
cent; in Nova Scotia, there was an increase of 41 per cent in 
terms of the rate of child poverty; in British Columbia, an 
increase of 78 per cent; and worst of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
right-wing Ontario under the Mike Harris government, an 
increase of 118 per cent in the rate of child poverty. Which 
really . . . my colleague from Moose Jaw says, shame. And I 
agree with him. That really is a shameful record, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because clearly one of the ways in which a 
government should be judged is the degree to which it’s making 
progress on an important front like this. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, having noted the progress that 
we’ve made, and the many positive initiatives that have been 



1606 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2000 

undertaken, I want to turn my attention to the work that lies 
ahead. Because while we’ve made significant progress, we have 
a major challenge ahead. 
 
And I want to go back to referring to the study by the Canadian 
Council on Social Development entitled, Urban Poverty in 
Canada, and talk a little bit about urban poverty in our own 
cities, and particularly my home city of Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And I want to . . . I think all members of the Assembly should 
acknowledge the progress that we’ve made. But all members of 
the Assembly should also acknowledge the challenge that lies 
ahead and the severity of the problem that we still face 
particularly in our urban communities. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to give three or four 
perspectives on that challenge that we face. 
 
First of all, I want to note that we face a situation in which our 
poverty rate for children in this province is still at around 19 per 
cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker — still much too high. In my home 
city of Saskatoon, there are 12 per cent of the census 
management areas -- which basically is another way to describe 
a neighbourhood, Mr. Speaker -- 12 per cent of the 
neighbourhoods that have a poverty rate that is more than 
double the national average of poverty in the country. Now 
that’s not nearly as bad as a city like Montreal where 30 per 
cent of the neighbourhoods have a poverty rate in the urban 
neighbourhood that is double the national poverty rate. 
 
But 12 per cent is still very significant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and in my mind, unacceptable. So we have 12 per cent of the 
neighbourhoods in Saskatoon with a level of poverty that is 
double the national poverty rate. We also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
have a situation in Saskatoon where 31 per cent of families with 
children, who have children under five, are living in poverty. 
And that in my mind, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is also very 
unacceptable and clearly shows that we face a significant 
challenge in the years ahead. 
 
And that contrasts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with an overall poverty 
rate in Saskatoon of 21 per cent. So clearly, poverty among 
families with young children is abnormally high. And I think 
one of the obvious reasons for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
fact that it’s very difficult for families to work full-time while 
they’re raising preschool children. 
 
And many of these families will be headed by a lone parent, a 
single parent, and it’s almost impossible to hold down a 
full-time job and look after very young children at the same 
time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s one of the reasons why 
we’re seeing this very high poverty rate among families with 
preschool children. 
 
We also face an unacceptably high level of Aboriginal . . . of 
poverty among First Nations and Metis people in our city — an 
unacceptable rate of poverty among Aboriginal people. And 
again, that same report has pointed out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that poverty rates among Aboriginal people in our urban centres 
are approximately four times that of non-Aboriginal people. 
And again, this is an unacceptable situation. 
 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about some of the 
measures that I believe are needed . . . further measures that are 
needed in addition to the good programs that we’ve already 
introduced, that will be designed to further reduce poverty in 
our province and that ought to be implemented by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And before I . . . before I speak to those measures, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I want to put this in context by talking about what, 
what is the poverty rate in our province right now. What level 
of income do people need to earn in order to not be living in 
poverty? 
 
And Statistics Canada defines poverty for a single person, 
living in a centre the size of Saskatoon or Regina, as being 
$15,070 a year, and that’s pre-tax income, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
For someone living in a community the size of Prince Albert, 
the poverty level is $14,965. So you need to be making more 
than that to be above the poverty line, and again that’s pre-tax 
income. 
 
For someone living in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the poverty line would be defined as $12,142. And anyone 
earning less than that on pre-tax income would be living below 
the poverty line. So that puts the poverty line in context, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And clearly our task in this province as a government is that 
working together — government working with the 
non-government organizations sector, government working 
with the private business sector, government working with our 
educational institutions — our objective must be to 
systematically reduce poverty levels in this province year by 
year. We should be setting targets and we should be measuring 
the progress on a consistent basis. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to turn first to talking about 
poverty among those who are disabled because approximately 
30 per cent of Saskatchewan residents on social assistance are 
persons with disabilities. 
 
And I believe the time has come in this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker -- and I’m speaking on behalf of myself here now and 
not on behalf of the government -- but it is my view, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that the time has come in this province to 
introduce a disability pension for all persons who have 
significant disabilities: physical disabilities, serious mental 
health problems, serious intellectual disabilities. 
 
It’s time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we had a disability pension 
in this province that guaranteed that every one of those persons 
was living above the Statistics Canada poverty line, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Anyone who is disabled in this province shouldn’t 
have to live in poverty as a result of that disability, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I think that’s an important reform that the 
Saskatchewan government needs to bring forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to point out 
that I think one of our other high priorities needs to be to 
continue our work to reduce poverty among families with 
children, and especially families with pre-school children, Mr. 



June 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1607 

Deputy Speaker. So we need to further strengthen the 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit. We need to increase that for 
families on social assistance and for low-income working 
families, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I think we want to get to the point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
where we can get these families . . . If we can’t get them to the 
poverty line, at least get them close to the poverty line, Mr. 
Speaker, by improving the Saskatchewan Child Benefit and the 
employment supplement to the point where these families are 
no longer living in the kind of dismal poverty that they often 
face particularly in our urban communities today. So that in my 
mind, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is another very high priority. 
 
(1615) 
 
And I want to then lay a number of other initiatives that I think 
need to be taken to reduce poverty in both urban and rural 
communities. 
 
First of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to urge the government 
to expand and support neighbourhood employment . . . 
neighbourhood-based employment initiatives in low-income 
neighbourhoods with jobs targeted for residents of those 
neighbourhoods, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I believe there are many 
local neighbourhood jobs that could be created through 
initiatives such as home renovation, energy conservation, 
recycling, and repair services — just to give four examples. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I look at the Quint initiative in my 
home community of Saskatoon which as I said our government 
has strongly supported, the Quint initiative demonstrates the 
effectiveness of this kind of an approach. And this approach 
should be expanded and should be applied in many other 
low-income neighbourhoods across our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for those who have limited transportation 
opportunities, work opportunities need to be created in their 
neighbourhood. And for many people who are on social 
assistance, they have limited capacity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
travel to another part of the city to take employment. Their first 
employment opportunity may need to be in their home 
neighbourhood. They often don’t have the money, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to travel, to take job elsewhere, even in their own city. 
 
A lot of these people are just barely surviving, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and employment opportunities need to be created 
where they live, and once they have more financial wherewithal 
they’ll be able to readily take a job in another part of the city. 
When they have more training opportunities, they’ll be able to 
take a job in another part of the city or in another part of the 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But often their first job needs to 
be in their home neighbourhood. 
 
And I think we need to be paying attention in neighbourhoods 
that have very high rates of unemployment in this province — 
and there are several of them — we need to try to create 
employment opportunities in those neighbourhoods, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I think that would be an important initiative. 
 
As I said, we need to increase the Saskatchewan Child Benefit. 
That is very important to do that both for low-income, working 
families and families on social assistance. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my view we need to implement 
strategic increases in rates paid under the Saskatchewan 
Assistance Plan. I’d like to see an increase in the Saskatchewan 
Assistance Plan allowance for food and clothing and personal 
items. I’d like to see the reinstatement of the travel allowance 
for social assistance recipients. I think those are two positive 
initiatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I’m anxious to see our 
government undertake. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to see an allowance 
introduced under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan that gives 
those who are employable and on social assistance the resources 
that are required to look for work, including a clothing 
allowance, child care dollars, and a travel allowance to get to 
their place of employment. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to see our government 
introduce a series of increases in the minimum wage that would 
steadily move the minimum wage up to the poverty line. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would argue 
that the minimum wage should be above the poverty line. There 
is no reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why someone who is 
working full-time in Saskatchewan should, after working 40 
hours a week, still live in poverty, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Those 
days need to come to an end. And we need to increase the 
minimum wage, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to at least the poverty 
line. 
 
And what that means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is getting it over $7 
an hour — that’s basically what it means, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I think the time has come to do that. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I think that should be one of the high priorities of our 
government in the term ahead. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also need to continue to expand social 
housing programs in this province. One of the things that I’m 
very proud of is that in Saskatchewan we have 33,000 social 
housing units — now that’s quite an accomplishment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but we need more. We need at least another 
20,000. 
 
The unmet need in terms of social housing in this province is at 
least 20,000 — probably more like 30,000, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— and we need to continue to expand social housing in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and not only for low-income 
families but also for low-income seniors, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
will be a very important initiative. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe we need a major initiative 
in this province aimed at getting children who are not attending 
school back in school. In Saskatoon we have at least 300 
children, aged 8 to 13, who don’t attend school on a regular 
basis, and hundreds of more who are dropping out. These are 
. . . and hundreds more who are dropping out without 
completing grade 9. 
 
And many of these children are ending up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
getting into trouble with the law or ending up on the streets. 
And it’s time to launch a major initiative in this province to 
help those children, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



1608 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2000 

And I’m very proud that our government set up . . . One of 
these groups of children of course is children who are being 
sexually abused on the street. They are a small portion of the 
overall group of children who are out on the street, but they are 
a very high-needs portion of those children. And I’m pleased 
that our government has set up a special legislative committee 
to address the needs of these children, which the member for 
Humboldt and myself are co-chairing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I’m looking forward to our province making headway on 
this issue as a result of the joint party work that is going on in 
this legislature on this important issue. 
 
But beyond the specific needs of children who are being 
sexually abused on the street, there’s a much larger group of 
children who are very high needs and very high risk who are . . . 
they’re not involved in . . . they’re not being sexually abused on 
the street, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but they’re spending too much 
of their time on the street. 
 
They’ve dropped out of school. They’re engaged in break and 
enter and car theft and other illegal activities, and they have 
little prospect of a promising future ahead of them unless we get 
them back into school, get them training, get them off the street, 
and give them both educational and job opportunities, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And this must be one of the major priorities of 
our government in the coming term in my view. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are some of the additional 
initiatives that are needed, in my judgment. And I want to close, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, by turning the attention of the Assembly 
again to the motion before us. 
 
And that motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the continuing decrease in 
social assistance caseloads in Saskatchewan, and the 
reduction in child poverty in Saskatchewan in the past 
decade and advocate that high priority be given to further 
steps to reduce poverty in our province. 

 
And Mr. Speaker, in summarizing my comments in this area, I 
just want to say three or four key things in summary. 
 
First, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the motion speaks to the continuing 
decrease in social assistance caseloads. And we have seen 
between 1994 and the year 2000, an increase of almost 20,000 
persons relying on social assistance in our province, as a result 
of the initiatives of this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
hope that’s something that all members of this Assembly will 
applaud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Secondly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are the . . . 
Saskatchewan is the only province in Canada, the only province 
in Canada, to reduce child poverty in the decade that we have 
the most recent statistics for nationally — between 1987 and 
1997, an 8 per cent reduction in child poverty in this province, 
again as the result of the initiatives of this government, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Prebble: — The only province in Canada to reduce child 
poverty during the decade while in every other province it either 
increased or remained the same, and while it increased by 118 
per cent in Tory Ontario. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, that this Assembly acknowledge the 
challenge that lies ahead, the work that needs to be done to 
further reduce poverty in this province. And I’ve talked about 
some of the initiatives that I believe are needed in terms of a 
neighbourhood-based . . . more neighbourhood-based 
employment opportunities for low-income people; further 
reforms to the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, including an 
increase in the Saskatchewan Child Benefit, including a 
clothing and transportation allowance for people who are 
actively looking for work, including, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 
disability pension for people who have significant disabilities in 
this province which prevent them from being able to work on a 
full-time basis, and including, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an increase 
in the rates that are paid under the Saskatchewan Child Benefit, 
and for the food, clothing, and personal allowance for those on 
social assistance, and the reinstatement of the transportation 
allowance for those on social assistance. And those views, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to emphasize are my own views. But I think 
they should be important priorities for our government. 
 
And also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that we need to take 
seriously the issue of youth on our streets, particularly in urban 
Saskatchewan; and we need a major initiative to provide 
educational opportunities, employment opportunities, and 
counselling and support opportunities for those young people, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this should not only be a priority for 
our line government departments, it should also be a priority for 
our Crown corporations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and for the 
private sector. 
 
And I just want to give one example of the kind of thing that the 
Crowns could be doing. I note for instance with interest in the 
city of Saskatoon that SGI is paying out $5 million a year, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in premiums on car theft and break and enter. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why not take some of that money 
and put it into employment and training opportunities for the 
young people that are committing the break and enter and the 
car theft. Let’s get them off the street, out of criminal activity, 
and back into school. Those are the kind of initiatives that we 
need to take. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the challenge of tackling poverty in 
this province lies ahead of us. But in looking at that challenge 
let’s not forget the progress we’ve made. The progress we’ve 
made is significant, but the further reforms that are required, the 
further program initiatives that are required are also significant, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know our government’s up for the task, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know we’re going to see further progress 
in the years ahead. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am confident that when the 
Canadian Council on Social Development publishes its next 
report on reductions in child poverty, our rates will have gone 
down further because of some of the recent initiatives that 
we’ve taken that I’ve talked about that have happened since 
1997. 
 



June 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1609 

But let’s not be complacent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just because 
we’re making progress, let’s not be complacent. Let’s 
implement the other initiatives that I’ve talked about. Let’s take 
our province to the point where we have the lowest poverty rate 
in all of Canada. Let’s ultimately set our objective to eliminate 
poverty in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’m proud of what our government’s done and I know we’re up 
for the task ahead. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — . . . which it’s my pleasure to do, seconded by 
the member for Saskatoon Southeast: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the continuing decrease in 
social assistance caseloads in Saskatchewan, and the 
reduction in child poverty in Saskatchewan in the past 
decade and advocate that high priority be given to further 
steps to reduce poverty in our province. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to start off first by apologizing to the House for being so 
eager earlier on before the member from Saskatoon Greystone 
so eloquently talked about the initiatives that we have done to 
decrease social assistance caseloads. I apologize to the House 
that I stood up and moved the motion. I clearly want to second 
it though. I’m very pleased to be able to enter into this debate. 
 
Earlier today we had a debate about agriculture. And there 
seemed to be a suggestion that unless you’re a farmer, you can’t 
properly enter into the debate about agriculture, and because 
most of us on the government side represent city constituencies 
that we don’t really know what we’re talking about when we’re 
talking about agriculture. 
 
Now following that logic through, I guess one could assume 
then that you have to have been on social assistance in order to 
be able to adequately and eloquently address the issues of 
poverty in our society. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I stand here in this House today as 
somebody who was on social assistance for the first 17 years of 
my life. I stand here today, I think, as an example of how you 
can succeed despite great odds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — When I was five years old, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
my father was killed in a car accident as he was being driven 
home from Claresholm, Alberta to where the family was 
stationed at the RCAF (Royal Canadian Air Force) station in 
Calgary. He was thrown from the vehicle and killed outright. 
My mother, at that point, had four young children under the age 
of five. I was the eldest. And there were very few options at that 
point. Probably if we’d had seat belt legislation in place in 1952 

my father would be alive. We didn’t have seat belt legislation, 
my father died, and my mother was faced with the not envious 
task of raising several young children on her own. 
 
She had trained as a school teacher but with four young children 
it was impossible for her to go back to school. So she moved 
back to her hometown of Caron, Saskatchewan and raised her 
children as best she could, but she had to depend on public 
assistance. 
 
Public assistance in those days, I will tell you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, was not a wonderful thing. And I could probably 
regale the House with many tales about the mean-spiritedness 
that I had to experience because I was a dirty, welfare-bum kid. 
I won’t do that because as many people who were negative 
towards our family because we had to be on welfare, there were 
an equal number of people who were very positive and were 
very helpful. 
 
And I remember very fondly being offered skim milk from our 
neighbours; having people come and say well, we’ve killed a 
deer, you can have part of it; being offered chickens to slaughter 
in the fall and so forth. 
 
Many of the people were extremely helpful and helped a young 
widow and her family survive the adversity of poverty. Now I 
think the fact that I stand here today is a tribute both to my 
mother, who was a wonderful woman, and to the education 
system in this province. And if I had not been able to get a 
student loan and to go on to university, I would not be here. 
 
I tell this story, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I think it’s 
important for us to recognize that people going on to social 
assistance, it can happen so easily. And escaping poverty is not 
so easy but there are some solutions that we can put in place. 
We have done some things like increasing access to 
post-secondary education, like ensuring that people feel proud 
and stay in schools and so forth. 
 
We haven’t resolved all the ills though that contribute towards 
poverty, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have though, I think, moved 
a fair distance. In the last five years, for instance, there has been 
a 15 per cent decrease in welfare dependency in this province 
— a 15 per cent decrease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have moved from a caseload . . . We now have 
a caseload of 34,019 cases, representing 62,988 persons in this 
province. Now I would suggest that is still 62,988 people too 
many who are living in poverty. But the fact is we have moved 
some considerable distance and we have a 15 per cent decrease 
in the welfare-dependency rate. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you listen to the members opposite, 
you would think that that simply wasn’t so. You would think 
that 100,000, 150,000, 200,000 people were on welfare in this 
province. 
 
I think it’s a shame that the opposition has this tactic of going 
around and trying to convince people that everybody’s on 
welfare. But I just want to talk a little bit about some of the 
things that have been said in this legislature in the last little 
while. 
 



1610 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2000 

On March 19, 1999 during the 19th session the MLA for 
Kindersley, representing I guess the Alberta envy party said, 
quote: 
 

Let’s talk about welfare in Saskatchewan. Let’s talk about 
our welfare numbers in this province. From 1991 to 1997 
the welfare rolls in Saskatchewan swelled from 53,400 to 
79,700, an increase of nearly 50 per cent . . . The national 
average was actually an increase of 22 per cent. 

 
During the same period of time in other provinces (he goes 
on to say) they’ve decreased their numbers . . . have 
decreased the number of people on social services. 

 
Well he doesn’t go on to point out that the number of people on 
social services in Saskatchewan has also decreased. As a matter 
of fact along with Manitoba and Alberta, Saskatchewan has the 
lowest dependency rate of any province in the whole Dominion 
of Canada. We have made significant progress in terms of 
decreasing the welfare caseloads. 
 
Again the member from Rosthern on December 8, 1999 said in 
Hansard: 
 

I could have spent a lot of time on the welfare numbers — 
the worst in Canada from an NDP government that claims 
to have a social conscience. 

 
The same day the Leader of the Opposition, the member for 
Rosetown-Biggar, talked about Saskatchewan having the 
highest taxes in the country, the worst health care in the 
country, the worst highways, the longest welfare rolls, the worst 
job creation record. It seems . . . I could go on and on. 
 
April 17, 1999, the member from Humboldt made similar 
allegations about welfare rates in this province. March 26, 
1999, the member from Melfort was on his feet saying that the 
reality today, when the NDP was elected in 1991, more hungry 
children, more people unemployed, more people on welfare. 
Flies in the face of reality, but they keep saying it. Again on 
March 23, 1999, the member from Kelvington-Wadena made 
similar statements. 
 
This, in spite of the fact, this in spite of the fact that the welfare 
rates are going down. Our dependency rate is amongst the 
lowest in the whole Dominion of Canada. 
 
Now you would have thought that after the fall session, they 
would have gone away and done their homework and stopped 
this myth making about the number of people who are on 
welfare in this province. 
 
But, oh no, again they’re at it. May 2, 2000, the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers says: 
 

In the meantime, (he says) . . . while the revamping is 
going to (and then it’s something inaudible; he carries on) . 
. . we’re waiting for it to start, 5,000 jobs have been lost in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, because of the inane policies of 
this government whose desire it is, is to control people and 
to put them out of work and say that we are doing good. 
Putting people on welfare and on unemployment insurance 
rolls is certainly not an attitude to take and say that this is 

good for the province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is not true. The welfare dependency is 
going down. It’s down by 15 per cent. The number of children 
and families receiving social assistance has decreased by 
11,000. That is a decrease of 31 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Now, Mr. Speaker, as I understand the 
right-wing mentality, the mentality, and I have to admit I have 
an imperfect understanding of it, but it seems to me what they 
say is, get people off welfare; the best social assistance is a job. 
Well guess what? We’re delivering on that. 
 
Right now, in March of this year, we had 478,000 people 
working in this province, the most ever in Saskatchewan. The 
number of full-time jobs is increasing; unemployment is 
decreasing. Our unemployment rate in March was 5.2 per cent 
compared to nationally a 7.3 per cent unemployment rate. 
 
So we are working to get the economy going and to get those 
jobs for people so that they can have an alternative to 
assistance. 
 
While we’re talking though about social assistance, we need to 
look at who is actually on welfare in Saskatchewan. I 
mentioned earlier there were 34,000 cases in Saskatchewan of 
people who are on social assistance. Fifty-five thousand of 
those people, a full 19,000 people, are not fully employable. 
They could not get a job. Because of various disabilities, 19,000 
people cannot work in this province. 
 
Those are people that we have a responsibility and a duty to as a 
caring society. We have to provide some measure of dignity and 
sustenance to those people. Those 19,000 people require an 
adequate living. And I don’t think there’s anyone in this House 
that would deny those 19,000 people an opportunity to be able 
to put food on their tables, to be able to clothe their children. 
 
Just as my mother did back in the ’50s when she had to rely on 
social assistance — my mother was unable to be employed. 
And I don’t think people here today would deny her the right to 
receive social assistance and to be able to raise her children 
with dignity. And I don’t think we should deny those 55 per 
cent of our people who are on social assistance, the right to 
dignity and to assistance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Now if we buy the right-wing argument that the 
best social assistance is a job, what we have to do is look at 
what is the best route to get a job. And I would suggest to 
members of this House that the best route is education. The best 
way off welfare is to get an education. 
 
Eighty per cent of Saskatchewan people have grade 12 or more, 
but in contrast, 70 per cent of the employable people who were 
on social assistance have less than a grade 12. 
 
When we look at the youth who were on social assistance, the 
statistics I think are even more stark. Twenty-five per cent of 
the social assistance caseload today is youth, 18 to 25. And only 



June 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1611 

20 per cent of those 8,500 cases actually have any education 
beyond a grade 12. 
 
(1645) 
 
And we all know that today’s economy requires not just a grade 
12, but extensive post-secondary education. The low-skill or 
no-skill jobs are almost a thing of the past. And so it is 
imperative, if people are gong to get off social assistance, that 
they remain in school and that they have the opportunity to go 
on and do post-secondary education. 
 
This is particularly so, I would suggest, when we talk about 
Aboriginal people. Overall, Aboriginal people unfortunately 
comprise about 40 per cent of the total caseload on social 
assistance, and 50 per cent of the youth on social assistance are 
Aboriginal. So we need to have a very specific focus on 
Aboriginal needs and concerns when we’re talking about 
decreasing poverty even further. 
 
In that regard, I am very proud and very pleased of the specific 
Aboriginal educational institutions that we have in the province. 
Institutions like Gabriel Dumont, Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College, the SUNTEP (Saskatchewan urban native 
teacher education program) and the NORTEP (northern teacher 
education program) programs. These are highly successful and 
the graduates of these programs get jobs after their training, and 
they stay here in Saskatchewan, and they are fully contributing 
members of society. 
 
In this House we have just finished passing legislation for the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies. And I’m very 
proud of that. That was a banner day in this House, Mr. 
Speaker, when we saw representatives from SIIT sit in the 
Speaker’s gallery and watch the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education do second reading of the speech for SIIT. 
 
This is a major initiative that will make a difference. 
 
Now one of the things that we have done, Mr. Speaker, in the 
nine years that we’ve formed government, one of the things that 
we can very much brag about is the fact that mining 
employment in the North has doubled. Mining employment for 
Aboriginal people has doubled in this province. And we know 
that one worker probably supports about three or four people. 
 
So we have several thousand people living in the North, and it’s 
not a great stretch to understand that most of those people are 
Aboriginal people. We have now several thousand people who 
are living in the North, working in mining . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . working in uranium mines, yes, working in the 
mining industry in this province, taking their place as fully 
employed workers and making sure that we have fewer people 
on welfare. 
 
And this has come about because of strong partnerships 
between government, business, and community. We’ve seen, 
for instance, the business contracts in the North are up. In 1991, 
those contracts that resided very specifically in the North were 
about $20 million. In 1999, those contracts were up to $180 
million. 
 
We’re talking about opportunities for Aboriginal people in 

trucking and transport; we’re talking about opportunities for 
Aboriginal people in construction, in site construction in the 
mines up North, in road construction; we’re talking about 
opportunities for Aboriginal people in catering. We’re talking 
about opportunities for Aboriginal people in mining expansion. 
We’ve made major improvements. 
 
Well unfortunately we have yet to make those same kinds of 
improvements in terms of Aboriginal employment in the potash 
mines down south or in the oil and gas industry. But it is my 
hope that as we work with businesses in partnership, that we 
will see the same initiatives and opportunities for employment 
for Aboriginal people in potash mining as well as in the oil and 
gas sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem of poverty is a multi-faceted one. It’s 
a difficult one, and there are no quick-fix solutions. There’s no 
unilateral one-dimensional approach. We have to, all of us, 
opposition and government, work together to stamp out the 
blight called poverty. 
 
I think though if I could close on any kind of a note, I would 
like to say that the best way that we can tackle poverty is if all 
of us take just a moment out of our busy schedules and imagine, 
even for 30 seconds, what it would be like if we ourselves were 
on welfare. If we had no money, if we were feeling desperate 
and hopeless and powerless. 
 
If we think about that, we think about what it would be like to 
be on welfare, if we actually take a moment to walk a mile in 
someone else’s shoes or in someone else’s moccasins. We have 
to ask ourselves: what would we need; what would we want; 
what would be helpful to us in order to get off welfare, to get an 
education, and to get a job. 
 
And I would suggest there are three things, Mr. Speaker, that 
we would need. The first is an opportunity to maintain our 
dignity. Without dignity, human beings have no self-esteem, 
and without self-esteem, it is extremely difficult to force 
yourself out of your home and to go out and put out those 
resumes and to try to get a job. So we need to create the 
conditions, the psychological conditions, so that people can 
have dignity whether or not they’re on social assistance. 
 
That is something that we, all of us and particularly we as 
public representatives, can help to foster. We’re not going to do 
any good by dumping on poor people and saying, oh they’re 
poor because they’re lazy, shiftless, no-good bums. We’ve got 
to encourage people and allow them those remaining shreds of 
human dignity so that they can have self-respect. 
 
Which brings me to the second thing that people on welfare 
need that I think, if we imagine for a moment, if we put 
ourselves in their shoes, we’ll understand. People who are on 
social assistance require respect. They are not there because 
they choose to live on the dole. That is a pernicious and an ugly 
myth that does a disservice to people like my mother who raised 
her children with dignity and in spite of great odds, but raised 
them on social assistance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — It was hard for my mother to accept social 



1612 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2000 

assistance and she needed to hold her head high despite that. 
She was able to do it because she received respect — from her 
friends, from her community, from her family. Dignity and 
respect. 
 
And this third thing, Mr. Speaker, I think all of us would 
understand if we took a moment and got away from our 
political rhetoric and thought about what it is that we would 
require, that we need, that would be helpful for us if we had no 
money and we were forced to be on social assistance, the third 
thing, I think we could all agree on, is that there has to be an 
absolute, ironclad, total focus on children. 
 
We need to focus on the needs and concerns of those children 
on social assistance. And I think by doing that, by having a 
forward-looking, future orientation and encouraging them to 
stay in school and to get their post-secondary education, we will 
be able to start to make an even greater dent in the numbers of 
people on social assistance in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve gone on at some length and I would just like 
to close now by thanking members of this Assembly for their 
indulgence in letting me relate a few of my childhood 
experiences. And I ask you all to always remember it is 
imperative that we have empathy and respect for people and 
that we be prepared to walk a mile in their shoes. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to take a moment just to thank the members from 
Saskatoon Greystone and Saskatoon Southeast for their very 
thoughtful and well-considered words on the topic of debate. 
They were very informative and spoken with passion and 
conviction, and I do want to thank them on behalf of members 
of the Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I move that debate be adjourned on this 
motion. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Hermanson........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1581 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1581 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1581 
  Jones .................................................................................................................................................................................................. 1581 
  Eagles................................................................................................................................................................................................. 1581 
  Harper ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 1581 
  Wall.................................................................................................................................................................................................... 1581 
  Bakken............................................................................................................................................................................................... 1581 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1581 
  Weekes............................................................................................................................................................................................... 1581 
  Brkich ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 1582 
  Harpauer........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1582 
  Wakefield .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1582 
  Hart.................................................................................................................................................................................................... 1582 
  Allchurch........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1582 
  Stewart .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 1582 
  Kwiatkowski ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1582 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1582 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Harpauer........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1582 
  Brkich ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 1583 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1583 
  Brkich ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 1583 
  Wall.................................................................................................................................................................................................... 1583 
  Harpauer........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1596 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Privatized Health Care Results in Bankruptcies in United States 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1583 
 Retirement of Dr. Roy Holm 
  Eagles................................................................................................................................................................................................. 1584 
 Decoration Day Ceremony 
  Harper ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 1584 
 Provincial Mine Rescue and Emergency Response Competition 
  Harpauer........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1584 
 Scientific Research Station at Eastend T-Rex Centre 
  Yates .................................................................................................................................................................................................. 1584 
 Volunteer Recognition Awards 
  Weekes............................................................................................................................................................................................... 1585 
 World Environment Week 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1585 
 Saskatchewan Economy Growing 
  Jones .................................................................................................................................................................................................. 1585 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Wascana Centre Prohibition on Sports 
  McMorris .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1585 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1586 
 Converting Paved Highways to Gravel 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1586 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1586 
 Maintenance of Highway 349 between Naicam and Archerwill 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1587 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1588 
 Maintenance of Highway 3 from Glaslyn to Turtleford 
  Allchurch........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1588 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1588 
 Maintenance of Highway 339 from Avonlea to Stelcam 
  Stewart .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 1588 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1588 
 



 

 Maintenance of Highway 15 from Seaman to Highway 20 
  Harpauer ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1589 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1589 
 Maintenance of Highway 6 between Minton and Ceylon 
  Bakken...............................................................................................................................................................................................1589 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1589 
 Maintenance of Highways 44 and 31 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1589 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1589 
 Maintenance of Highway 35 from Francis to Highway No. 1 
  McMorris ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
 Maintenance of Highway 40 East and West of Hafford 
  Weekes...............................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates ..................................................................................................................................................................................................1591 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Farm Families Finish Seeding 2000 Crop 
  Harper ...............................................................................................................................................................................................1591 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1593 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1594, 1601 
  Boyd ...............................................................................................................................................................................1596, 1601 
  Lorje.........................................................................................................................................................................................1598 
  Eagles.................................................................................................................................................................................................1599 
  Wartman .................................................................................................................................................................................1600, 1601 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1601 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 9 — Decrease in Social Assistance Caseloads 
  Prebble...............................................................................................................................................................................................1602 
  Lorje...............................................................................................................................................................................1601, 1609 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1612 
 
 


