





























































Hansard: May 11, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1145 
 May 11, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
dealing with the fuel tax and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And this is signed by the good people from Caronport, 
Tompkins, Caron, Riverhurst, Ituna, all over the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan 
who would like to see their cellular telephone coverage service 
improved. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda and Cudworth. 

 
And the signatories on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Vonda, from Nipawin, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Prud’homme, 
and other places throughout the province. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition today for 
increased cellular coverage. This is in the Watson area. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to ensure reliable cellular service to Watson 
and area by installing a cellular tower at Watson. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are all from Watson. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of people concerned about the high price of fuel. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of St. Brieux, Melfort, and Prince Albert. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition regarding fuel taxes and the fuel price in the province. 
Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals 
from the communities of Swift Current and Herbert. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 
regards to the high price of fuel. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 

And the signatures are from the people of the community of 
Arborfield. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
stand today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens concerned about the high cost of fuel. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this signed by folks in Arborfield and Zenon Park. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of people concerned about the high price of 
fuel. So concerned in fact, Mr. Speaker, that I think they spilled 
some coffee on the petition when they were signing it. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of the 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 



1146 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2000 

And the concerned people are from Swift Current, from Webb, 
from Regina, and from Preeceville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to provide reliable cellular service in the 
districts of Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the citizens of Silton 
and Bulyea. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present 
petitions on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan regarding 
forced amalgamation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed from people in Star City, Nipawin, and 
the famous community of Carrot River. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to read a 
petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good people of Arborfield. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here opposed to 
the forced municipal amalgamation. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures are from Buena Vista. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 

with citizens concerned about the high price of fuel. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
The petitioners are from Arborfield. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition on 
. . . that deals with a group cellular telephone coverage, and the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures to this petition come from Bulyea and 
Silton. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens concerned 
about the high price of fuel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The petition is signed by the good citizens of Arborfield, Zenon 
Park, Nipawin, and my wife’s hometown of Bjorkdale. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 
To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes; and 
 
To provide reliable cellular service in Prud’homme, Bruno, 
Vonda, and Cudworth. 



May 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1147 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
44 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: how 
much did your department pay out in 1999, year 2000, to 
cover the cost of repairing damage to vehicles owned by 
people or businesses where such damage was found to 
have been caused by highway conditions; how many 
requests for compensation were made to the Department of 
Highways in 1999, year 2000, and how many were 
granted? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through to all members of our House 
today, a group of students, teachers, and chaperones that have 
journeyed over a fair distance to come to our Assembly today. 
As you know, we live a long way from the seat of power and 
we rarely get guests, so I’m especially pleased that this is the 
first group of students and teachers and parents that have come 
here. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you today 23 students in grades 2 to 6 in 
the east gallery. And they come from the community of Piapot 
and they braved rather difficult weather conditions to get here 
today. Their teachers are Ms. Karen Schommer and Ms. Janice 
Markert, and they’re accompanied by Ylla Klein, Heather 
Hecker, Doug Smith, Renée Wasilow, Art Unsworth, Vicki 
Kruetzer, Laurie Bertram, and Susan Selke. 
 
And they came to see how we conduct the people’s business 
and how well behaved we are. And I will try and keep them 
under control for the rest of the afternoon. Please welcome them 
with me today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a 
great deal of pride that I rise today in my place and introduce to 
you and through you to all colleagues in the Assembly, some 
very important people in the lives of my family. I inherited 
them through marriage but they’ve adopted me and they 
provide me with a lot of personal support and a great deal of 
unconditional love. 
 
In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, I have cousin Arlene, her mother, 
Aunt Margie Weeks, and with them a special guest from 
Dawson Creek, BC (British Columbia), Lois Smith, Aunt Loie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was a new bride, we spent a few years in 
Dawson Creek and I can’t tell all of you how important it was 
to have a sense of family that lived close by and the support and 
love that was provided. And Margie up there has recently 
turned 39 with 41 years of experience, so Loie has come to be 
with us to celebrate that great occasion. Aunt Margie also 
includes me in her Christmas tart and Christmas pudding baking 
list of which I’m grateful and most appreciative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in a warm welcome 
to our family. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 
today to introduce to you and through you to the members of 
the House, students from the fine community of Osler. Osler is 
one of those fortunate rural communities that’s growing and it 
helps to have had a good constituency like that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 31 students, grades 8 and 9, in the east 
gallery and they are accompanied by their teachers Glen 
Osmond and Suzanne Clements; also chaperones Jennifer 
Reimer and Colleen Rempel. I’ll be meeting with them later on 
and discussing what they observed in the House. Would you 
join me in giving them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now you may 
remember a while back I introduced my father Mr. Hub Elkin, 
and I did mention at that time that he pesters me constantly 
about the minimum wage. But today he has someone else with 
him, a long-time friend, Mr. Adrian Moen, a retired official of 
the Labour department of the Government of the Netherlands 
Antilles and a resident of the main island of Curaçao. 
 
Mr. Moen and my father worked together on an international 
labour organization project — they both look so young — 27 
years ago. Can you believe it? And Mr. Moen continues his 
interest in labour matters and spends much time representing 
immigrants from poor countries who experience problems 
arising from unfair labour practices. 
 
So I ask them to rise and be recognized. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join my colleagues from . . . colleague from Cypress Hills to 
welcome one individual in his group of students and teachers 
and chaperones from Piapot. It’s an old friend of mine from, 
back from Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Karen Schommer is with the group and she was a teacher, and 
she was a very good teacher. She spent many hours, extra hours 
working with the students of Ile-a-la-Crosse. So I sincerely say 
to the Piapot students that you’re gaining an incredible 
advantage over the rest of Saskatchewan having Karen as a 
teacher. 
 
And as well I want to thank her publicly for her nomination of 
me several years ago to be awarded the National Native Role 
Model Award for Saskatchewan. It was her nomination that 
they accepted and certainly it was her that afforded me the 
opportunity to represent Saskatchewan in that capacity for 
several years. 
 
And the exchange, Mr. Speaker — what I had done was I taught 
her curling and taught her husband hockey. So that was my gift 
back to her and to her husband. So I want to tell her that I hope 
that her curling has improved drastically and her husband’s 
hockey has improved. 
 
But I want to show special recognition to her, and thank her 



1148 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2000 

once again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY MEMBERS 
 

Federal Initiatives to Benefit Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
It gives me great pleasure today to rise and let some sun shine 
through the doom and gloom that the Saskatchewan Party 
brings to the province. Indeed the announcement Wednesday 
from the Liberal government in Ottawa should give farmers, 
motorists, and municipalities throughout the province a reason 
for optimism. 
 
The announcement yesterday shows Minister Goodale does 
listen to what we say in Saskatchewan, and with this 
government’s support he can get results. Just imagine, Mr. 
Speaker, if we have 14 government members in Ottawa next 
election, how clearly the voice of Saskatchewan residents will 
be heard. 
 
The announcement of new money for rural roads and $100 
million in the pockets of Saskatchewan grain farmers in the 
form of reduced freight rates can only be described as a victory 
for working co-operatively and constructively with all levels of 
government. 
 
Not only has the federal Liberal government addressed some of 
the major costs to both farmers and our road system, but there is 
also good news on the long-suffering subject of branch line 
abandonment. Measures will be put in place for railroads to 
provide transitional compensation of $10,000 per mile annually 
for three years to affected municipalities when a grain line is 
closed. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, there will be initiatives put in place that 
will require that railways continue to operate the remaining part 
of a branch line when they transfer grain line . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Time has expired. Members, 
time has expired. 
 

Government Funding of Film Festival 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Tuesday, just 
before he moved to cut off debate and silence the opposition, 
the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley challenged the 
opposition members to go to the Queer City Film Festival and 
to do so with an open mind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I fully intend to do just that. I want to see where 
taxpayers’ dollars are going, and I will consider whether there is 
some possible reason the government should be funding 
pornography. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to issue that same challenge back to 
the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. He should go, and 
he should go with an open mind. He should consider whether 
this is an appropriate use of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I plan to attend tonight and Friday night 

screenings and the Saturday afternoon panel discussion. And I 
invite and challenge the member of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
to join me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Meadow Lake Students Compete in National Science Fair 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
recognize four constituents from Meadow Lake who are 
showing us just how innovative students can be. Maegan 
Fincham, Charley Lepage, Mitchel Sarauer, and Cassie 
Opikokew, all grade 8 students from Jonas Samson Junior High, 
are heading to London, Ontario for the national science fair. 
These four students earned top honours at the regional science 
fair held this spring in Meadow Lake and are off to the 
nationals in just a few days. 
 
Mitchel Sarauer and Cassie Opikokew studied genetically 
modified organisms by extracting DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) 
from an onion. Earlier this year, they took home the $1,000 
Saskatchewan Education Award. Maegan Fincham and Charley 
Lepage did a project on electronic monitors building one from 
scratch, if you can believe it or not, using among other things 
paper clips and batteries. These two won the SaskEnergy 
Award and $500. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these four students exhibit the very best of 
creativity and knowledge in young people. I’d like to commend 
the students, their teachers, and their parents for supporting the 
scientific endeavours of their children. 
 
Cassie, Mitchel, Charley, and Maegen have made their school, 
their community, and their MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) very proud, and I want to wish them all good luck as 
they embark on their journey. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Theatre Fest 2000 Held in Swift Current 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During the last week of 
April, the Swift Current Little Theatre hosted the Saskatchewan 
Community Theatre Full-Length Play Festival, which included 
workshops along with performances every night of the 
week-long competition. 
 
Seven amateur companies from around the province took part in 
the event. Congratulations to the Milestone Prairie Players, who 
captured the award for the best play, and hats off to the 
runner-up, the Saskatoon Gateway Players. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it was the host theatre company that received 
the most recognition. The Swift Current Little Theatre and their 
play titled Noises Off won five awards including Brian Dueck 
for best actor and Ken Johnson who was the first runner-up for 
best director. 
 
The Swift Current Little Theatre also won awards for technical 
merit and community involvement. The cast of Joanne 
Matsalla, Iain McLean, Brian Dueck, Rachelle Haubrich, Terri 
Potter, Sean Finell, Lynn Theise, Bruce Rayner, and Bill Sharp, 
along with the entire crew, should be commended. And a 



May 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1149 

special congratulations to Agatha Dyck of Swift Current who 
was the festival chairperson. She was recognized with a 
Lifetime Achievement Award for her support of local theatre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people in Swift Current have told me they 
watch the legislative channel from time to time, what a treat it 
must have been for the entire community to actually see some 
good acting for a change. 
 
I hope all members will join me in congratulating the Swift 
Current Little Theatre and all who participated in Theatre Fest 
2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Support for Bread and Roses and the Healing Co-operative 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our progressive social 
democratic movement has always been very supportive of 
co-operatives. And yesterday in Saskatoon our government 
showed its dedication to the co-operative movement once again. 
 
The Minister of Economic Development presented two cheques 
to two very unique co-ops, Bread and Roses, and the Healing 
Co-operative. Bread and Roses will develop programs that will 
help women deal with workplace stress and build better 
workplaces. The Healing Co-operative will offer alternative, 
holistic health care, especially to low-income individuals and 
survivors of sexual abuse. 
 
It is fitting that this event took place during Women 
Entrepreneurs’ Week, as both co-ops will create business 
opportunities and employment for their members. These co-ops 
reflect the very special dual nature of the co-operative 
movement — commitment to the economic progress and social 
justice. Bread and Roses and the Healing Co-operative join a 
network of co-operatives that have shaped a caring 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Co-ops are indeed about economic progress. But they’re also 
about people, quality of life, and building a better world. 
 
I would like to commend all 14 women involved with these two 
co-ops for their commitment to helping women help 
themselves, for their work will not only benefit women, but all 
of society. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tammy Cool of Davidson Receives Scholarship 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great pride that I rise 
today to inform the members of this Assembly of a remarkable 
young lady from my constituency. Ms. Tammy Cool, daughter 
of Don and Gloria Cool of Davidson, presently attends grade 12 
at the Davidson High School. 
 
Tammy is a most remarkable student, having a grade average of 
over 95 per cent, Mr. Speaker. To add to this academic 
excellence, Tammy has contributed greatly to her community 
through her leadership achievements . . . the enormous energy 
in helping organize and run events in Davidson. 
 

It is by these great achievements I’m proud to announce that 
Ms. Cool has been awarded the University of Saskatchewan’s 
top academic scholarship — the $17,000 George and Marsha 
Ivany President’s First and Best Scholarship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, only four of these scholarships are awarded to 
Saskatchewan students who are entering higher education. Ms. 
Cool was selected from a group of only 63 candidates whose 
academic and leadership qualities were so high to be considered 
by the university. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Tammy’s ongoing achievements are many. 
Besides being involved in SRC (student representative council) 
activities and leadership at school sports teams, Ms. Cool has 
been involved in community fundraising in regards to 
Telemiracle, Peers Helping Peers, and the Fly Higher program. 
She’s even composed lyrics for some songs performed at 
Persephone Theatre in Saskatoon. And to add to all of this is her 
membership in the pastoral committee involved in selecting a 
minister for a church’s congregation. 
 
To be proud of this through this higher . . . proud of this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The member’s time has 
expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Renal Dialysis Services for Swift Current Regional Hospital 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, my home health district, 
Moose Jaw-Thunder Creek, has CT (computerized axial 
tomography) scans because of a partnership with the province 
and other health districts including Swift Current. 
 
I’m pleased that another technology partnership means renal 
dialysis services are now in place at the Swift Current Regional 
Hospital, and patients began using the service on April 17. 
 
Renal dialysis is an important service for kidney failures as it 
helps to delay or prevent the onset of kidney failure. 
 
These new services in Swift Current are provided by satellite. 
As we all know, staying near one’s family helps to alleviate 
stress during a time of illness. Satellites help to do that. They 
are a way of bringing services closer to home for some people, 
reducing travel time for patients. 
 
Currently eight patients who require treatments three times a 
week use the services of the Swift Current Regional Hospital. 
Since 1998, Mr. Speaker, the number of operational satellites 
has more than doubled. We now have satellite services in 
Lloydminster in the northwest, Prince Albert in the north 
central, Tisdale in the northeast, Yorkton in the southeast, and 
now Swift Current in the southwest. 
 
The development of this service has been a joint effort between 
the Swift Current Health District, the Regina Health District, 
and Dr. Cam Wilson, a renal specialist in Regina. And 
Saskatchewan Health contributed more than $700,000 in 
one-time operating funding to establish the service for the 
people in the southwest part of our province. 
 



1150 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2000 

I want to commend all of these participants for helping to 
improve the accessibility to health care in Swift Current and 
area and for allowing patients to remain close to their families, 
receiving support during their illness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Regina District Health Board 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, for the 
last two days we’ve been asking you questions about the Living 
Sky Health District after one of their board members expressed 
his concerns that health facilities in Lanigan, Wynyard, and 
Watrous were on your chopping block. 
 
And now we have another health board member, this time from 
the Regina Health District, expressing his deep concerns over 
the plans for his district. In fact he was so dismayed by the 
cutback proposals that he has resigned. 
 
Madam Minister, the health boards are supposed to represent 
the public in their district. But your top-down approach to 
dictating health care delivery is too much for them. 
 
Madam Minister, how do you explain the fact that health board 
members are saying they are being muzzled? How do you 
explain their public frustration with your process driving them 
to the point of resignation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker. What I can 
confirm is that Mr. Crosby, a health board member in the 
Regina Health District, resigned yesterday. I can confirm from 
the media reports — I have not spoken to him nor have I spoken 
to anyone in the district — that he resigned because he was 
concerned about the Regina Health District’s budget. 
 
But I can also say to the member that the board has not dealt 
with their health plan as of yet. My understanding is they are 
dealing with their health plan this evening and once the health 
plan is approved by the district board, they will forward it to the 
Department of Health by May 15. Once all of the plans are in, 
the province will either approve the plan, vary the plan, or 
disapprove of the plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the 
minister. Well, Madam Minister, I did speak to Mr. Crosby this 
morning. He resigned, he said, because he was not going to be a 
puppet for this government. He resigned because he felt that 
there was no choice. He resigned because he felt that the results 
of the discussion tonight were going to be a foregone 
conclusion and that his one dissenting voice was not going to be 
enough in order to make this changes more appreciable or 
acceptable to the people of Regina that he serves. 
 
Madam Minister, we’ve been, we’ve been told by these 
individuals from Living Sky and now from Regina that they 

either have to approve the direction that you’ve set or they are 
going to resign or be dismissed. 
 
Madam Minister, if they approve this budget tonight, will you 
make it public tomorrow morning? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite — and I have heard him say it on a number of 
occasions — that I am not going to dismiss any health member, 
health board member, in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one district that a public administrator was 
brought into, and that is the East Central Health District. And I 
have indicated the reasons for that, Mr. Speaker. But these 
members continue to indicate this to the public, and I want to 
assure the public that what they are saying is simply inaccurate, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what I will also say to that member, and there was a 
document that was sent to staff in the Regina Health District 
today and it says is . . . what all of this means is that anyone 
who claims to know what the approved plan is going to contain 
is just creating mischief. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
the only mischief that’s being created in health care in this 
province is from your department. 
 
Madam Minister, in his comments, Mr. Crosby said he was 
resigning because he didn’t want to be in a position of ruining 
people’s lives. That’s a pretty serious statement. 
 
And when I talked to him this morning, he said that the 
decisions that are going to have to be made that your 
department is imposing on the Regina Health District will rival 
the closure of the Plains hospital and its impact. 
 
Madam Minister, what does that mean? Does it mean the 
closure of facilities in Cupar and Imperial as was reported? 
Does it mean bed closures in Regina, staff layoffs? 
 
Madam Minister, there’s warning signals coming from all over 
the province. When this budget is tabled tonight will you table 
it the House tomorrow morning, Madam Minister, so the people 
of Regina know what’s in for them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to go on — and this is from Jim 
Saunders, the CEO (chief executive officer): 
 

What this all means is that anyone who claims to know 
what the approved plan is going to contain is just creating 
mischief. Since there is no approved plan, and since our 
Board has not even (decided) the final draft 
recommendations for such a plan (let alone decided to 
accept them), there is no-one who (could) claim to know 
that this or that initiative is going to be approved for 
implementation. 



May 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1151 

So those who are promoting the idea that there are going to be 
closures here or there, or that certain areas are at risk for layoffs 
simply don’t know what they’re talking about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question again for the 
minister. Madam Minister, you said earlier that the Regina 
Health District is going to formalize their plan this evening. My 
question is very clear to you then. Tomorrow morning when 
you receive that plan, will you table it in this House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the health districts are to 
have their health plans to the Department of Health by May 15. 
Once all of the plans have been received by the Department of 
Health, the Department of Health will review all of those . . . 
(inaudible) . . . in the context of a provincial, broad, conceptual 
basis. Once we have that work done, we will indicate to all 
districts whether we approve the plan, disapprove the plan, or 
will vary the plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Bone Density Examination 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, 
osteoporosis is a serious health issue for many women in 
Saskatchewan, and yet the waiting list for bone density scans, a 
critical diagnostic procedure, is more than a year in most cases. 
I say in most cases, Madam Minister, because sometimes the 
wait is much longer. 
 
Now we are being told things are going to get worse. The bone 
density testing facility in Saskatoon is being shut down for at 
least six weeks because of a lack of technical staff, yet the 
Saskatoon testing service is the only one in this province. 
 
Madam Minister, we should be extending the hours of testing 
per day to alleviate the waiting lists, not closing the only one we 
have in the province. 
 
Madam Minister, what alternatives will you provide for people 
who are facing a long and growing waiting list for bone density 
testing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, tests are 
priorized by specialists based on the needs of the patients. 
Specialists use a written requisition form to determine the 
priority of exams. I understand the initial requisition is sent to 
the district. 
 
In the case of Saskatoon, this is a temporary closure because of 
a lack of technical staff who are doing their exams. And 
medical imaging specialists in Saskatoon have determined that 
are not providing bone mineral density tests, but they will 
maintain the MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), the CT, and 
nuclear medicine. And that’s how they plan on managing this 
technical shortage for a six-week period while these folks are 
writing their exams, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, another question for the Minister 
of Health. Madam Minister, on April 26 I wrote to you about 
Dorothy Herauf whose family has a history of osteoporosis. 
 
In October of 1998 her family doctor recommended a bone 
density study and faxed the request to the University Hospital in 
Saskatoon. After waiting more than a year for an appointment, 
Dorothy’s doctor finally contacted the hospital. The hospital 
claimed the request was never received. Finally, last week 
Dorothy received confirmation of her appointment for a bone 
density test on August 22 of year 2000. 
 
Madam Minister, Dorothy has waited for almost two years. In 
Dorothy’s words, there is something dramatically wrong with 
the health care system in this province. 
 
Madam Minister, I ask you again: what alternative are you 
providing so that women requiring this test can receive it now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the 
member, there is a prioritization that can be given by 
specialists. As I’ve indicated, the bone density program in 
Saskatoon is not working at the moment because technicians are 
writing their exams. 
 
What I can also confirm, Mr. Speaker, is that on September 1 of 
2000 there will be a second bone density site here in Regina 
that is being funded by the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, another question for the Minister 
of Health. Madam Minister, Dorothy Herauf relied on the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) health care system and it let her down. 
And her experience is not unusual in Saskatchewan. Your 
mismanagement is forcing many people to seek private health 
care outside Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, Bernelle Lutz is a constituent of mine from 
Weyburn. She also suffers from osteoporosis. But when her 
doctor told her she would have to wait for more than a year for 
a bone density test, she called a hospital in North Dakota and 
was told that for $400 she could have the test done within days. 
 
Is that your advice, Madam Minister? If you don’t like the 
NDP’s growing waiting list, just pull out your cheque book and 
call North Dakota? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I have indicated to 
the member is that we will have a second bone density site in 
the city of Regina in September of 2000. 
 
What I also will say to the member . . . And I know why they 
raise the kinds of cases that they do. They are trying to create a 
climate — as they have in Alberta — where they are now going 
to allow privatized, private surgical clinics. 
 



1152 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2000 

In fact I see that that member in her election campaign thought 
that privatization of health services should be an option, and she 
says we need to look at privatization of health services. Well I 
can assure the member that we are not going to privatize health 
care as long as the NDP-Liberal coalition is the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, you and your 
government refuse to take responsibility. It’s not good enough 
any more to say just wait. While people are waiting, they are 
dealing with lives, and we’re dealing with people, and they are 
losing loved ones because of you and your government. 
 
Madam Minister, it is not just the Saskatchewan Party that says 
the NDP is implementing a two-tiered health care system in 
Saskatchewan. Bernelle Lutz from Weyburn, and I quote, says 
in our local newspaper: 
 

The fact is we have a two-tired health system right now. 
People are going and paying for what they cannot get done 
here. 

 
Madam Minister, after nine years of the NDP, Saskatchewan 
has the longest waiting lists in the country, and things are 
getting worse. Will you finally admit the NDP has created two 
health systems in Saskatchewan — one for the rich and one for 
everyone else? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, before the last election 
the Saskatchewan Party asked very few questions about health 
care in this Legislative Assembly. When they did ask questions 
it was about MS (multiple sclerosis) patients, the drug plan, and 
MRIs. 
 
What I can say is that we are now providing Aricept and 
Betaseron coverage for MS patients. What I can say is that we 
have triple the numbers of MRIs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. What I can say, Mr. Speaker, is that we are 
going to have . . . we are going to double our capacity in 
bone-density testing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, all of the time when in the last election their 
The Way Up was nothing other than the Provincial Auditor 
looking at the health system and a freeze on health spending, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Trade Union Legislation 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, this government continues to 
ignore the people who create the jobs in this province. The 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce is meeting in Prince 
Albert. Yesterday the chamber passed a resolution calling on 
the government to scrap its proposed forced unionization Bill. 
 
And what does the NDP do? Yesterday the NDP gave notice 
that they will be pushing ahead with this Bill. It doesn’t matter 
how much it hurts business, it doesn’t matter how much it hurts 

workers, the NDP has to pay off its union leader friends and 
that’s what they are going to do. 
 
To the Minister of Labour: Madam Minister, the Saskatchewan 
chamber is telling you to scrap the forced unionization Bill. 
Will you listen? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m always 
interested in what anybody has to offer on the matter of 
legislation. 
 
But I will reiterate, I think I mentioned this a few days ago, that 
these parties had over a hundred meetings two years ago. We 
asked them to resolve these issues, warned that we would have 
to make a decision if they failed to act. And the fact of the 
matter is, is that they were not interested enough in the common 
interest to get together and resolve this thing so we’ve made a 
decision. 
 
But I would give the member opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would give the member opposite the 
same advice that was given to the chamber of commerce by 
their speaker and that’s to accentuate the positive — 10,000 
new jobs, a credit rating upgrade, and 55,000 low-income 
people removed from the tax rolls. 
 
We have a lot of activity going on in this province and I think 
that members opposite should get with the program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — The Saskatchewan people will not be fooled by 
the minister’s response to that question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the chamber heard from Ron 
Woodward, President of Red Deer College. Mr. Woodward has 
spent much of his working life in Saskatchewan, and he talked 
about the differences between the two provinces. He said in 
Alberta, government is a facilitator and a supporter of the 
private sector. In Saskatchewan, the government is a partner 
and sometimes even a competitor. 
 
In other words, in Alberta, government works with business; in 
Saskatchewan, government works against business. And you 
don’t need to look any further than your forced unionization 
policy. 
 
Madam Minister, the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce is 
telling you to scrap this Bill. Why are you working against 
business by pushing ahead with forced unionization? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, in democratic economies 
all over the world, people consider the democratic right to 
unionize as a fundamental part of a modern economy. 
 
Now these people want to take the economy back to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 



May 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1153 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There is no place where a union would 
be formed without the appropriate process of the certification. 
And the only instance where an employer would be affected by 
this is where they have tried to avoid their legal collective 
bargaining obligations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I’d like to remind the minister that in a 
democracy people get to vote in a secret ballot. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan spoke against forced municipal 
amalgamation and the people of Saskatchewan are against 
forced unionization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan chamber doesn’t want forced 
unionization, the construction companies don’t want forced 
unionization, construction workers don’t want forced 
unionization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, nobody wants it. Nobody except 
the union leaders who write the big fat cheques to the NDP. 
That’s what this is really about, Mr. Speaker — the NDP paying 
off its union leader friends. 
 
Madam Minister, if the workers in these companies want the 
union, they have the right to unionize right now. The reason 
only 20 per cent of the industry is unionized is because the 
other 80 per cent doesn’t want to join a union. 
 
Madam Minister, why don’t you respect their wishes? Why are 
you bringing in a forced unionization policy that no one wants? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’m not 
sure why the member opposite wants us to be different than all 
the other provinces in Canada who have the very same rules. 
And I would ask the member opposite why he thinks 
Saskatchewan should be the first place in Canada to not have 
the same standards as other provinces have. This is a commonly 
accepted right of people in a modern economy. 
 
And if he wants to rediscuss what his motives are in supporting 
the de-unionization efforts of Conrad Black, we could discuss 
that, but I don’t think the member really wants to get into that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Amalgamation 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister said he is working with 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) on 
municipal amalgamation. Then in the next breath, he said he’s 
doing a cost analysis of amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ve spoken with people from municipalities — 

urban and rural, from all over the province — this is the first 
they’ve heard about a cost analysis. How can you possibly do a 
cost analysis without checking with these people? 
 
Is your department cooking up some sort of an analysis to try 
and justify forced amalgamation when municipalities know 
nothing about it? It’s no wonder they don’t trust you, Mr. 
Minister. Mr. Minister, how can you do a legitimate cost 
analysis in two weeks, and what are you basing this on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite . . . and I listened to some of his questions 
over the last couple of weeks of which he’s been up asking 
about municipal affairs. And I’ve read some of the articles of 
which he has responded to when he’s attended many of the 
meetings that Garcea was at, and spoke at all of them. And one 
of the most important things that comes from the member from 
Saltcoats on a regular basis is that there’s no credibility to 
Stabler or Garcea because there’s no cost-benefit analysis, 
which is what he said all along. 
 
And that’s what SARM said in their meetings that they went to. 
It’s what SUMA said in their meetings. And this is also what 
Mr. Mackness says, just a couple of days ago, that he says 
there’s no cost-benefit analysis. So we say, I guess what we’ll 
need to do is provide some information to the round table that 
provides some cost-benefit analysis on those models of which 
we’re going to be looking at and discussing over the next 
couple of weeks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, all through this process you’ve said there’s going to 
be a saving. Now after all the smoke is cleared you’re going to 
go back and do a cost analysis. Isn’t that a little bit like getting 
the cart before the horse? 
 
Mr. Minister, you had Stabler and Garcea out there for over a 
year. You cost the province probably in excess of a million 
dollars and their reports are now useless because they didn’t do 
a cost analysis. 
 
Mr. Minister, your department is now cooking up some kind of 
a cost analysis. It’s like putting the fox in charge of the chicken 
coop. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re going to check on yourself to see if there’s 
a cost saving to promote your NDP agenda to force 
amalgamation on municipalities. Mr. Minister, if you’re doing 
this then you might as well let Mr. Garcea go, put him away, we 
won’t have to pay any more money for this person . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, please. Order. The 
member’s been rather lengthy in his preamble. Go directly to 
your question please, hon. member. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
where was the public consultation on costing? Is it because 
you’re dictating and slanting the results to fit your NDP 
agenda? 



1154 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, it looks like the member 
from Saltcoats is back again. And over the last couple of weeks 
the member from Saltcoats has been out there saying that the 
government is going to be forcing amalgamation in this 
province. No where in our language have we talked about 
forced amalgamation, no where in our language. 
 
And what the member from Saltcoats should try to understand, 
Mr. Speaker, is that the report of Garcea and his committee in 
this province was commissioned by the government because 
SUMA and SARM requested that there be a review in this 
province. 
 
And the member from Saltcoats should know that there are a 
whole host of issues that need to be reviewed within the 
municipal structure — need to review legislation; need to 
review whether or not there are any services that can be 
enhanced or economic development that can be enhanced by the 
change in the municipal structures in this province, a question 
that municipalities want us to answer. Cost efficiency is a part 
of that. 
 
Those are all of the issues of which the round table will be 
talking about and discussing over the next little while, of which 
the member from Saltcoats should stop running around and 
fearmongering with Saskatchewan people and say that forced 
amalgamation is somebody’s agenda. It’s his agenda, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s his agenda. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, it’s no wonder people out there don’t trust you, 
because you flip-flop. From day to day you do double scrums. 
You say one thing on one hand. Your bureaucrats come out and 
say, Mr. Minister, to the media, we have to change that because 
that wasn’t exactly what the hack said that you should be 
saying. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday I asked you about a Bill Mackness 
study that was done on amalgamation and you said you hadn’t 
seen it. Well now you’ve seen it, Mr. Minister. 
 
He also slams forced amalgamation. He said that the study on 
both Mr. Garcea, Mr. Stabler were very narrow-minded. That 
they had their own agenda and weren’t really listening to the 
people. 
 
He said there was no advantage for rural municipal 
governments, town or RM (rural municipality). The benefit 
from that was nil, and he said there is no reason to be doing 
something like this forced. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you back off from any kind of forced 
amalgamation, bring in legislation that would actually remove 
impediments and stop . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, we finally find out which 
side of the page the member from Saltcoats and the 
Saskatchewan Party is on. And they’re attached to Mr. 
Mackness. 
 
Now I read from Mr. Mackness’s report, which I have now seen 
an opportunity . . . I’ve now had an opportunity to read. And he 
said, he said this: there are certainly a case for municipal 
renewal and there is rethinking of administrative structure. He 
says that. 
 
He also said there are indeed a large number of smaller 
municipality units in Saskatchewan and some amalgamation 
may be beneficial, is what he says. And then he goes on to say, 
there is a clear case for renewal and there should be no mistake 
about that, is what he says. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, for the last couple . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — For the last couple of weeks, Mr. Speaker, 
the member from Saltcoats, the Saskatchewan Party has been 
going around the province and saying that we have academics 
that are doing the reviews. 
 
We have Dr. Garcea who’s an academic. We have Dr. Stabler 
who is an academic. And then we have Val Kononoff from 
Saskatchewan, and then we have Mr. Westby from 
Saskatchewan. All Saskatchewan people that are involved in 
municipal reform in this province. 
 
And he attaches himself to somebody from Ontario who comes 
in here, is going to tell us that Ontario people know what rural 
municipalities need. Beats up on the municipalities and the 
leaders in Saskatchewan who know something about 
municipalities and attaches himself to an Ontario firm, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Medical Profession 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill No. 41, The Medical Profession Amendment 
Act, 2000 be introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker I move that Bill No. 42, The Cattle Marketing 
Deductions Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 



May 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1155 

Bill No. 43 — The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 43, 
The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2000 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Insurance Premiums Tax 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 44, The 
Insurance Premiums Tax Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Fuel Tax Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 45, The 
Fuel Tax Act, 2000 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 46, The 
Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Power Corporation Superannuation 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 47, The 
Power Corporation Superannuation Amendment Act, 2000 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, hon. members, 
yesterday the Opposition House Leader raised three points of 
order. The first point dealt with language used during oral 
question period and I will rule on that point today. The second 
two points arose in regards to the content of debate during 
Tuesday’s private members’ motions. I will return to the 
Assembly with the ruling on these points in due course. 
 
I have received the verbatim for Tuesday’s oral question period 
and I draw the members’ attention to page 1094, where the 
Minister of Health responded to a question with the following 
statement. And I quote: 

Mr. Speaker, everyday in this legislature these people get 
up and make false statements about everything. They are 
simply misleading the public. 
 

Hon. members, it has been a long-standing practice in this 
Assembly that members are not permitted to insinuate that a 
colleague is not being truthful. In this regard, members are 
guided by paragraph 494 of Beauchesne’s Rules and Forms, 6th 
edition, which states that, and I quote — Order, please. 
 

It is not unparliamentary temperately to criticize statements 
made by Members as being contrary to the facts; but no 
imputation of intentional falsehood is permissible. 
 

The statement made by the hon. minister is clearly out of order, 
and I would invite the minister to withdraw those remarks and 
apologize to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I do now apologize. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I request that question 136 be 
converted to motions for returns (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has asked leave to 
convert the question. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — The question to be converted. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — The question to be converted as well. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 4 — The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a couple of 
comments, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to make regarding The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. When I looked at the 
amendment as proposed, there was some, I felt, really positive 
things that we want to make sure is continued. But I wanted to 
highlight one or two things that I feel is important as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is one of the areas that is very important, particularly in the 
rural areas, Mr. Speaker, and it’s very important in the areas of 



1156 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2000 

the cities that we find the lower income groups. Because this is 
one of the pension plans that Saskatchewan residents . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask hon. members to please 
not debate across the floor while there is a member on his feet 
speaking, please. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The importance of 
the pension plan, the Saskatchewan Pension Plan is, I feel, 
really critical. And again, I would like to reinforce the fact that 
it’s very critical in the rural areas particularly where one of the 
participants in farms is unable to participate in other forms of 
pensions, particularly the RSP (registered savings plan). And 
that I think is one of the most important aspects of this 
particular Bill, that we continue to give that option of pension 
for the participants in the province. 
 
I guess one of the disappointing parts of this that I’m finding is 
that there is an administrative fee that will be charged, 
according to these amendments of the Act. Now an 
administrative fee attached to that kind of a service certainly 
raises questions in my mind — questions about why the fee is 
necessary. 
 
And if we’re trying to put a pension plan in place that people 
can access freely and they have no other option but an . . . other 
than the RSP, then we should not try and criticize them or put 
impediments in their place, in their way, in order for them to 
achieve gaining access to this pension plan. And I believe a fee 
in place, an administrative fee, is a negative aspect to this 
particular Bill. 
 
The right to charge this fee gives me another concern as well. 
Because once it’s a fee, then the government has the authority 
to increase the fee at their will. 
 
And of course we learned earlier that fees can be changed 
without a great deal of fanfare or a great deal of notice to the 
public in general. And I’m afraid that the same thing might 
happen in this particular case — the fees charged will be hidden 
and all of a sudden it will be increased without the knowledge 
of those being part of it. 
 
Also because people want to get involved in these kinds of 
pensions, I don’t think that the fee will . . . I don’t want the fee 
to be a deterrent for them. Because in fact being part of this 
pension should give these participants a tax advantage, and by 
charging a fee you just turn around and add a fee in lieu of a 
tax. And I think that that is not exactly the right thing to do. 
 
Another item that makes me a bit nervous when I read through 
these, Mr. Speaker, is that the investments of these funds are 
put into place and we want to make sure that the safeguards are 
in place; there’s a proper check and balance for these funds. 
 
Now I see that the funds have been handled really quite well 
over the years, and I think that that is also a very admirable 
thing. 
 
So these fees and funds that I’m looking at, particularly the 
funds, should continue to have a very close monitoring so that 
the investments of these taxpayers are safe for their future usage 
and for their returns. 

Again there isn’t a great deal of information about the rates of 
return on these funds, how they can compare to other plans. All 
of these things I think we’ll have to explore in the future. 
 
Those are the comments that I have, Mr. Speaker, and I at this 
time would just thank you for the opportunity of making these 
comments. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 18 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 18 — The Public 
Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2000 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Regarding the 
pension for Saskatchewan government employees’ pension, 
there is one or two items that I would like to bring to the 
attention of this legislature in terms of my concerns with this 
pension, government employees’ pension. 
 
I think in general terms, Mr. Speaker, the pension has been 
performing very well. It has been doing what it was intended to 
do. And I notice that there is an increasing dependence on this 
particular pension fund. 
 
I guess the concern I have, Mr. Speaker, focuses around the 
term, unfunded pension liability. I noticed that there are other 
pensions that the government has been involved with that has in 
fact not a particular fund in place but becomes a liability of the 
government. 
 
That has been an ongoing concern of the auditor, Provincial 
Auditor, and he’s commented on this many, many times. And 
yet I’m afraid that this might begin to fall into that same kind of 
a category, unfunded pensions. I haven’t been given any 
assurance that it will not. 
 
For instance, when you put the unfunded pension amounts into 
the overall financial position of the government, it’s easy to 
determine that the overall liability of this government is in fact 
increasing. The amount of unfunded pension itself has been 
increasing. 
 
And when you do a comparison, the amount of the liability of 
this particular government from 1991 to 1999 has actually 
increased as opposed to what is normally recognized as a 
decrease in the public debt of this particular province. So that’s 
a concern of mine, Mr. Speaker, that this particular pension 
fund also become part of that unfunded pension plan. 
 
One of the things I noticed when I was reading through these 
amendments is the fact that the minimum age for retirement has 
been . . . is proposed to be amended from 55 down to 50. It 
would seem to me that that’s going to add an increasing draw 
on this particular pension and in fact become an even greater 
. . . a greater problem or greater liability for this particular 
pension plan. 
 
I guess another concern is that when a person reaches 50, Mr. 



May 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1157 

Speaker, there is ample opportunity for continued employment, 
for moving to a different work environment. And I guess the 
concern I have is that when a person decides to change into 
another occupation from being employed with the government, 
there is certainly a strong temptation to follow the trend that we 
have seen oh so clear, lately. And that trend of course is to 
move away from your field of employment and go to where 
other opportunities are. And we are seeing . . . the statistics 
show quite clearly that some of that opportunity is outside of 
the province. 
 
I would very much hate to see a person be able to take some of 
the voluntary contributions that he has paid over the years into 
this plan, withdraw those voluntary contributions, and then 
move out of the province and invest those provinces somewhere 
else . . . those funds somewhere else into another jurisdiction. 
 
Generally speaking again, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
amendments, we can support generally, except for the concerns 
that I have outlined. Those are the comments that I have, Mr. 
Speaker, on this particular item. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing 

Vote 24 
 
The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote, I invite the Hon. 
Minister of Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. This 
afternoon I have with me, seated to my immediate right is Mr. 
Ken Pontikes who is the deputy minister of the department. To 
my immediate left is Mr. Brij Mathur who is the associate 
deputy minister of municipal and community services. To my 
far right is Lana Grosse who is the executive director of 
protection emergency services. And directly behind me is Larry 
Chaykowski who is the executive director of finance, 
administration, and facilities. And just to my left here is Peter 
Hoffman who is the assistant deputy minister of housing. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Subvote (MG01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to start today, 
Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, by welcoming your officials here 
today. And I think there’s a number . . . in fact there’ll be a 
number of times we would like to get together because we have 
many, many questions, Mr. Minister. 
 
But I think the hot topic as you know is amalgamation. And we 
would certainly like to go into that a little bit because it does 
affect every facet really, of municipal government. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t know if you’ve realized by now, but I 
would think you have, just how serious this is to people in rural 
Saskatchewan especially, but it affects the cities, the towns, 

RMs, everything, but to I think a different degree. 
 
I think you will even admit, Mr. Minister, that to the cities, 
probably the idea of forced amalgamation, or the changing, as 
Mr. Garcea would suggest, 17 areas or even going as drastically 
as Mr. Stabler is suggesting to 11 areas, for all intents and 
purposes would probably cater to the cities in this province. 
And I can understand why they probably don’t have a problem 
with this. In fact it would probably be not to their advantage to 
get up and holler against this. 
 
And I realize within SUMA themselves they probably have a 
bit of a problem, because SUMA represents not only, as you 
know, the cities, but the same towns out there that you in your 
wisdom are trying to do with away with — their local 
autonomy, local councils, any say in what happens in their lives 
at all. 
 
Now you can say this isn’t going to happen, but you know, Mr. 
Minister, as well as I do what has happened in health care with 
health reform. We’ve saw with our health boards out there 
where we have volunteers now that were serious about what 
they were doing before, have pulled back and said, this is a 
sham; we want nothing to do with it. 
 
I think the first question I have today, Mr. Minister, and I 
believe that this was a fight, I have no idea why you got into; I 
don’t think it had to be fought. I don’t think there’s a benefit 
that I can see unless it’s hidden, and hopefully we can get to 
that today. 
 
Why on earth are you pushing amalgamation so hard? Will you 
explain to me, to councillors, to alderman, to mayors, to reeves, 
what is the advantage of amalgamation, and why in your mind 
do you think they should be accepting this, while at the same 
time you know they’re just furious about it, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I welcome very much my 
colleague’s from Saltcoats’ question because he asks the very 
important question of which Saskatchewan people I think have 
engaged themselves in having a discussion around. 
 
And when I talk about . . . get up and talk about municipal 
reform in this province, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker 
. . . or Chair, I talk about renewal. Because when you look at 
what’s happened in Saskatchewan over the last we could say 50 
or 60 years, there has been a significant change in the 
environment and the climate of the Saskatchewan community. 
 
Where we used to 50 years ago . . . as the member is also a rural 
individual and farmer and a past municipal reeve, understands 
what’s happened in rural Saskatchewan in particular. And I 
share the same kind of view that you do because I too am a 
farmer today and have a small farming operation, do all of our 
business and work in a small community of about 450 people 
today of where I went to school, did all of . . . got all my 
elementary and high school years, watched a community wither 
away over the last 30 years of which I’ve been a party to. And 
not any different than I think what you’ve experienced in your 
own life. 
 
So over the past 50 or 60 years what we’ve seen in 
Saskatchewan is that we’ve seen a tremendous change where 



1158 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2000 

we’ve seen the population of rural Saskatchewan, where 70 per 
cent of our Saskatchewan community used to be agriculturally 
based and 30 per cent used to be in the urban areas, over a 
period of 70 years we’ve seen that reverse itself completely. 
 
And so what’s happened over the past many years is that we’ve 
had, not just this administration, but we’ve had all 
administrations across governments over the past 40 or 50 years 
address this issue about what we should try and do in terms of 
renewing the municipal structure in Saskatchewan, not unlike 
what’s happened in other parts of Canada. Our neighbours to 
the east and west of us had municipal reform and renewal in the 
’40s and ’50s. Saskatchewan hasn’t done municipal reform over 
that period of time of which municipalities were created, both 
urban and rural. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite that since we came to 
government in 1991 there have been a series of events that have 
looked at addressing how in fact we might look at renewing the 
municipal structure system in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I just take you back to the last couple of events that we 
had. In 1997 we had in this province the district services Act, of 
which the district services Act was intended to provide a 
voluntary consolidation of municipalities, or redesign of 
municipalities in this province with incentives that would be 
provided for the urbans and rurals of which they agreed they 
wanted to have. And so we brought to this House in 1997 a 
piece of legislation that was going to assist municipalities to do 
that. 
 
And at the end of the day it fell off the order table because 
SARM, at that particular point in time, saw that as being the 
first phase of some sort of amalgamation, a major consolidation 
of municipalities, and so it fell off the Table with incentives 
being there and it being voluntary. 
 
Following that came the MOU (memorandum of 
understanding), as you’re aware of; so a MOU was signed 
between SUMA and SARM and the government. And over a 
period of a year and a half we tried to resolve some of the issues 
about how do we change the structure of Saskatchewan, the 
face of municipalities, the municipal structure in the province. 
 
And one of the barriers that they ran into right away was that of 
the legislation. They said that there are legislative impairments 
today that exist within the environment, within The Rural 
Municipality Act and the urbans Act. 
 
So what we should do was a discussion at the round table; was 
that we should engage a discussion around the province and we 
should put together a task force, a team of men and women who 
would travel the province and look at how they could undo the 
legislative structure today so that in fact you might have 
municipal redesign, or provide for easier opportunity for 
municipal redesign in the province. 
 
And so came about the Garcea committee. And so the Garcea 
committee was struck on the blessings and goodwill of all of the 
partners at the round table, which was SUMA and SARM and 
the provincial government. And they selected the individuals 
who would sit on that committee and charged them with the 
responsibility to go out and do their work. 

They said that within two years, began their work in 1998, said 
that in two years you’ll come back and you’ll tell us what the 
legislative reform or changes should look like. But before you 
come back in August to provide us with that — in the spring of 
the year of 2000 — you will provide us with an interim report. 
So that interim report could signal then to the round table what 
kinds of legislative renewal was required. 
 
And so the intent was always in 1998 for that committee to go 
about the province and talk about municipal legislative changes, 
which could do a whole host of things. The legislative reform 
was to provide opportunities for greater recognition of an order 
of new government because municipalities said we want to be a 
recognized order of government, and you should make us that. 
And you should change your Act to allow for that to happen. 
You should give municipalities more responsibilities. You 
should give municipalities more access to the revenue base, the 
provincial revenue base. And you should provide municipalities 
with an opportunity that they might assume some of the 
provincial services in the future. 
 
Then they go on to say we should also at that same time 
examine whether or not there are any efficiencies in this 
process. And they were going to look at that. 
 
So when the committee began its work in 1998, they had a very 
specific agenda. And that was to craft new legislation that 
would permit for municipalities to become new orders of 
government, to have greater access to revenue bases, to be able 
to provide a broader range of services and economic 
development. This was the idea when they began their work. 
 
And so they did. And when they got to the process in about 
December of the year 2000, they discovered that there was a 
fundamental problem with structure. And so Mr. Garcea and his 
committee then came back and said in order for us to provide a 
change to the legislative structures of the Acts, urban and rural, 
what we need to do of course is we need to look at addressing 
what the structure in this province should look like. 
 
And that’s where Mr. Garcea and his committee then made the 
statement that there should be fewer municipalities. Not 
suggesting . . . He didn’t draw a map, didn’t outline what in fact 
that should look like, didn’t talk about . . . did make some signal 
about how that might happen. And then proceeded to say you 
tell us — round table, urban and rural municipal leaders — how 
you’re going to achieve that and tell us what kind of legislation 
you need. 
 
And that’s the stage that we’re at today — at the round table. 
Now we’re going to be talking about what kind of reform, if 
any, do we want in the province. And at the end of the day, 
what kind of legislative changes do you require. 
 
And that’s just a short history of what’s happened in this 
province around the thinking of municipal renewal in 
Saskatchewan which I happen to think is a pretty important 
exercise. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, but . . . and 
seeing that we’re getting on to the Garcea report already, I’ll 
turn to there. 
 



May 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1159 

At meetings we’ve had with Mr. Garcea, we ask a couple of 
basic questions that we felt would be very important to what 
was going on, Mr. Minister. 
 
Number one, what would be the cost savings if we went 
through and forced amalgamation? I think in Mr. Garcea’s 
words it was a directive approach which, let’s face it, was 
nothing more than a nice way of saying forced amalgamation. 
 
Number two, we asked him, what did you find when you looked 
into the efficiencies of local government? 
 
You know what the response was? Number one, he never 
looked at the costing effect, as you know. And number two, he 
never looked at the efficiency of local government. 
 
Well if neither one of those things have anything or any 
advantage to what he had done in his report. Where on earth 
does this agenda come from? And I think that’s the most 
bewildering question on this side of the House. 
 
You know, I’m really wondering who’s driving this, Mr. 
Minister. Is it your department that’s pushing this? Is it your 
own bureaucratic hacks in your own office? Who is pushing 
this agenda? Or is it the NDP government themselves to remove 
any local voice out in rural Saskatchewan because on 
September 16 they didn’t vote for your government? 
 
Mr. Minister, is this a punishment for those people because they 
jumped off the bandwagon for your NDP government and said, 
we’re fed up with what’s going on in this province whether it’s 
health care, education, highways, roads, whatever it is, Mr. 
Minister . . . agriculture, agriculture especially, Mr. Minister, in 
which you say you are a so-called farmer out there. You should 
know better. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you go back . . . And you talked about the 
service district Act. There was the one, the former minister, Ms. 
Teichrob, tried to ram down the throats of people involved with 
municipal government, and what happened? She was forced to 
withdraw that because of the backlash from things like SARM, 
the official opposition. All those people at that time made you 
withdraw that. And, Mr. Minister, you didn’t seem to listen at 
that time. 
 
You carried on. In fact you’ve even gone farther because now 
you say it’s not forced amalgamation. SARM says it’s forced 
amalgamation, towns say it’s forced amalgamation, we say it’s 
forced amalgamation, Mr. Minister. 
 
Let’s face it — call a spade a spade: it’s forced amalgamation 
because that’s the NDP agenda. We know it and you know it, 
and you’re not scamming anybody when you say that’s not 
there. 
 
Another thing, Mr. Minister. You say with your round table 
talks now that forced amalgamation’s off the table. Well forgive 
us, Mr. Minister, because number one, I don’t trust you. And 
any municipality, whether urban or rural, out there I’ve talked 
to also don’t trust you; that before the end of this present 
session you may bring that legislation onto the table, which I 
believe you’ve already got drafted but haven’t at this point got 
the nerve or the intestinal fortitude to put it on the table because 

of the backlash you heard from the public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, stand up today and tell me as 
a rural taxpayer, as a farmer, as a past reeve, of a person that 
lives every day with rural people, what advantage to those 
people there’s going to be by your forced amalgamation? 
 
Or don’t call it that — just say amalgamation. These 11 
districts, 17 districts — I don’t care where you’re talking from 
— what advantage to their lives out there today are you going 
to have for them when the smoke clears and they’ve lost their 
local councils? 
 
Explain to me how it’s better for those people than they were 
yesterday, than they will be tomorrow after you ram your NDP 
agenda down their throat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m very interested in 
the approach that the member from Saltcoats takes about the 
discussion around the estimates of Municipal Affairs, and I 
would be happy to entertain a discussion of anything in our 
document as it relates to the finances. 
 
But to have a debate today, Mr. Chair, to have a debate today 
about whether or not there’s going to be forced amalgamation 
in this province, I want to say to the member opposite and to 
this Assembly and anybody who’s watching, Mr. Chair, that on 
this side of the House, this member and this government has 
never talked about forced amalgamation. It’s never been our 
agenda. 
 
And so I want to say to the member opposite that the only 
language about forced amalgamation has come from over there. 
And I want to say to the member opposite, just recently on 
April 19, on April 19th, SUMA and SARM and our Premier 
were in the same room, had a discussion about a process, and 
said that there will not be any kind of legislation this spring in 
this agenda from this ministry or from this government. 
 
And so you need to rest peacefully and Saskatchewan people 
need to rest peacefully that there isn’t any legislative agenda 
that we’re on, and there isn’t any legislation that’s coming to 
this House. 
 
And I’ve said that to you on a number of occasions; the Premier 
said it to the people of Saskatchewan; the two municipal leaders 
have said it to the people of Saskatchewan. And you continue to 
get up in this House, again today, and say that somebody has an 
agenda about forced amalgamation. This is only your own 
verbiage. This verbiage doesn’t exist within this ministry, or 
this department, or those people who are working together at 
the round table. 
 
(1500) 
 
What we’re going to do at the round table, Mr. Chair, is that 
we’re going to look at all of the work that’s been done in this 
province over the past 10 years and all of the commitments that 
have been made by municipal leaders and this government to 



1160 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2000 

look at renewing the climate in Saskatchewan. Because on 
many occasions I hear you stand up in the House and other 
members from your side of the House stand up here and say 
that this is about the consolidation of this province into two 
communities. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Member, because I very much care about 
what happens in rural Saskatchewan, that you people who sit on 
that side of the House are not the champions for rural 
Saskatchewan alone. There are many of us who sit in our chairs 
on this side of the House who know what rural Saskatchewan is 
about. Who live it every day — who live it every day. 
 
And so I say to you, Mr. Member, that I’m concerned about the 
consolidation of services from rural Saskatchewan only to two 
major communities in this province. I’m concerned about that. 
 
And so I want to be sure that when I have some responsibility to 
provide some leadership in this province, around systems and 
structures, that collectively, with my partners in SUMA and 
SARM, we set up the best municipal structures in 
Saskatchewan that can do the kinds of things that they want to 
do. Because municipalities are asking for things to do in this 
province that they don’t have the ability to do. They say things 
like we need to have changes and reform to the Acts so the Acts 
can provide us with greater opportunity, and greater opportunity 
to do things like enhance our service delivery systems in rural 
Saskatchewan We want greater access to the financial resources 
of this province’s municipalities. 
 
And you know what? They should have some of that. They 
should have it. Because municipalities are the most integral part 
of the service delivery systems in our province. They’re closest 
to the people. 
 
So there’s not an attack on this side of the House on 
municipalities. None at all. This is about enriching the abilities 
that municipalities will have in the future to do the kinds of 
work that they can do to sustain those rural communities that 
you and I are concerned about. That’s what we want to do here. 
 
Now how do we do that? We’re going to try to do that in a 
process of conciliation and voluntary agreement. That’s how 
we’re going to do it. That’s how we’re going to do it. 
 
Now what doesn’t help this debate for sure is to say to people in 
rural Saskatchewan today, in particular in rural Saskatchewan 
today, that on this side of the House there’s some kind of 
agenda where we’re going to consolidate everybody and at the 
end of the day there isn’t going to be existing municipalities. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Chair, and to the member opposite, there’s no 
agenda of that nature. There’s no agenda of that nature at all. 
This is a discussion about how you can strengthen the quality of 
life for municipalities and improve services, economic 
opportunities for people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And we’ll do it at the pace and the rate and in the manner in 
which municipalities will want to do that. That’s what we’re 
going to use. And that’s how we’re going to do it. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, but I find 
some of your comments very interesting. You say that 

municipalities are the backbone — and if I understood you right 
and I think you meant that — are the backbone out there of 
rural Saskatchewan. And I agree with that point. 
 
But then why on earth at the same time are you trying to 
eliminate them, do away with them, and create these monster 
boards? And there’s no other word for it, Mr. Minister, because 
Mr. Stabler himself said — and I would like to be able to quote 
exactly when we met with him what his comments were — but 
he said our problems in rural Saskatchewan are minuscule and 
they’re mainly only in our minds, and that him and others like 
him know better what’s better for us out there than we do 
ourselves. 
 
I found, coming from a university professor, that was a very 
amazing, amazing statement, Mr. Minister. It was hard to even 
think that someone with that attitude should come out and be 
having any part in rearranging our lives in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I thought at the SARM convention this last spring 
there was a very interesting comment that a lady made to Mr. 
Garcea, and you may have heard it. She said, Mr. Minister, 
there wasn’t a problem out here until you people invented it. 
 
And I believe that, Mr. Minister. I’m not saying amalgamation 
can’t happen; I’m not saying it won’t happen. In fact in a 
number of cases, I think we’re going to see it happen at a 
greater rate than it has ever happened before. Because as you 
mentioned, Mr. Minister, our population is dropping. But the 
problem being out there, Mr. Minister, is that the same number 
of roads are out there, the same need for municipal governments 
are out there — local — because they’re in touch with what 
happens every day out there. 
 
And I’m afraid, Mr. Minister, if we create these . . . Say we go 
to 17 — give you the benefit of the doubt here. We don’t go to 
Stabler. We go to Garcea’s report and what he is suggesting. 
Let’s go to 17. What does that say out there? How many RMs 
would have to be lumped in with how many towns with no 
voice out there? 
 
Well you said . . . as you said, you could have a volunteer from 
Saltcoats, a volunteer from Eston, a volunteer from Kelvington. 
That’s a joke, Mr. Minister, and you know as well as I do it is. 
Because they would have no voice in anything. You know 
who’d have the voice? Probably your appointed boards that 
would match our health boards, and we saw how successful 
they were. 
 
In fact, Mr. Minister, in your own area, what happened to your 
health board? You disbanded it because it wasn’t actually doing 
exactly what you wanted it to do. And for you to stand up and 
tell me that these boards would be different and they wouldn’t 
be listening to you, they would be representing the people, is a 
myth. We know who they would be listening to. 
 
And I think that’s the whole agenda here, Mr. Minister. That 
voice out in rural Saskatchewan would be gone. 
 
You talked before that you are the champion and we weren’t for 
rural Saskatchewan. I find that an amazing statement 
considering last September 16 that on this side we elected pretty 
near every rural seat in this province went to the Saskatchewan 



May 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1161 

Party and your people got booted out of office. That’s who’s 
championing the cause for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Farmers out there, when the agriculture problem, Mr. Minister, 
was forefront, I didn’t see people from that side jumping up and 
down to run out and help farmers. I did see people on this side 
voicing the concerns of farmers, standing up for farmers, 
standing up for people in rural Saskatchewan. And we’re 
getting renowned for that and we’re becoming respected for 
that, Mr. Minister, and that’s why we elected so many seats in 
rural Saskatchewan last time around. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And I might go farther, Mr. Minister, that if 
you persist with things like forced amalgamation, there’s a 
number of city people that are starting to see what’s really 
happening in this province — a touch of a dictatorship, I might 
say. And even they are starting to really realize what your 
government’s about. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday I asked you if you’d seen the Bill 
Mackness report and you said you hadn’t had time. And I guess 
I would ask you, number one, have you had time to look at this 
report? Because it’s quite a scathing report of Mr. Stabler and 
Mr. Garcea’s study. And I know what you may say, Mr. 
Minister — well this is just a gentleman off the other side, paid 
for and bought. 
 
Well let’s go through his credentials to start with. Mr. 
Mackness is a former dean of business of the University of 
Manitoba. I think he’s got pretty good credentials there. He is 
also a former VP (Vice-president) and economist with one of 
Canada’s largest banks. So I think this gentleman’s been around 
the block. 
 
And I’d like to just read you a few things where he starts out 
here and there’s a number of things in here that are quite 
scathing to both Stabler and Garcea reports. But he says: 
 

These reports (and he’s talking about Garcea and Stabler) 
are not helpful to the cause of municipal government 
renewal. In fact, they are deficient to the extent that they 
threaten to materially impede rather than advance or assist 
the cause of renewal. 
 

That’s quite a statement. 
 

The first arresting weakness of the studies is that they 
advocate reliance on force (forced amalgamation) and 
compulsion as the first option for implementation of the 
sweeping, radical reforms. 
 

And it just goes on and on, Mr. Minister. And if you’ve read 
this . . . I’m sure you’ve had a chance to see it. And I guess I 
would ask you to comment on the report to start with, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’d be happy to make a 
couple of comments about the report and as I alluded earlier this 
afternoon, to the report. And you’re right, the kinds of language 
that Mr. Mackness uses are, I would suggest, fairly 
inflammatory and not supportive of the work of either Stabler 

or Garcea. I agree with that. He says that. He says that 
repeatedly on many pages of his report. 
 
But he also makes some other comments that I think are 
important to note and I’ve made a couple of notes of them. On 
page 10 of his report he talks about “there certainly is a case for 
municipal renewal as there is for rethinking other administrative 
systems from time to time.” So he says there’s a need to do 
some of that. 
 
He goes on. On page 14 he says, “there are indeed a large 
number of smaller municipal units in Saskatchewan. Some 
amalgamation may be beneficial.” He says that on page 14. 
 
And then on page 20 he makes a fairly profound statement 
where he says, “there is a clear case for renewal, and there 
should be no mistake about this.” 
 
And so in his report . . . Then he goes on and I think he finishes 
his comments by talking about how in fact the round table is the 
appropriate place in this province to deal with the issues, of 
which you won’t get any disagreement from me. And he says 
that in his dissertation. 
 
I say to the member opposite though that it strikes me as a little 
bit unusual, a little bit unusual because . . . And I’m a little 
surprised by the fact that my good friends at SARM have 
attached themselves with some of the work here. And I say this 
to you respectfully. Because what I’ve heard for the last six 
weeks or eight weeks in this province or ten weeks, coming 
from you and members of your side of the House and 
particularly from SARM, is that the academics of the research 
that’s been done in this province in the two reports of Garcea 
and Stabler . . . They talk about these guys as being some sort of 
university misfits in Saskatchewan — Stabler and Garcea, who, 
by the way, have been in Saskatchewan for the past 20 and 30 
years doing work on municipal reform, studying the 
demographics of Saskatchewan. These two people have been 
doing that. 
 
Mr. Stabler provides reports for all sorts of Saskatchewan 
communities today including the business community when 
they go to do their demographic work. He does that kind of 
work for them. He does it for the business community. He does 
it for the industrial community. He’s done it for tourism 
authorities. He’s done it for REDAs (regional economic 
development authority) all across the province for 30 years. 
And if you take a look at his history on Saskatchewan, you can 
see what he’s done. 
 
Mr. Garcea educates our young people in universities today and 
teaches about municipal reform in this province. Attached to his 
committee are people like Mr. Westby who’s a long-time 
municipal leader in this province, who you know well and your 
colleague from Indian Head knows well. Clearly, Mr. 
Kononoff, who was the past-president of SARM, he sits on this 
particular committee with Garcea. 
 
Here you have a collection of Saskatchewan men and women 
who have travelled this province to speak about municipal 
renewal in spades. And we attack them, we attack the work that 
they do. 
 



1162 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2000 

Now are their models right? I don’t know if their models are 
right — what they’re saying in Saskatchewan, what they say 
needs to happen in Saskatchewan. Some people say that, yes, 
we need to have renewal including SUMA and SARM. 
 
But for you, sir, and members of my round table who support 
what Mr. Mackness says — an Ontario academic, an academic 
of who you in fact have been yourself questioning over the last 
several months, saying that what place do academics have in 
this province. What place do they have in telling rural 
Saskatchewan what they need? And here you are today in 
estimates telling me that you have an academic who you 
support not even from Saskatchewan — somebody from 
Ontario who has arrived in our province and is going to tell you 
and I and Saskatchewan people what’s good for us. 
 
I find that extremely, extremely disconcerting, I have to tell 
you, sir. Because I don’t know which side of the page you sit 
on. Because you attack our Saskatchewan academia and people 
who work in the municipal system in spades for weeks, and 
then you line yourself up and attach yourself to some guy who 
comes here from Ontario and writes a report who you say is 
your vision and your wisdom to guide you in what should 
happen with municipal reform in this province. 
 
I find that really, really disconcerting, I have to tell you — I 
have to tell you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I definitely 
believe you do find that disconcerting because your government 
has never done one thing like that where you didn’t have 
somebody that already had a bias before you hired them or you 
wouldn’t have hired them to do the study. 
 
Mr. Minister, where did Mr. Garcea, when he went out . . . did 
Mr. Garcea have any instructions from you? When you hired 
him to do the study, did he have any instructions from you what 
you wanted him to come back with? What really did you tell 
him? 
 
Because I was at a number of the meetings, Mr. Speaker, or at 
least a number of members on this side attended his first round 
of meetings. And we find it somewhat mystifying how he came 
back with what he said that we should have, whether it was 17 
districts, and this radical change that he’s suggesting we have, 
when I never once, and I don’t think any other member on this 
side or anybody from SARM that we’ve talked to or 
municipalities, heard these ideas coming from the meetings. 
Where did this come from? 
 
Has Mr. Garcea got his own agenda? Or like really what did 
you instruct him when he went out to get his . . . come back 
with what you wanted to see him come back with. Where did he 
get all this stuff from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, I just want to say to the 
member opposite, and I know he knows the difference of the 
two reports, I just want to be clear that he and I both are 
speaking from the same page. 
 
Mr. Garcea in his report, talked about — his interim report — 
talked about the consolidation of communities, urban and rural. 
And when you read his report, it looks . . . he discusses the 

disappearance of rural municipalities by and large, is what Mr. 
Garcea and his committee talk about. There are the 
incorporation of municipalities, whether they’re urban or rural, 
they come together as one unit. 
 
(1515) 
 
Stabler has a different approach in his model. Stabler’s model 
talks about 17 regions in the province, or 11 regions in the 
province is what he puts out as possible scenarios, of which he 
says any community, any community over 1,800 would remain 
whole or remain with their own councils, would still remain 
with their own authorities. Everything else would get folded in 
into the larger piece, is what he talks about. 
 
And those are the fundamental differences between those two 
reports, is what I wanted to highlight first. 
 
But I want to say to your most important question about what 
was said to Garcea. And as you can appreciate, when I assumed 
the responsibility of this file in September of this year, one of 
the first things I did is I invited the members of the committee 
to meet with me because they, as you can appreciate, had 
already started their work. They began their work in 1998. 
 
And if you have a moment or you wish in the future to ask any 
one of the committee members — this is the very first question 
I asked them — when you began this work in 1998, Mr. Garcea, 
and members of your committee of which they were all present, 
did anybody give you any direction about what we anticipated 
to see at the end of the day? Did anybody say anything to you? 
Did our government give you any direction? And on an 
individual basis, barring none, they said there was no direction 
given to them. Their job was instructions of the round table to 
provide a report on legislative renewal in this province. That 
was their task. 
 
And so I said to them — and you can check this with them if 
you choose — I said to them, we are not intending to get 
involved in changing that approach with you at all. And I want 
to say to you today, Mr. Member, in this House and to anyone 
who is watching this, that we have not. We have not been 
involved in getting in the way of the work of this committee or 
the work that it’s reported in any way, shape, or form. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. Then I can 
only conclude from that, that when Mr. Garcea went out he 
already had his mind made up what he wanted to come back 
with because I’m very sure he heard next to nothing of 
recommendations from the public, especially rural 
Saskatchewan, that they wanted these kind of changes that he’s 
suggesting. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve talked a lot and that maybe we may be 
exaggerating and I think you could set the record straight right 
now, is how many dollars has Mr. Garcea cost us to this point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the amount that this work 
would cost us from the committee to the end of August would 
be $750,000. If your question is more specific than that, what 
we’ve spent to date, I don’t have that particular statement, that 
particular amount now, but I know that to the end of August 
that work will be $750,000. 



May 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1163 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would you be 
able to give us a figure then on what Mr. Stabler has cost for his 
study to this point? No, I should clarify that, Mr. Minister. I 
accept your answer. That’s actually what I wanted to know, 
what Mr. Garcea’s total cost will be to August. 
 
What about Mr. Stabler, and I’m not sure if he’s finished or not, 
but what will be the total cost of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — To the member, Mr. Stabler has completed 
his work and the cost of his work was $99,000. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess I 
haven’t been exaggerating other than maybe a thousand dollars 
to this point. I’ve been spreading the word that he’s cost us 
$l00,000, so I apologize for that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to talk to you . . . and Mr. Garcea — I 
know a number of times, and I know he’s sincere about this — 
but he said one of the handicaps we have with so many local 
municipal governments is economic development in this 
province. Now this may be the difference from that side of the 
House to this side of the House, but I cannot . . . and especially 
being a past reeve. I didn’t know as being a reeve that I was the 
one that was being . . . restricting economic development in our 
area. I had no idea that it was my fault. I know that the mayor in 
our town would be totally dismayed if somebody could explain 
to him why he is holding back economic development, because 
there’s so many of them. 
 
And Mr. Garcea has gone on and on. We met with him a couple 
of times ourselves as a caucus, and he used this same argument 
that because, not because of the costing analysis he’s done, not 
because of the efficiency of local government, but because, 
mainly because economic development in this province is 
stymied. 
 
Well I had to agree with him there. But where I disagreed with 
him was that blaming this on too many local municipal 
governments . . . I just can’t grasp where that’s coming from. 
 
I’d like to read you a little bit out of the Mackness report again. 
And you can disagree with it if you like, Mr. Minister, but this 
man has a lot of credentials when it comes to economic 
development. 
 
But he’s talking about the Stabler-Olfert study and he says that 
it completely ignores important factors other than the existing 
system of municipal governance that clearly are contributing to 
the provincial economic underperformance — 
underperformance, Mr. Minister. 
 
In particular the role of burdensome levels of federal and 
provincial taxation and regulation are ignored in the discussion 
of provincial economic underperformance. Having ignored the 
real culprits, the studies unjustifiably attempt to indict the 
efficient municipal governments as a principal cause of 
Saskatchewan’s economic difficulties. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, if you could explain to me, I’d sleep a lot 
better at night, how so many local governments out there are at 
fault for our economic performance in this province, which I 
may say is dismal at best. 

Maybe for just an example, Mr. Minister, it could be the high 
taxes in this province that are at fault, and we’re trying to put a 
smokescreen over that to hide the fact that that’s probably one 
of the main problems and it has nothing to do with local 
municipal government. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you try and explain to me how local 
municipal government is a handicap to economic development 
in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well if I do that, Mr. Chair, in a fairly 
significant fashion, I don’t want to be responsible for you not 
sleeping at night. So if I can fix that a little bit, then I’ll be very 
helpful — it’ll be very helpful. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that I was most impressed 
by the work, I have to say, of Stabler. And I say that because 
when I looked at what Stabler says about what’s happened in 
Saskatchewan, which is most important, I think, about this 
discussion, he talks about how, in fact, we’ve seen a 
regionalization today in Saskatchewan of individuals. 
 
And this is an important discussion. When you take a look at 
where people are congregating around today. They’re around 
many of the communities of which some of your members 
represent: the Estevans and the Swift Currents and the Yorktons 
and the Lloydminsters and the North Battlefords; and some of 
your larger towns in this province like the Nipawins and the 
Tisdales and the Humboldts and the Meadow Lakes. This is 
where a great deal of your business and your economy and your 
industry has moved towards today. 
 
And that’s been achieved, not because there has been an 
impairment or an inability by governments to try and promote 
that, it’s because those are the choices that people have made in 
Saskatchewan. They’ve made that on their own, in spite of the 
fact that there have been our administration and previous 
administrations in this province who’ve tried to prop up rural 
Saskatchewan in a major way. 
 
And you can go to communities across Saskatchewan today and 
you’ll find a whole host of infrastructure that’s there today 
that’s not being used, and that governments made investments 
in them to try to prop up rural communities today. 
 
And so what Stabler talks about to a large degree, and which 
I’m hoping to provide some direction on, is that when you have 
a major initiative in Saskatchewan today wherever it is — and 
you can take your part of Saskatchewan or mine — we have 
this competitive nature amongst communities, which is an 
important issue for us to try to discuss and see through. Because 
municipalities on an individual basis today can decide whether 
or not they’re going to participate in a project or whether 
they’re not going to participate in a project. And that might not 
necessarily be in the best interests of the region. 
 
And you can take a look at a number of developments in the 
province today of which I’ve had some experience in my own. I 
mean when we go to develop something . . . the Melville 
community goes to develop something through their economic 
development folks, they rarely come and have a discussion with 
the people in Yorkton. And the reason that they don’t do that is 
because they’re concerned about whether or not they’re going 



1164 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2000 

to lose any of their opportunities to another community. 
 
In the same way when you have hog barn developments in 
Saskatchewan today, you don’t have necessarily municipalities 
that are working together, not only sharing their resources as 
elected municipal leaders but often they won’t agree to share 
any of their financial resources because there isn’t ability in 
some cases to do that. Now the legislation stands in the way of 
doing some of that. So we think we need to fix some of that so 
that the legislative opportunities permit for that to happen. 
 
So rather today than looking at the larger economic regions, 
because clearly we know, you and I know, that my little 
municipality of Insinger, Saskatchewan today with a very small 
tax base and a very small network of opportunity for the future, 
for them to try and compete for a major project for my part of 
east-central Saskatchewan is not likely. It’s not likely. 
 
So they need to be a partner and a player with two or three or 
four other municipalities, not only where they share their 
expertise and their wisdom but they share their resources. They 
have to share their resources, which is their tax base and their 
assessment. Because when then they go to make a presentation 
to an industry or to a particular opportunity they have some 
solid financial opportunity to compete — to compete. And this 
is the issue. This is about competing with some of the other 
parts of Saskatchewan where places go to. 
 
Why do some of the industries today come to Saskatoon or 
Regina and don’t show up in your part of the world or mine? 
Partly because we don’t have the economic base to support it. 
We need to start to think about how we’re going to craft that in 
a broader way so the municipalities don’t only give permission 
to each other to participate, but they might want to share some 
of their resources; because by sharing some of their resources, 
they’ll be at a better opportunity to compete. And that’s what 
that’s about. 
 
There’s no point in my little municipality of Insinger, 
Saskatchewan, competing with yours and Saltcoats. What’s the 
point of that? Because whether or not it’s successful for you in 
your municipality or just me, it’s not sufficient because I can’t 
win it in my little municipality of Insinger or Garry. We can’t 
compete. 
 
And so we need to start thinking about that in a broader way, 
because if we’re going to attract economic opportunity to 
Saskatchewan, in rural Saskatchewan, which is important for 
you and I, we need to be able to put people on a more solid 
footing or a more solid base. That’s what the economic 
opportunities are about that I think Stabler talks about. That I’d 
like to see us talk about at the round table. Not to beat up on the 
small, little municipalities — it’s not about that at all, not about 
that at all. 
 
This is about identifying the changes that have happened in 
Saskatchewan today in which those little municipalities do a 
wonderful job. There’s no disagreement of whether or not they 
do a good job of sustaining the roads because they do a good 
job of sustaining the roadways. And many rural municipalities 
have become road authorities in many ways. 
 
There are small, little communities today — we have 165 

communities in Saskatchewan that have less than a hundred 
people, less than a hundred people, who down the road aren’t 
ever going to be able to restore some of their infrastructure. We 
need to address that fairly soon so that grandma and grandpa 
today who live at Wroxton, Saskatchewan, or Calder, 
Saskatchewan, might be able to stay there because we can 
provide them with some of the essential services for them to be 
there. This is what we need to start thinking about. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and I agree 
with you on some of the points that you made when you talk 
about Wroxton and . . . The village of Wroxton, the Calder RM 
is a perfect example of where voluntary amalgamation is 
working, has worked, and far as I’ve saw out there it’s a great 
success because those people did it from the bottom up. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Minister, one way we could help is instead 
of threatening those municipalities in Saskatchewan with what 
you’re talking about or has been talked about, is maybe . . . And 
you talked about, Mr. Minister, about bringing in legislation, 
and I think was what you were saying was to remove 
impediments for maybe that amalgamation to happen. I 
commend you for that. And you would have our full support if 
you brought that type of legislation in. 
 
In fact I think that’s maybe where we should have started this 
whole process, was by bringing that type of legislation in, 
removing the obstacles that were actually stopping 
amalgamation, and maybe amalgamation would be going at a 
higher speed right now, Mr. Minister, than we see it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a bit of a concern. I was at a number of the 
meetings where . . . In fact we had a member at every meeting, 
and we had a presentation at every one of Mr. Garcea’s 
meetings this last time around, and we heard the same message 
night after night. 
 
You know as well as I do, Mr. Minister, 800 people in Yorkton 
— and I could be exaggerating, maybe there were 7, but an 
awfully good crowd — 550 in Melfort, 500 in P.A. (Prince 
Albert), and these numbers could be out a bit, but very large 
crowds, Mr. Minister, all over the province. And unless I’m 
wrong I got the message . . . out of every one of those meetings 
I would bet 95 plus were against what they were hearing and 
from the . . . Mr. Garcea’s first recommendations. And they 
were definitely against Mr. Stabler’s recommendations. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I guess where my concern comes now is: 
was Mr. Garcea and his panel listening when they went around 
the province this time? Because if he comes in . . . I believe he’s 
going to give you an interim report on Monday, if I understand. 
And it’s going to be interesting, Mr. Minister, to see what this 
gentleman comes out with on Monday, and we’ll know 
instantly whether he actually paid attention or his panel paid 
attention to what people were saying out there. 
 
The Yorkton meeting, for an example, RM and town after town 
after RM got up and said we want no part of what you’re 
recommending, Mr. Garcea. And I think they went on for like 
four hours out there — this happened all over the province. 
 
Are you expecting Mr. — and you may have saw it already, and 
I’m not asking you to report on what you saw because I know 



May 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1165 

you’re not . . . he’s not doing this till Monday so you can’t tell 
us — but are you expecting that the comments that Mr. Garcea 
got at this meetings to affect what he’s actually going to come 
out with on Monday? Are we going to go back to exactly what 
he was recommending before? And we’ve gained nothing by 
the second rounds of meetings, Mr. Minister. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I just want to say to the 
member from Saltcoats that Mr. Garcea is not providing a . . . 
first I want to make it clear that Mr. Garcea is not providing a 
report to me on Monday. Mr. Garcea is not providing a report to 
me on Monday. I expect that Mr. Garcea’s report will be on its 
way fairly soon, but I don’t have it yet. 
 
Your question about whether or not Mr. Garcea and his 
committee have in fact been listening. It’s my view, and from 
only what he’s said to me, that the report that we had before us, 
the interim report, he says and his committee members say this 
is a reflection of the kinds of information that we’ve garnered 
over the period of September of 1998 to April of the year 2000 
— that was a period of about 18 months. 
 
And we should, we should remember that Mr. Garcea was in 
many, many offices and boardrooms across the province talking 
to people about what needs to happen with municipal reform 
and renewal in Saskatchewan. So the meetings that he had in 
rural Saskatchewan for the period of about eight or nine . . . I 
guess it was seven, seventeen meetings that he had across the 
province, that was only one small picture of what he’s seen over 
the past 18 months. 
 
And I don’t disagree with you. It was obvious that 
Saskatchewan people, rural Saskatchewan people today weren’t 
in favour of the kinds of things that were being said. But the 
kinds of things that were being said didn’t address the rationale 
for why in fact this committee was ever struck. I mean the 
debate was whether or not somebody out in rural Saskatchewan 
today wanted to have something imposed upon them — forced 
amalgamation. 
 
And if you ask the people the question — it doesn’t matter 
where it is, whether it’s in rural Saskatchewan or urban 
Saskatchewan or in this House — if we say to somebody how 
would you like me to force something on you, the immediate 
response to that is going to be no. The immediate response to 
that would be no. 
 
And so the thinking that this issue in rural Saskatchewan is any 
different than it would be in urban Saskatchewan, if you said to 
somebody that you’re going to force something on them, it 
would be problematic. I think that, and I agree with that. 
 
So I want to say to the member, to the member opposite and to 
you, Mr. Chair, that this is a highly, highly emotional 
discussion — there’s no question about that — because it really, 
the really . . . questions the fundamental issues that 
communities today talk about. Will there a loss of 
independence? Will there be any opportunity to enhance our 
services or economic opportunities? This is about people 
talking about possibly losing their jobs. 
 

So when you take a look at what the kinds of debate that raged 
out in rural Saskatchewan and the kinds of issues that we’re 
going to be forced to address at the round table haven’t changed 
— haven’t changed. If we’re going to have renewal in 
Saskatchewan, and if we’re going to have a change to the 
legislation, or if we’re going to have changes to the structure, 
we’re going to have the same debate within our closed doors 
and the same issues will be there. 
 
Because if you’re going to consolidate or you’re going to look 
at changing the structural boundaries in this province, and 
people are going to be losing some of the independence that 
they have today, or maybe even their jobs, this will be a very 
tough discussion — even on a voluntary basis. And the 
fundamental question of course will be, are we prepared as 
municipal leaders and provincial governments, prepared to 
endorse any kind of a model that would address that? And that’s 
the question. 
 
We don’t have a model today. We have two reports in front of 
us which is Garcea and Stabler, which are very different, very 
different in terms of what they’re recommending. We have two 
reports in front of us today that are talking about legislative 
reform and economic opportunity of which we’re going to have 
to balance. 
 
And then we’re going to have to answer the question that 
you’ve been raising and others have been raising: is there any 
efficiency in doing this? Is there any efficiencies? And if there 
are, what are they? 
 
And the other question of course is what kind of model do you 
going to have in Saskatchewan? What is the model? Because I 
don’t know what that model is going to be. I don’t know what 
it’s going to be. Because Stabler talks about 17 regions in the 
province, or 11. That’s a very, very large consolidation of urban 
and rural Saskatchewan. And there are efficiencies in that. 
 
Now if you have a fewer . . . if you have fewer consolidations 
or less consolidations or a different model, then you have to do 
the numbers on that to figure out whether or not there are any 
efficiencies. And I can’t give you those because I don’t know 
what they are, because there hasn’t been a decision made on 
what those models should look like. 
 
But I tell you, when I drive down the street in Canora, 
Saskatchewan and I see a municipal office on one block for one 
municipality and see a municipal office for another 
municipality, and the town office there, I have to ask the 
question about whether or not there’s any efficiencies here. 
 
And I can tell you that in my own community of Yorkton, 
Saskatchewan today we have the RM of Orkney and the RM of 
Wallace today who’ve consolidated their administration. Now 
why did they consolidate their administration? They 
consolidated their administration because there’s efficiency. 
There’s efficiency. 
 
So if there’s efficiency for that to be done on a gradual basis 
across the province, I think that it begs the question for us to 
examine that in a broader way within our round table. Now 
what will be the result of that? I don’t have any idea today what 
will be the result of that. And what will the models look like? I 



1166 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2000 

don’t know what the models will look like. That’s why we’re at 
the round table having those kinds of discussions. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. 
Mr. Minister, you talked about jobs out there that are going to 
be lost and things like that, and I hope you’re not insinuating 
that that’s the reason that there’s such a backlash out there in 
rural Saskatchewan. Because you know as well as I do there 
was a vote out there of the ratepayers just not long ago, and of 
the ones that voted, I believe — if my numbers are right — that 
98 per cent were against forced amalgamation. 
 
That wasn’t just the administrators or the councillors voting. 
There was a lot of ratepayers out there that were expressing 
their concern, especially in a busy time of year like seeding, 
took the time to vote and showed that 98 per cent are against 
forced amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Minister, you also have to remember — and you talk about 
Wallace and Orkney out there in your area and that’s great; I 
think we have to help promote that, assist them, but don’t ram it 
down their throats — but you have to remember, and I’m sure 
you know as well as I do, who’s actually paying for local 
municipal government. It’s not your government; it’s the local 
taxpayer out there. 
 
Now for an example, in the RM of Saltcoats in my community, 
if the ratepayers out there aren’t happy and think we’re wasting 
money, I would suggest to you that they probably should be the 
first ones we should be listening to that aren’t satisfied with 
their local administration and their local councils, because 
they’re picking up the tab. 
 
Wouldn’t it be them probably first that should be asking for this 
instead of you, as father government, coming out and saying, 
well we know what’s better for you than you actually do for 
yourselves, when you aren’t actually spending a nickel on local 
administration, Mr. Minister. And I guess maybe . . . I just ask 
for a comment on that, Mr. Minister, because I’m sure you’re as 
well aware as I am aware of who actually pays the bills out 
there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, it’s a very interesting 
question, and certainly I think I’ve said on another occasion 
which I want to be very careful that we don’t misconstrue what 
I say here, because I know in a previous discussion or comment 
that I made, it was. But today the provincial government makes 
the commitment as well. 
 
I as a rural ratepayer today in my two RMs that I pay taxes to, 
the municipality collects, and they pay for the roads and they 
pay for the administration out of my tax dollars that I pay to 
those municipalities. But I want to say to you as well that the 
provincial government, through its revenue share, also sends a 
cheque to all of these municipalities and all these small towns. 
We send them all a cheque: $26 million to the RMs and $24 
million to the urbans in Saskatchewan. And this goes to each of 
those on revenue share. 
 
Now a portion of that, and I think if you were to go to your RM 
councillor or to your administrator, they would say to you if 
you were to say, well what portion of this money do you use for 
administration? Well they might say, well a portion of it comes 

from you, Clay Serby, the taxpayer in rural Saskatchewan, from 
the farmland that . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. The minister, I think, understands 
already the mistake he made in using his own name and it’s not 
allowable to use names of sitting members. It’s just a reminder 
to all members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, as the member from Yorkton 
who has farmland in the municipalities of Garry and Insinger, 
when I go to the, when I go to the RM office and have a chat 
with the RM administrator and say to her, well of my tax bill 
that I pay to you here, Madam Administrator, what portion of it 
comes from my farmland and what portion of it comes from the 
revenue share? 
 
I’m sure she’s not going to be able to break that out for me; nor 
is any other administrator in the province going to be able to do 
that because municipalities get their funding from two sources 
— they get it from the taxpayer and they get it from the revenue 
share. 
 
So I think it would be . . . I think it would be fair to say that part 
of the administration salary and part of the salary that’s paid, or 
part of the per diems that are paid to municipal councillors or 
councillors across the province, some of it is revenue-sharing 
money as well, as well as it is taxpayers’ money. But clearly it 
is. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m afraid I have to 
disagree with you again because I have checked with 
administrators out there, and they tell me that not one cent from 
your government goes for administration. 
 
I know you pay for assisting on road maintenance, road 
construction, grass cutting, gravelling — I’m talking RMs now, 
Mr. Minister — I know you assist on sewer and water projects 
within urban communities, a number of those things. But, Mr. 
Minister, when it comes to administration I don’t believe — 
unless I’m really, really out to lunch and I don’t think my 
administrators are — that they pay 100 per cent of 
administration, Mr. Minister. So one of us is wrong, and I don’t 
believe I am, Mr. Minister, on this issue. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask you . . . and you talked a minute 
ago about models, and you were talking about that. Rather than 
going the route we’re pushing, seem to be pushing for and 
getting such a backlash right now . . . and I’m sure there’s got to 
be areas out there if amalgamation is such a popular thing. And 
I know in some areas actually they’re already talking . . . you 
know that, I know that. Why don’t we pick out an area out there 
— depending on how much, how many entities we could get to 
go in this — why don’t we try a model for five years and just 
see how it works. 
 
You know if it worked really well out there, then we would 
have some credibility going back to SARM and SUMA and 
say: here we are, you’ve been part of this project, and it’s 
working great; we found the ways that we may assist this to 
happen. 
 
Wouldn’t that be a better way of trying to get this to happen out 
there and assist it to happen and speed it up, if that’s what you 



May 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1167 

wish? Wouldn’t that be a better way of going than to go the 
direction we are now? And I think you’d find that people will 
work with you a lot quicker than they will if you try and force 
them into something. If you can help the system to do it, they 
are much more ready to accept this. 
 
Have you thought of making some model at some spot in the 
province and having a test case there, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, I think that that will likely be one of 
the discussions that we’ll have at the round table when we’re 
looking at all of the options or models that might be available to 
us. 
 
I can say to you, I don’t have a particular design or model that 
we want to put forward in Saskatchewan so if the municipalities 
say to me that — or they say at the round table — we should try 
and achieve some of these, I’m not going to be objecting to it. 
What I’ll do is put forward sort of my case or my scenario of 
how, how some of that work has been attempted in the past. 
 
I think in 1996, as I said to you earlier, we provided two things. 
We provided a legislative agenda of which municipalities asked 
for, for district services Act. And then we dumped in a whole 
pool of money and said go ahead and do this at your own pace 
and rate. In fact, I think there was as much as $200,000 that was 
sitting in a pool for over three years, I think it was, for 
municipalities to . . . or two years, for two years for 
municipalities to access to do exactly what you said: to proceed 
to do whatever kind of consolidation or amalgamation or 
building stronger municipalities in their own regions and use 
some of that money to help do it. I’ve got to tell you that there 
was a very, very minuscule amount that was used — a very, 
very minuscule. And in fact I think this year we’ve taken it out 
of the budget because it hasn’t been used for two years. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. I 
just want to bring to you attention, Mr. Minister, it goes back to 
what we were talking about before. You were talking about 
putting the provincial money into X number of million dollars 
into municipalities out there. 
 
The member for Lloydminster just brought it to my attention, 
and there’s the example of the RM of Eldon out there is 
actually, when the smoke clears, a net taxpayer. From what you 
put into that RM out there, Mr. Minister, they pay more than 
that in PST (provincial sales tax) on equipment, fuel tax, and 
the taxes they pay. 
 
And I know it may be news to some people out there that RMs 
and towns actually pay taxes, but they do, Mr. Minister. You 
know that as well as I do. So we can’t leave that impression that 
actually every RM in town out there is getting this big bag full 
of money and they actually aren’t paying taxes and putting a lot 
of that right back into provincial coffers. 
 
Mr. Minister, you made a comment here a few minutes ago in 
one of your answers to me that you said, maybe if this happened 
with these, you know, amalgamation went on there, that these 
bodies, whatever size they may be, may assume provincial 
services. 
 
And I was quite curious about that, Mr. Minister, because what 

I am a little bit concerned about here, is what you’re talking 
about here, is another way for government to pass off some of 
our secondary highways to RMs. 
 
Is it a way of passing some government, provincial government 
responsibility to local municipalities, and maybe what we’re 
going to see is nothing more than another form of downloading. 
 
I mean, if this is what you’re talking of doing out there if these 
big boards are set up out there, I’m even more worried than I 
was before, Mr. Minister. Because if we go through with what 
Mr. Garcea has talked about, he said, number one, he suggested 
that they could run . . . these boards could run deficits, which I 
think is scary and I think you know why, Mr. Minister. One 
bonus of local government out there is that they couldn’t run 
deficits, kept their house in order, and have done a very, very 
good job at that. And I would question that. 
 
But he also talked about greater autonomy when it comes to 
borrowing money, things like that. And the only place I’ve seen 
this where I think that people think there is a real need is in the 
larger centres, especially in the cities. 
 
(1545) 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I have no problem with that at all. In fact I 
think if the cities think that this is an area where they need 
changes, why don’t we make the changes that they’re asking for 
but don’t involve the local . . . the smaller municipalities in the 
same bowl and have to have it all as one big package. 
 
Why don’t we pick out the things that they’re actually asking 
for. And the things like the city is asking for a greater autonomy 
when it comes to borrowing. Mr. Minister, would you respond 
though, back to the original question before I got carried away, 
about assuming provincial services, Mr. Minister? What were 
you actually talking about there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I was just reviewing, Mr. Chair, some of 
my information that I had, so I’m on two thoughts here. I’ll get 
to your second one in a minute. 
 
The RM of Eldon, you’re right, doesn’t get any equalization. 
You are right about that. And so I would suggest to you . . . and 
they do, but they do get funding for road preservation. So in 
that case they don’t get any equalization. So their 
administration, you’re right, would be covered fully by the 
municipality. 
 
But there are far more, far more municipalities who receive 
equalization than not. In fact it’s a rare case in the lists that we 
have. We have far fewer numbers of municipalities and it’s to 
do with their assessment, of which you would know. 
 
I say to the member opposite that if you might just refresh just 
the last part of your question, because I was looking for the 
other part of the answer. If you might just ask me again what 
the last part of that question was. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, now we’re both lost 
because neither one of us could remember it. You talked about 
passing some provincial responsibilities down to these boards, 
Mr. Minister. And I would just like an explanation of what you 



1168 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2000 

were talking about there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think when . . . Thank you very 
much for asking the question again. I was preoccupied with 
getting my first answer, and I’d heard you say earlier that again 
you were going to be staying up all night and your sleep 
disorder might be kicking in again. So I wanted to make sure 
that I could alleviate that. 
 
But I say to the member opposite that, when in fact some of the 
discussion with the municipalities and particularly the large 
urbans, they talked about the fact that they want to be their own 
order of government. They want to have larger access to the 
revenue pool of the provinces, and that they would like to have 
greater authority. They’d like to assume some of the provincial 
services that we might be providing. 
 
And to some degree, some of those might be better delivered by 
municipal governments than they would be by provincial 
governments today. And so I think that the question then 
remains, what source of provincial services could you devolve 
to municipalities and would you like to devolve to 
municipalities? Not only a devolution of the responsibility, but 
also where you would devolve resources, being money and 
manpower. 
 
For example, today many of the municipalities that we deal 
with at the department do a lot of their urban planning or their 
planning. Now some of those responsibilities in my view could 
be done at the local level far more efficiently, and more broadly 
and quickly at that level. 
 
I think some of the work that we do today with waste 
management, some of that work could be done far better at the 
municipal level with the resources that we have today on the 
provincial system than could be done at that level at the 
municipal system. 
 
But I think what you would want to do, and certainly I’ll put 
this to the round table and say to you, that you would want to 
make those responsibilities equal across the province to all 
municipalities. 
 
So if you’re going to be providing incentives and resources to 
one municipality, I think you’d want to do it for all to them 
rather than singling out one or two municipalities in the 
province, and say well I think what we’re going to do with you 
is give you special powers or opportunities or incentives, while 
the rest of the province watches while those people do their 
work. 
 
We already have some of that in Saskatchewan already today, I 
say, with the two larger urbans. Because when the rest of 
Saskatchewan goes to compete for an economic opportunity 
with the two larger urbans, often we’re not successful. 
 
Now in some things we are, because of our location. Going to 
build a hog barn in Saskatoon or Regina — we’re not going to 
build. But where does the packing plant go in many cases, or 
where does the processing plant go? Often many of those things 
don’t find their way into rural Saskatchewan because those 
economic opportunities aren’t there. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. 
Chair, at this point I would like to pass off questioning to my 
counterpart from Indian Head-Milestone, our critic for urban 
municipal government. 
 
I just want to take that opportunity, Mr. Minister, to thank you 
and your staff. And you know, in the next months to come — 
June, July, August, maybe even September — we’ll still have 
you back a number of times before session is over. So thank 
you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much. And welcome to the 
officials here today. 
 
I am going to shift gears a little bit. I’m going to leave the 
amalgamation, the municipal amalgamation area for a while 
even though I have a number of questions on it. And I guess the 
whole point of urban and rural and who it affects more and 
things like that, but there are a number of questions that I would 
like to get to perhaps the next time you come back. 
 
But what I wanted to deal with more today — because I’ve 
been getting a number of phone calls from it, it was discussed in 
the budget, and it’s an area that I guess I was involved with 
quite a bit during the campaign and especially since the 
campaign — is the property tax issue and the education portion 
on property tax. And I know it was addressed during the budget 
speech. 
 
I had the opportunity of attending a number of tax revolt 
meetings. As a matter of fact, the first tax revolt meeting that 
happened in the Benson RM was not in my constituency and it 
didn’t pass. But after that I believe the next five or six tax revolt 
meetings that took place were in the constituency that I now 
represent, Indian Head-Milestone, and all of them passed quite 
easily. I think there was a little bit of an administration problem 
in that first one and that would be the only reason that that one 
failed, I would think, more than anything else. Because the 
ratepayers that went there went there on a mission, and there’s 
some administration problems, and things kind of got 
misconstrued such as no secret ballot, and that was the problem 
with that one. 
 
The RM that I’m from — Lajord and Scott where I’ve lived in, 
and Wellington and all those RMs — were kind of the genesis 
of this whole tax revolt idea that’s sweeping the province. And 
now there’s been something like 70 or . . . RMs that have held 
tax revolt meetings. 
 
You and the Minister of Education at that . . . attended one of 
them in Montmartre and had an idea of what goes on that those 
meetings. And there’s some very strong emotion. I would say 
the emotion only second to this whole issue of forced 
amalgamation. I think the RMs and villages have really been 
under a lot of fire. They feel like they’ve been under a lot of 
fire. 
 
One of the issues that was big, of course, is the education 
portion on the property tax. And they wanted to see something 
addressed. Now you addressed it, I guess to a certain extent, in 
the budget where you talked about a two-year program and X 
amount of dollars. We’ll get into maybe a little bit later on the 
other side of the coin where . . . what is going on with 



May 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1169 

education, and how much is actually going to be realized by 
producers. 
 
But could you, I guess first of all, give me a little bit of insight 
on how far you are down that road with this property tax rebate, 
the dollars that are going to be put into it over the next couple 
of years. And perhaps, some sort of the process that it’s going 
to be . . . the mechanism that it’s going to be worked out on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, I want to say to the 
member opposite I can see now why you are going to keep me 
here until July and August or September, because if you’re 
going to ask me questions about agriculture and going to ask me 
questions about education, I’m going to need a far thicker 
briefing book, and will need the kind of time that you’re talking 
about. 
 
I can’t, Mr. Chair, to the member, tell you today at what level 
the rebate program is at because that particular program is being 
administered through the Department of Agriculture. And so I 
would suggest that when the Minister of Agriculture comes to 
the committee, that you might want to save that question for 
him and I know that he’ll be able to provide you with that. 
 
You and I both know that there was $25 million put into the 
pool over . . . 50 million over two years. And of course, he will 
then be able to provide in greater detail the kinds of questions 
that you’re asking today and specifically to the issue of the 
rebate. Because I can’t provide it for you because I don’t know 
where it’s at today. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. Mr. Chair. So in other words 
municipalities are not going to have any input or say as to how 
this rebate is going to be put out; it’s all going to be through the 
Department of Agriculture. Am I correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — That’s correct, Mr. Chair. That it would be 
the Department of Agriculture that would be having those 
discussions with SARM, I would expect. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Okay. I guess then another issue that I really 
wanted to discuss also is the policing issue that was addressed 
during the budget and I guess maybe the lack of funding that’s 
going to be going into policing for smaller communities and 
RMs. 
 
Could you tell me . . . In the budget there is no funding going to 
the RMs and smaller communities. Could you tell me what sort 
of consultation you had with the RMs and the small villages 
that were benefiting from that grant program, what kind of 
consultation prior to budget time did you have with them, and 
what were their feelings leading up to the budget after talking to 
them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, there’s been a 
committee in place for some time now called the policing cost 
redistribution committee. And that committee has been made up 
of representation from both SUMA and SARM, the Department 
of Justice, and Municipal Affairs. And it’s been in place I 
believe now for about four or five years. 
 
And when the committee began its work, one of the issues that 
they first found was that there were a number of municipalities 

in Saskatchewan today that weren’t participating financially to 
policing services. And they were municipalities that were under 
the population of 500. And those policing costs were being 
assumed by the rest of the province, by municipalities that were 
greater than 500. 
 
And so an arrangement was attained, I believe it was in 1997, 
where in fact the province said that what we should have here is 
we should have equalization where each of the municipalities 
across the province today would in fact be contributing to 
policing costs. It wouldn’t matter whether or not you were a 
community of 500 above or 500 below. 
 
And in order to ensure that all municipalities participated, what 
the province said is, over a period of time what we’ll do is we’ll 
provide a small pool of money to you to ensure that that gets 
looked after — a portion to the RMs and a portion to the 
communities under 500. And we did that. Always with the 
understanding that eventually those municipalities under 500 
would start to assume that. 
 
And it was an interesting discussion because when I assumed 
the portfolio, one of my early tasks was to meet with this 
committee on the policing costs. And it was an interesting 
discussion because some communities where there were 
populations over 500 said this still isn’t fair, because what’s 
happening here is that those communities under 500 aren’t 
paying their share of the policing at all. Those costs are being 
paid for by the province — not being paid by those 
municipalities who are getting the same kinds of services today 
as a community that was paying their own costs. 
 
So it was a discussion that we had at that level. At the end of 
the day, this year, the province made a decision that the 
expectation would be then that all municipalities would assume 
paying their own policing costs on the formulas that had been 
established by this particular body that I talked about earlier. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, the 
drop of the funding for policing, talking to the RMs and the 
villages in my areas, was really quite a shock. And they’ve had 
to since make up the difference and they will have to since 
make up the difference. Do you have any sort of idea what that 
is going to mean for the local taxpayer then as to how much 
more they’re going to have to put into policing? 
 
I know most of the villages and RMs, smaller villages, realize 
that this is not a permanent grant structure. That there was 
going to be some in the longer term, some more responsibility 
put on them to fund the policing issue. But to have it just 
dropped on them and really I think in a lot of the communities 
they’re struggling with elevator closures and things like that, 
and then to have an added cost put on them. 
 
And I guess that’s where it’s really disconcerting, because the 
ones that I talked to really felt that there was no consultation. It 
was just forced on them. It was just taken away from them, I 
guess, is more like it. 
 
So do you have any sort of idea what the costing will be for 
those RMs and small towns, villages to make up the difference 
in the grant money that you have taken away through the 
policing? 



1170 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. I don’t have the 
exact breakdown of all the communities, but what there is a per 
capita plus the formula of which the formula each of the 
municipalities . . . not the municipalities but SUMA and SARM 
representatives worked on. So each of those . . . in each of those 
communities under 500, there will be some requirement now 
based on population and the existing formula that they had 
agreed on to be assumed now by the municipality. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that it shouldn’t be 
assumed here, Mr. Chair, that in fact municipalities weren’t 
aware that this wasn’t an interim process. Because in 1995 
when this committee was established, it was fully understood 
that there would be a transition period. There would be time 
when the province would cover off the cost of those 
communities under 500, and that eventually those 
municipalities would be expected to pick up their own costs. 
 
(1600) 
 
And in our conversations, certainly mine and yours, you’ll find 
some municipalities that have in fact set aside some funds to 
assume this kind of loss of provincial revenue to look after the 
policing. In some instances, some municipalities did not. And 
so you and I will both find when we have discussions with 
municipal leaders or administrators that in some cases they did 
or they didn’t. But this isn’t a surprise — this is something that 
has been in the works now and discussions have been in the 
works since 1995. And as I understand it, always been the 
assumption that there would be . . . there would come a time 
when municipalities, urban or rural under 500, would be 
assuming their own policing costs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee 
report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
The Chair: — I invite the hon. minister to reintroduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my 
immediate right is Stuart Kramer, who is my deputy minister, 
and to my immediate left is Dave Phillips, assistant deputy 
minister of operations. Directly behind me is Lynn Tulloch, the 
executive director of corporate services. And to her immediate 
right is Bob Ruggles, the assistant deputy minister of programs. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And once again, 
I’d like to join with the minister in welcoming his officials 
again today. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, if I could I’d like to start back at the 
last time we met. And there were a number of issues where you 
indicated that it would be a couple of weeks before you were 
able to get the information back to us on this side. And the two 
weeks, I think, for all intents and purposes, has probably 

expired now. 
 
And the first one that I want to raise with you is the issue of the 
request for proposal process on the spruce budworm spraying. 
As you will recall, I gave some details the last time that 
indicated that cost was a very, very low factor in the 
consideration of these proposals. And that has caused a great 
degree of concern on the part of a lot of the smaller aerial 
contractors out there. 
 
And you indicated you had not been aware of that particular 
mechanism for requesting proposals. And since we met last, 
I’ve also heard from others who are equally concerned about 
this — the member from Melfort-Tisdale brought a very 
specific situation to my attention. And I was wondering where 
we were at with that, and if you had been able to avail yourself 
of the information, and if you could share it with us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just wanted to 
report to the member that, as you probably are aware, the two 
weeks that we asked for is a fairly tight time frame. There is so 
many questions that we’re asked, however, we do have — 
probably by early next week — the response that you’ve asked 
for. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I hope that 
we can have the information made available prior to the end of 
this session. 
 
I would just like to make a couple of comments with respect to 
the whole issue of the spruce budworm spraying. Are you 
aware, Mr. Minister, that there has been a proposal submitted to 
your department by the provincial association that represents 
aerial spray applicators? And they have made a number of 
suggestions around the request for proposal process that, as an 
association, they feel that they would be much more 
comfortable with. 
 
Are you aware of the proposal that they have presented? And if 
so, what kind of response have you made to that provincial 
association? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just want to 
report that we are going to meet with this particular association 
by the end of May. We have the proposal in hand and we are 
looking at. And I can assure you that a lot of the ideas and 
concepts that they have forwarded, that we’ll give it our 
thorough consideration and look at all the factors. 
 
As I mentioned, some of your specific questions, we’ll have a 
response to you by Monday. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, let’s 
see if the two-week time frame held for a couple of other 
promises that you made the last time we met. 
 
We had discussed the provision of a breakdown of a cost 
associated with the firefighting program last year — the 
contractors involved, individuals involved, contract amounts, 
and the salaries of those individuals. Has that information been 
prepared and is it available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. As we 



May 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1171 

mentioned, the questions that were asked several weeks ago 
were very extensive questions. A lot of questions were asked 
and we’ll have the complete answers to all the questions the 
member asked by Monday. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — And I think the other thing that I would 
like to remind the minister of, Mr. Chair, is that the component 
in there that we are particularly interested in is the number of 
northern contractors that have been involved in firefighting and 
the degree to which the resources that they have, have been 
utilized in firefighting. 
 
Would the minister be able to separate that information out and 
provide that as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just want to 
report that it’s often difficult in the business of fighting forest 
fires to determine what a contractor is. Is somebody working for 
two or three days considered a contractor? Is somebody 
working for two or three months, is that a contractor? 
 
So in relation to the question, we’re not trying to avoid giving 
you the answer, just that it’d be difficult for us to really put 
together what you would perceive as defined as Northerner, 
what you would perceive as being defined as a contractor. 
 
But we will undertake to provide you with a ballpark figure as 
to what is part of the northern contractors’ work as per the very 
basic criteria and understanding that we have as to how we 
would define a Northerner and a contractor. And as to what we 
also spend for southern contractors as well. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
would assume that your department would have definitions of 
what is a Northerner, what is a contractor, in order to be able to 
conduct their business. And I would be very surprised if those 
definitions weren’t applied on almost a daily basis in terms of 
the work that the department does. 
 
Firstly, do you have those definitions? Does the department 
have ways of applying those definitions? And could you 
provide those to me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to report 
that the challenge that we have when we looked at the northern 
contractor in terms of the definition, and definition-wise, 
throughout my history of being a northern resident, anybody 
north of the NAD (northern administrative district) line — 
that’s considered a Northerner. 
 
And I guess my response, it’s often a difficult exercise to try 
and categorize who is a northern contractor and who isn’t. It 
takes a lot of work. And many times, as you know, there could 
be somebody that’s based in northern Saskatchewan that has the 
main office or the head office in some other southern place, and 
it’s difficult to try and track that down. 
 
But what I will say is that it is often our effort to try and deal 
with as many northern contractors, who are impacted by some 
of the fires in and around the communities, as best as they can. 
One good example of that — if I could show the forest 
firefighters themselves — I would assume, again I’m assuming, 
that up to 90 per cent of some of the firefighters that we hire 

would be from the impacted communities that the fire is close 
to. 
 
So in that essence, if that’s considered a northern contractor, by 
picking them up then we can say from the labour perspective 
that 90 per cent of our labour force is from northern 
Saskatchewan. So 90 per cent of the northern contractors, which 
could be forest firefighters are from the North. 
 
(1615) 
 
However, you look at the other aspect of, say the helicopters. 
Often they come into the North and they do work over the 
summer. We get choppers from Alberta and we get choppers 
from Manitoba and so on and so forth, and again they could be 
classified as Northerners if they lived the whole summer in the 
North. And people could say well, they’re based in southern 
Saskatchewan but they work in the North so they’re considered 
a Northerner. There’s so many different variations to how you 
want to classify them. 
 
So it’s a difficult exercise. It’s often time consuming. But I can 
assure the member that we’re doing all that we can to ensure 
that Northerners do participate, and that they have a fair share 
and fair opportunity of some of the work associated with our 
forest firefighting program. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And, Mr. 
Minister, in reviewing Hansard from the last time we met, I 
found a section there where you alluded to looking at some new 
ways of doing things, and there are some exciting plans that we 
want to talk about later in the year. That was with respect to the 
forest firefighting and some of the technologies that we were 
discussing at the time. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you wouldn’t mind perhaps 
indicating what some of those exciting new developments may 
be and what the costs around them might be as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Once 
again, last time we basically bragged about Saskatchewan 
having one of the best forest firefighting management teams in 
place, and we continue upholding that dubious record across the 
great country of Canada. 
 
And what I want to say in reference to some of the exciting 
developments, I think I first of all want to paint a picture if I 
may. To date in Saskatchewan we have had 86 fires, forest 
fires, that have been started, and I want to point out that 100 per 
cent of these fires have been started by man. 
 
So certainly we can see that there is a tremendous challenge in 
not only making people aware of some of the challenges of 
being out there in the forest, but to make sure that they take care 
of their forests and that none of these fires in the future are 
caused by man. So awareness is probably one of the biggest 
challenges that we have to address, and certainly is a challenge 
that’ll continue to remain for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In relation to the Alberta example, I can almost guarantee you, 
and I won’t go that far as to guarantee you, but they have had 
twice the number of fire starts so far. And again this goes back 
to some of the earlier comments I made in estimates, the fact 



1172 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2000 

that the fire program in Saskatchewan is something that we 
should be very proud of. And as always, when we talk about 
being proud of something, there’s always room to improve. 
 
And some of the things we were arguing in terms of the 
exciting new efforts that is being undertaken by SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) is you 
want to have a highly specialized training program in which we 
get a lot of people that are able to fight fires very effectively 
and better than in previous years. That’s some of the things that 
we’re looking at in training of our forest firefighters, something 
that’s very, very important. 
 
The other thing is we are constantly evaluating our equipment 
needs, not only currently what they’re able to do but the age and 
so on and so forth. So we’re looking at some of our equipment 
needs and some of the challenges associated with equipment. 
Everything from our planes and everything to the firefighting 
equipment that we have now is being looked at. 
 
The review is extensive. We’re looking at forest fire 
technologies to see how the fires kind of react to certain 
challenges in our efforts to fight fires. As well we’re looking at 
the preparedness of our system in terms of early warning 
system if you like. We’ve put certain towers in certain critical 
areas to make sure that we have people constantly watching for 
fires. 
 
We’re looking at improving the lightning technology. As you 
know, when there’s lightning storms in Saskatchewan, there are 
literally thousands of lightning strikes. And we’re trying to use 
that information on a constant basis, and this where it goes back 
to the effort of understanding the technologies associated with 
forest firefighting. 
 
There’s just so many options that are out there. And as always, 
as always, as we pointed out, it’s a forest firefighting program 
we’re quite proud of, but we know we have a lot of work to do. 
And I would suggest, if people had ideas or comments or 
suggestions as to how we can improve, we’re certainly always 
open to that. 
 
But clearly I think the stats speak for themselves. We look at 
the Alberta example, we look at the Manitoba example versus 
Saskatchewan, and you can indeed see that some of the efforts, 
the past effort and the future efforts really are a credit to the 
people that are fighting forest fires in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy 
Chair, before I go on I want to pursue the issue of training a 
little bit. 
 
The member from Moose Jaw North has a burning question, 
Mr. Minister, that he would like to ask you. And I invited him 
to join us on this side and pose it to you, but being the shy, 
retiring type of individual that he is, he declined and invited me 
to ask it on his behalf. 
 
And his question is, Mr. Minister, and if you could direct the 
answer to him, what is the difference between a bison and a 
buffalo? 
 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just wanted to 
point out that the member from Moose Jaw is not shy and he 
certainly is not going to be retiring soon. 
 
But in reference to your particular question, in terms of the 
difference between a bison and a buffalo, it’s the same animal 
but bison is Latin and buffalo is English, and there are also 
sub-species. So if you want specific information we can 
certainly give that to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, with respect to the issues around training, and I think 
you and I both realize how important a component that is in the 
firefighting issue, has there ever been any thought given to 
working with farmers in the area of training? 
 
SERM has had on occasion a bit of an adversarial relationship 
with the farming community over burning. And the concept of 
perhaps taking a lot of the burning that is done by farmers and 
using it, particularly in the rough lands, as training for 
firefighters, this would be able to meet the needs of the farmers 
in terms of getting the burns done that they need, but it would 
also provide the department with an opportunity to be able to 
train their firefighters. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just 
wanted to make reference in terms of the question about 
training farmers in reference to fighting fires. I understand that 
the challenge that we have in SERM is that the majority of our 
activities in terms of forest firefighting happens in the northern 
forest fringe of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as you probably can appreciate, when SERM is busy 
fighting fires in northern Saskatchewan and part of southern 
Saskatchewan, it’s also the busy time of the year for farmers. So 
both of the resources of SERM and the farmers are stretched 
very thin, to try and look at training farmers in reference to 
fighting fires on the farm, if it’s for different purposes the 
farmers need to have training on. 
 
We have had some examples in terms of certain individuals 
doing some work with the farm community. And there aren’t 
many, I’ll certainly admit that. But what we do provide as 
SERM is we provide some technical advice in terms of some of 
the behaviours of fire, and we also issue permits with the 
farming community. 
 
And in one instance in terms of this individual that’s stationed 
around Love, Saskatchewan, he works with SERM. He’s also a 
farmer so he provides advice to different farmers as to how they 
can do that. So that’s some of the extra effort being undertaken 
by some of the SERM staff. 
 
And again, as I mentioned, it’s not a grand plan of any sort but 
there is a bit of support and advice as you go along. But clearly, 
when you have the farmers’ busy time and SERM’s busy time, 
that the opportunity for training is certainly not there. But what 
we will say that if you’re in Love, and you’re a farmer, then 
certainly there is some help there as well. 
 
(1630) 



May 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1173 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, are there certain performance standards that have been 
developed and are applied with respect to the training and 
requirements that would need to be met in order for a person to 
be determined as a qualified firefighter, and to be able to be put 
in some of these very high-risk situations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The 
obvious answer is yes, we have very specific standards and 
mandatory training programs for the forest firefighters. The first 
rule here is that you have to be physically fit, so I obviously 
wouldn’t be a forest firefighter for sure. 
 
But some of the other things that they do, it includes helicopter 
safety, occupational health and safety, first aid, and that’s just 
your basic first aid. You also have to understand how fire acts; 
behaviour of fire is also very important. And as well if there’s 
other people out there that have certain proficiency and 
efficiency levels, then SERM also works with these individuals 
to give them some greater training for some greater opportunity 
within the forest firefighting program. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, the last time that we met we talked very briefly about 
24-hour firefighting. And I was wondering if perhaps if you 
could just expand a bit and indicate to me what parts of the 
firefighting operation are in fact 24 hour? I understand from our 
previous conversation that there are very severe limitations in 
terms of the individuals and their ability to be able to fight fires 
at night. But are there any specific parts of the operation that are 
run on a 24-hour-a-day basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I just wanted to point out that the 24-hour exercise is 
basically only limited to equipment and to kind of evaluate 
what’s happened with the fire. 
 
The only thing that we’ll not do is we’ll not put men on the fire 
line at night. There’s obvious reasons for that. However, heavy 
equipment, and I stress some of the Cat lines that we sometimes 
build to fight fires, management certainly sits around after all 
the crews are back in camp, and they begin to decide what 
they’re going to do the next day. So some of that work 
continues on. 
 
We continue with the lightning and the weather watch to make 
sure that there isn’t any drastic changes in the weather. And all 
that of course impacts how you’re going to fight fire the 
following day. 
 
And to point out that the peak season for firefighting is usually 
at the end of June. And as you know, at the end of June there is 
light sometimes as early as 2:30 in the morning, and sometimes 
as late as 10 o’clock at night. So the night fighting problem isn’t 
so apparent at that time. But clearly the intent here is to not stop 
fighting fires 24 hours, but to make sure that the men, the men 
are not out on the fire line at night. That’s our primary concern. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, can you tell me how much money the department has 
spent to date on technology such an infrared equipment? And is 
there any . . . are there any anticipated expenditures in this 
coming budget for any of those kinds of technologies? 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Deputy Chair, I just wanted 
to point out in terms of the infrared scans, we do use them. I 
think we have approximately 12 of them. But we don’t have the 
exact costs of them; but we will certainly forward that 
information to you very, very quickly. It will not happen by 
Monday. But to assure you that we do use this particular type of 
equipment and we will forward all those costs to you as quickly 
as we can. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I 
guess after having listened to the last number of questions, I am 
a little bit puzzled because it appears that the department is 
spending a significant amount of time and money on training. 
They have availed themselves of different types of technologies 
that are available for fighting fires at night. 
 
And I guess my question is, with that kind of investment . . . 
And I know that your department has received over the years a 
number of different representations that appear to prove that 
night firefighting can be very, very effective, particularly with 
the use of infrared technologies, that sort of thing. 
 
It’s interesting to note that a firefighter was quoted not too long 
ago as saying, after we’ve got the fire out then they come along 
and tell us it’s out; because while the money has been spent on 
the technology and on a lot of the other areas, there is a 
reluctance or an inability to somehow use more effectively this 
equipment and to find a way of putting people out on the fire 
line sometimes when they can be the most effective. 
 
As I understand it, a lot of very successful mop-up operations 
with fires are done at night in other parts of North America and 
this can be very, very cost-effective in the long term. 
 
And perhaps the minister could indicate to me why it is that 
we’re putting this much investment into all of these areas and 
yet we seem to be staying away from what would appear to be a 
very obvious and effective way of fighting fires. And there are 
some schools of thought out there that it could also save the 
province millions of dollars if we adopted a 24-hour firefighting 
system in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. And I guess to respond to the question, I want to go back 
a number of years ago for the member. Being from northern 
Saskatchewan, as you can appreciate, I was at times trying to 
get into forest firefighting when I was younger, because 
obviously it does pay some of the bills as a young guy growing 
up in the North and they take practically anybody at that time. 
So I was certainly one that went forward to sign up. 
 
And the guy that was there at that time was just starting off in 
his career. And when I walked in there and I said — all 140 
pounds of me — saying that I want to be a firefighter, he looked 
up and down at me and said, at best you’re a commissary man. 
And he did take me. 
 
Now years later he’s still working there, and I go visit him and I 
say, hello, I’m your minister. So I think what I’m trying to point 
out there is that these guys can make very, very quick 
assessments as to what they’re able to do in forest firefighting. 
And I think basically as a minister, we are very, very proud of 
the work that’s being done out there. 



1174 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2000 

There are 50 different ways that people will tell you to fight a 
fire. What I say to you today is that number one, safety is the 
issue, first of all, for all the forest firefighters out there. And 
people are very, very well trained to make very quick 
assessments as to how to fight fires in northern Saskatchewan. 
And you’re right — there’s tons of ideas out there on how to 
improve that and we’re always looking for new ideas and new 
concepts. 
 
However, the underlying theme in terms of our success as a 
province in relation to fighting fires in northern Saskatchewan, 
and the rest of the province for that fact, is the stats. And we 
indicate, you compare Saskatchewan with Alberta and 
Manitoba and you will see that the investment that we have 
made in technologies and being prepared for the fire season and 
trusting the instincts of people that have been there for 20 years, 
30 years, and really putting a lot of emphasis on things like 
early warning systems, like new towers, that indeed it is paying 
off. 
 
And is there better ways of fighting fire? Obviously there is, 
and all I can say at this stage of the game is that the stats will 
certainly speak for themselves. We’re always looking at new 
concepts. We’re always open to that. But clearly, safety is a 
concern in terms of fighting fire at night. 
 
And I’m sure that throughout time the people that are involved 
with the firefighting program have heard tons of ideas and they 
have responded to them only to come back to say, well, that 
didn’t work out so well; this system is still the proven system. 
 
So quite frankly, I think overall the bottom line is the number of 
fires in Saskatchewan, the numbers of successful fights that we 
have had against fires. And clearly I think it’s a credit to people 
within SERM that have the task — and the rough task, the 
tough task — of protecting our forest and certainly fighting 
these fires. 
 
So I think overall that, as Minister of SERM, we’re very proud 
of the effort and we’ll continue seeking advice and input from 
all walks of life on how we can improve this very, very 
important service. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Minister, so then am I to assume 
from that then that there is no consideration being given at this 
point to establishing any kind of a 24-hour operation even with 
respect to some very specific parts of firefighting such as 
mop-up operations, smaller, perhaps more isolated or just 
starting kinds of fires? Is there no consideration then being 
given to expanding any kind of 24-hour component to any of 
those at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — As I pointed out earlier, we are looking 
at those options. The only thing that we are having difficulty 
with is in terms of putting men out in the safety line. But as I 
mentioned, the heavy equipment, monitoring the weather, 
designing an attack strategy for the next day, certainly working 
with all kinds of different options that are available. 
 
The only thing that we will not do in reference to the 24 
exercise is put men out on the fire line. All other activity that 
you have mentioned, we undertake now and we’re looking at 
ways to improve it. 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I’d like to move just very briefly, if I could, to land 
use planning. SERM is conducting a number of land use plans 
in northern Saskatchewan, some of these at a great expense to 
the taxpayer. 
 
The Pasquia-Porcupine land use plan was the first. And as I 
understand it, the plans are there to balance the uses of the 
forest and to reduce conflict amongst users. Public meetings, 
some of which I have attended in previous capacities, and 
advisory committees provide input, raise concerns. And that 
was done in the example of the Porcupine-Pasquia plan to the 
degree that the result was something over 90 excellent 
recommendations coming from individuals and communities 
who were participating. 
 
(1645) 
 
But to date, it seems that very few of the recommendations that 
benefit the forest environment or the public that participated in 
these have been implemented. And yet the department is 
continuing to proceed with these land use plans prior to issuing 
the forest management licences. There, I think, is some 
cynicism developing out there particularly in light of some of 
these recommendations not having been adopted, that these are 
perhaps little more than window dressing. 
 
And I guess my question I’d like to start with is how much 
money has been spent on the development of these land use 
plans, and how much money is it anticipated will be spent on 
the further development of land use plans in the coming 
budget? Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just 
want to point out that SERM has a very, very difficult task in 
managing and balancing all the different interests that the 
Saskatchewan people have in relation to the land mass of this 
great province. 
 
We actually administer approximately 60 per cent of the land 
mass of the province of Saskatchewan. And you incorporate 
into that 60 per cent the different demands from all the different 
interests, special interests, that people want to have access to 
land. And land is always, always a tough thing to deal with. 
 
And the reason why I point that out is that there has been some 
incredible work being done by a lot of staff members and some 
incredible people. Some of them are here today. And really, it’s 
been a balancing act that has been going on for many, many 
years. 
 
So in saying that we administer 60 per cent of the land mass in 
the province, you can almost guarantee that there’s going to be 
some groups that will not be happy and some that will certainly 
be happy. 
 
In terms of the Pasquia-Porcupine Plains or Pasquia-Porcupine 
land use planning, the 90 or so recommendations that you spoke 
about, they are now the basis of the forest management 
agreement with SaskFor MacMillan and that was issued in 
May, 1999. And we will forward to you the recommendations 
and the response to the 90 or so issues that we raised with 
SaskFor. 



May 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1175 

So I think in relation to the comment that you had, we will 
forward those across to you, we will forward the response. And 
to also indicate to you that it’s a great day in the province of 
Saskatchewan when you can incorporate 90 or so of the 
recommendations into an FMA (forest management agreement) 
in co-operation with all the different interest groups and in 
concert with some of the forestry companies that we are 
working with. 
 
So really it’s a tremendous accomplishment, and SERM, as 
always, will be very diligent in trying to make sure we have that 
balance that we speak about and to make sure we try and 
involve as many Saskatchewan residents as we can in the whole 
land use of this province. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like to 
ask the minister and I guess thank the minister for his offer to 
forward that information to me. Because the sense that I’m 
getting in talking to a lot of people who are familiar with this 
process, and in a lot of cases more familiar with it than I am, the 
indication I’m getting is that they don’t feel that they’re actually 
has been a lot of effort put into the implementation of, as we 
indicated, what are a very large number of recommendations. 
 
But what is SERM’s plans in terms of implementing all of those 
recommendations? And I know the minister indicated that some 
of them, and perhaps the majority of them, formed the bases of 
the FMA (forest management agreement) at this point. 
 
But there were some pretty critical recommendations there that 
will have some tremendous impact, particularly on that 
Pasquia-Porcupine forest area. And I would like to get an 
indication from the minister as to what he feels the time frame 
for complete implementation will be and what the cost 
associated with complete implementation would be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I just want to point out that we have an ongoing advisory 
committee of local people in reference to the Pasquia-Porcupine 
land use plan. So the question: is there a time line? The obvious 
answer is no. We continue consulting and working with people. 
 
And what I want to say is that it’s very, very important that as 
SERM we understand that forest development is going to 
happen throughout the province of Saskatchewan. We want to 
work alongside the forestry companies to make sure that they 
have — I don’t want to use the word unfettered — but they 
certainly have the unfettered access to some of the . . . some of 
the forest resource that’s out there. 
 
And in doing that we have to make sure we take into account 
some of the other users. And I’ll get into detail as to some of the 
special interest groups that we speak about. 
 
But in terms of the forest itself, the advisory committee of local 
people is certainly advising us on some of the recreational use 
of that particular area, some of the outfitting use — which is an 
exciting industry — some of the ecotourism opportunities 
associated with the Pasquia-Porcupine area, some of the 
Aboriginal people that use the area. So there’s, there’s lists that 
can go on and on and on. And I would submit to you that 
perhaps this list is 20 or 30 long. 
 

So the clear objective here of SERM is to try and work with that 
local advisory committee in balancing all the interests 
associated with that particular chunk of land, so that the forestry 
companies can operate in coexistence of them. And that’s an 
incredibly challenging job as you can appreciate. 
 
So we’re not taking any of the recommendations lightly. Some 
of them have been incorporated as I mentioned through the 
FMAs; others will be incorporated through this advisory 
committee. But as I mentioned before, we are bound and 
determined and will work very hard and exhaust all avenues to 
make sure as many of the users in that particular area have 
access and have a say as to how things are going to operate in 
the future. 
 
Now can we make 100 per cent of the people happy? Obviously 
we can’t. But we’ll do our very best to alleviate some of their 
concerns and work with their interests so that we can achieve 
that balance that I speak so often about. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, as the time is running short, perhaps we can revisit 
some of the issues around this a little later. But if I could move 
specifically to the forest management plan just for a second. I 
note that a clause in the forest management plan, the Pasquia 
forest management plan, goes as follows: 
 

The fundamental intent of this plan is to enhance the social 
and economic well-being of the people in the communities. 
 

And then further: 
 

That this should be reflected in all arrangements and 
dealings between the partnership and its contractors and 
subcontractors. 
 

Now in light of that, there have been some very negative 
developments particularly in the Hudson Bay area, relating to 
contractors over the course of the last number of months. 
 
Weyerhaeuser has advised that at least 14 and perhaps even 
more contractors, some of them with over 20 years of logging 
experience in this area, that they’ve only got one year left on 
their contract. There are others that have at least five. 
 
The total employees for these small contracts, 12 contractors, is 
well in excess of 100 employees. If these contractors are forced 
out of business, they are going to be probably bankrupt, but the 
other thing is their recovery is going to be very difficult as well. 
Most of these are dealing with older, smaller equipment, and in 
order to try and get that . . . getting any returns back from that 
on the market, it’s going to be very, very difficult. 
 
So under the agreement that was signed May 14 of 1999, the 
company did agree to treat these contractors as fairly and 
honestly as they could. And in some cases there are going to be 
some pretty devastating consequences. So one of the contractors 
that is affected here just very recently invested over a quarter of 
a million dollars in equipment, and that could all end up being 
lost. 
 
Could you, Mr. Minister, indicate to me: will the department be 
looking at this situation? And given the clause in terms of social 



1176 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2000 

economic benefit to the community, how will they be 
interpreting what Weyerhaeuser is doing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just to 
point out that it’s often very sad to hear when people are losing 
their jobs. And it’s something that we don’t want to see happen 
often. 
 
What I will say is that from the environmental prospective in 
reference to SaskFor, we are always diligent in making sure that 
SERM does indeed watch from the environmental prospective 
that they’re harvesting these forests in the proper fashion. 
 
Secondly is that we are working with, you know, with the 
Weyerhaeuser group to make sure that some of these impacts 
are certainly not drastic and that they’re . . . are looking at the 
whole package now. 
 
But I will say is that, as always, from the economic point of 
view, that it’s always a choice of the companies that are 
operating in this area to look at these issues. We strongly 
encourage them to minimize some of the layoffs, and it’s 
always a sad day in Saskatchewan to see that happen. 
 
But I can assure you that we’ll do all we can from the 
environmental protection point of view to make sure it’s done 
properly and to strongly encourage companies to minimize job 
losses. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 
 
 


