





























































Hansard: June 20, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2001 
 June 20, 2000 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 71 — The Health Districts Amendment Act, 2000 
 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1 I’ll invite the Hon. 
Minister of Health to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — To my right is Patrick Fafard, who is 
the head of policy and planning in the Department of Health. 
And immediately behind me is Rick Hischebett, who is our 
lawyer from the Department of Justice, civil law branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Madam Minister, 
and welcome to your officials. There are some concerns on 
behalf of the official opposition that we have regarding this Bill 
that is dealing with the two northern health districts that were 
never formally recognized in legislation. I guess we’re 
wondering how could something like this have happened? How 
can health districts in the North have been excluded in the 
legislation originally? And why did it take the government this 
long to bring these amendments forward? 
 
Obviously from both an administrative and legal perspective 
there is much more at stake here than just recognizing that an 
error has occurred. There’s also the potential impact that the 
boards’ decisions would have had on health care delivery in 
these areas and what has happened in the interim. 
 
Recently there have been events that have happened 
surrounding the Uranium City Hospital board. They have 
indicated the importance of having a well-defined set of 
regulations in place that allow for proper legal and financial 
operations of a health district. 
 
We now know that a forensic audit is currently being conducted 
into the Uranium City Hospital board. The auditors found that 
there were not adequate rules and procedures in place to 
safeguard and control assets. The auditor also found that excess 
payments are being paid to employees. Nurses and support staff 
are being paid upwards of $400 a day and being flown in to 
work in the Uranium health . . . in the hospital. I don’t know if 
. . . I’m not sure if it’s a hospital or a health centre. 
 
And in one case, a worker was paid for over 600 hours of 
overtime when there was adequate staffing in place at the time, 
and I guess this raises huge questions in our mind and in the 
public’s mind, and we wonder who was minding the store. Who 
was looking after things at this time and why did it take so long 
for this government to react? If you can answer that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — First of all, there are 32 health districts 
in the province of Saskatchewan, and when we set up the health 
districts, initially there were 30 districts. And so when we 
brought in the legislation regarding The Health Districts Act, 
there were 30 districts. The two other districts came when 
Keewatin Yathe and Mamawetan were created, and they were 
created some time after the initial 30 districts were put in place. 
The people in the North wanted time to work on what health 

districts would look like in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
To the member, I would also indicate that Uranium City is not 
part of either of the two northern health districts. It is still a 
hospital that is run by a separate board. And once the hospital at 
Stony Rapids is completed, there will be the Stony Rapids 
authority, which really is a First Nations authority. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, thank you for clarifying that. 
So Uranium City Hospital board is not part of these new health 
districts. So what is it under? Is it under . . . I mean who 
controls it? Why is it not part of the new districts in the North? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is that 
Mamawetan and Keewatin Yathe are two health districts that go 
up the sides of the province. Once the facility at Stony Rapids is 
in place, there will be the Athabasca Basin authority. 
 
Right now Uranium City obviously is located in that part of the 
province, but there is not a health district for that part of the 
province because we’re waiting for the Stony Rapids’ facility to 
be put in place. Once it’s put in place, there will be the 
Athabasca Basin authority. 
 
Right now the Uranium City Hospital is appointed. The 
members of the board are appointed on the recommendations of 
members of the community. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, it’s my understanding that 
health districts are formed, and then those things within those 
health districts become part of it. Why would we wait for a 
hospital to be built in order to form an authority? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Basically your question is why do we 
do the Athabasca region differently than we have in other parts 
of Saskatchewan? Basically many of the people in that part of 
Saskatchewan come under the jurisdiction of the federal 
government, so there are tripartite agreements between the 
federal government, the province, and First Nations 
communities in that region. 
 
And secondly the people in that region wanted time, as the 
people in the Mamawetan and the Keewatin Yathe health 
district, they wanted time to develop their regional authority. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, Madam Minister, I guess if we wanted to 
look at it from that point of view, the people in all of 
Saskatchewan wanted time to decide how they wanted it to look 
in their own areas. Many people in this province were very 
upset when health districts were formed and what happened to 
their local dollars that they had raised over the years, what 
happened to the services that they had. They were not given the 
same privilege that you’re allotting to these people to say, we 
want to do it over time. 
 
This happened some eight or nine years ago, and these people 
are still being given this advantage of having the say in what’s 
going to happen in their area; whereas the rest of the people in 
the province were stripped of their services, were stripped of 
things out of their hospitals, and told they had no option but to 
turn the money over to the local health district and that they 
were under their authority. I would like to know why there was 



2002 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

this discrepancy. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Before the minister answers, I just wish 
to remind both members that all questions and answers are to be 
directed through the Chair, and I ask for the co-operation of 
both members. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. The reason why is because 
we have First Nations jurisdiction where there is also federal 
government involvement. That is not the case for other parts of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Just to remind the member that the two northern health districts 
that are functioning that are the basis of the amendments to The 
Health Districts Act were put in place in 1997. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you tell 
me then if the Authority is looking after the Uranium City 
Hospital? Is that not correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The Uranium City Hospital, as I said 
earlier, is an appointed board, upon the recommendation of the 
community of Uranium City. They make recommendations to 
the government as to who should be appointed to the board, and 
it is a community-run board. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Chair, Madam Minister. Then in light of that, 
who is responsible for the health care services in the rest of the 
area that is above the two health districts that we are now 
talking about? Who is in charge of the rest of the area, other 
than the actual Uranium City Hospital? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The Athabasca Health Authority is 
presently in transition. As I said earlier, there are First Nations 
people that live in that very far northern part of Saskatchewan. 
Mamawetan provides some services to the Athabasca Health 
Authority, as well as the Department of Health has some 
involvement, as does Health Canada have some involvement in 
that region of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is the region at the very far northern part of Saskatchewan. 
It goes across the entire province. And Mamawetan and 
Keewatin Yathe are basically divide . . . they are two districts 
that divide the more southern northern part of Saskatchewan. 
And they take up the rest of the jurisdiction, and then we have 
districts like North-East, Northwest, P.A. (Prince Albert) that 
begin the transition to southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, then who is 
ultimately responsible for this district? You’ve indicated that 
there’s three levels of government involved. Who is the 
ultimate authority? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. The Athabasca Authority is a 
non-profit corporation. It is made up of communities and First 
Nations people. There will be only one health facility in that 
region as well as a number of community programs or services. 
That’s point number one. 
 
Uranium City is presently governed by a community board, so 
members of the community recommend it to the government 
who should be appointed to that board at the Uranium City 
Hospital. It is not part of the Athabasca Authority. It is not part 

of Mamawetan, and it’s not part of Keewatin Yathe. It is a 
separate board. We’re waiting for the hospital at Stony Rapids 
to be constructed. Once it’s constructed, it is likely that the 
facility at Uranium City will become a primary health centre. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, I would still like 
you to tell us who has the ultimate authority for this area above 
these two districts — this whole part of the North other than 
Uranium City, then. If Uranium City Hospital has its own board 
who they are accountable to, who is responsible for the rest of 
the area? 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The Athabasca Health Authority is a 
non-profit corporation. It presently delivers . . . it enters into 
arrangements with Mamawetan to deliver services. So it’s not 
delivering services at present itself. It has entered into a 
partnership with Mamawetan to deliver services to some very 
isolated communities in the North. And many of these 
communities are First Nations communities. That’s point 
number one. 
 
Point number two, Uranium City is not part of the Athabasca 
Health Authority. It still has a hospital board that, as a result of 
recommendations from the community, is an appointed board. 
The Uranium City Hospital comes under the jurisdiction of the 
Provincial Auditor. And that is why the Provincial Auditor has 
reported on Uranium City. 
 
Now I would like to go into details about the situation at 
Uranium City, but this is a file that has been turned over to the 
Department of Justice at this time. And therefore it would be 
inappropriate for me to go into any kind of detail because it 
could compromise the situation. So I hope the member 
understands that. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
Madam Minister, could you just update us on the status of the 
Stony Rapids hospital. It’s my understanding that this project 
has been on the books for a long time. It was suppose to 
actually be completed in October of 1998. 
 
Could you please tell the Assembly if this project is even 
underway? And if not, when it’s going to be underway, and 
when’s the planned date of completion? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’re just in the process of finalizing 
the agreement with the federal government, the provincial 
government, and the Athabasca Authority. There is a site; the 
plans are ready; it’s just a matter of working out some 
jurisdictional detail because there are First Nations, Health 
Canada, and the province involved. 
 
It’s a matter of making sure that we have an agreement in place 
that will serve people in the North well. There is federal money 
involved in this project along with provincial money and that’s 
why there’s a tripartite agreement. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, and Madam Minister, could you 
please tell us why the delay when this was slated to be opened 
almost two years ago? Could you tell us why it’s been this 
delay? 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2003 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This is rather a complicated process 
because there is a health facility, a hospital, that’s being built on 
reserve land. The province will be providing operating funds 
and there’s a need to be respectful of various jurisdictional 
questions. 
 
And one of the things that I’ve come to understand that when 
you’re trying to respect First Nations people, it’s important that 
First Nations people and the province and the federal 
government be allowed to work through these issues so that we 
don’t have any misunderstandings. So that it can be a 
co-operative, collaborative effort. 
 
And some of these jurisdictional issues have taken time to work 
their way through. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister, I have no further 
questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Department of Health 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the hon. 
Minister of Health to introduce her new officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Sitting beside me is Eileen Kendel of 
finance and management services branch. Behind me is Pat 
Melia, medical services plan. And to my left is Rick Hischebett 
of Justice, a lawyer, civil law branch. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Madam Minister, 
and I again welcome your officials. And I’d like to extend my 
thanks to those that were involved in the last Bill, which I failed 
to do. 
 
Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, I would like to speak for a few 
moments on Bill No. 10. In a second reading speech this Bill 
was said to be largely housekeeping in nature and it was 
necessary to ensure continued health care services for residents 
of the province, particularly for those that are needing treatment 
in other provinces or territories. Is that correct, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Basically this is a housekeeping 
amendment in order to allow for reciprocal billing between 
various provinces and territories and our province. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, and Madam Minister, why was it 
necessary for this housekeeping work to be done? What is 
actually being changed from what the legislation originally 
said? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. Subsection 14.1(2) of The 

Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act is currently the authority to 
refund these recoveries. However this Act will be appealed . . . 
or repealed when section 7 of the miscellaneous statutes repeal 
Regulatory Reform Act, 1997 is proclaimed, and when the Act 
is repealed the authority to refund the recoveries will no longer 
exist and that’s why we need an amendment to The Department 
of Health Act. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, so then my 
understanding is that you are eliminating one Bill and so you 
are including what it did before and putting it in to this new 
Bill. Is that correct, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You’re correct. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, given the fact that two-thirds 
of our health districts are currently in deficit situation, and that 
there doesn’t seem to be any additional funding available to 
help them cover these deficits, could you please verify for me 
that the amendments set forth in this Bill will not add to their 
costs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It will not add to their cost. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, did health districts 
and your department see an increase in the number of reciprocal 
agreements that were utilized last year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think what the member needs to know 
is that these are reciprocal agreements between provinces when 
patients or citizens from our province go to another province for 
health services, or patients from another province come to our 
province for health services. It’s interesting . . . I know that the 
members opposite have made a great deal about the numbers of 
citizens from our province that are going to Alberta. I had the 
Department of Health go back, I believe 10 years, and what’s 
interesting is that there has basically been no change in the 
numbers of citizens from our province going to Alberta, for 
instance. 
 
And in fact when the previous government was in place in 
1990, the numbers of people going from Saskatchewan to 
Alberta were about the same. What is interesting, however, is 
that there has been a substantial increase in the number of 
patients or citizens from Manitoba coming to our province, and 
there has been a significant change from about 5,000 patients 
per year in that 10-year period. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister. Well, Madam 
Minister, I find it very encouraging, I guess, that the amount of 
people that are going to another province and actually having it 
paid for has not increased. But I think it would be very interesting 
to find out how many people in this province are going to Alberta, 
Manitoba, and the United States and are paying their own way 
because they cannot access health care in Saskatchewan. And so 
they have made the decision rather than not to receive care at all, 
they are going elsewhere for the betterment of their health and 
many times because of their very life that they are fighting for, and 
they have to make that decision. They’ve already paid taxes in this 
province and they were ensured by this government that they 
would have health care when they needed it and now they do not 
receive that. So they have to make the decision to go elsewhere in 
order to receive timely health care. 



2004 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

Madam Minister, have there been problems with you receiving 
payment for people that are coming into our province and 
accessing health care, and have you a problem with receiving 
payment from other jurisdictions? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There is no issue at all with provinces 
paying our province. When their citizens receive services in our 
province then obviously they’re billed. Other provinces and 
territories are billed and there has been no difficulty whatsoever. 
 
I do want to respond to the member’s comments about citizens in 
our province having to leave the province. What is very 
interesting, and that’s why I wanted to put this on the record, 
because I noticed a headline in the P.A. newspaper, where it 
talked about the Leader of the Opposition saying thousands of 
people are fleeing Saskatchewan to Alberta for health services. 
 
What I want to say to the member is that when we answered 
that motion for return, what we should have really done was 
indicate what has happened in this province in the last 10 years 
in terms of citizens leaving our province to go to Alberta. 
 
And what has happened is there’s been no change. There’s been 
no change. The numbers of people leaving our province for 
health services in Alberta are about the same today as they were 
in 1990-1991. 
 
What is interesting . . . and what is interesting is there has been 
a change in the number of citizens coming from Manitoba to 
our province for health services. And what has . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, no, the member says that what kind of 
services do they have in Manitoba. What we need to know, 
Member, is that . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order, order, order. Order. Order! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. What I would say to the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers that was shouting from his 
chair is that if you look at the data, the data is from 1990-91 to 
’99-2000. The NDP (New Democratic Party) government was 
not elected until this past fall. And if you look at the data, it was 
under the auspices of the Filmon government which was a 
Conservative government in Manitoba. 
 
And what I was saying was that there’s been a significant 
increase in the number of citizens from Manitoba coming to our 
province. And I would say this, that we have a facility in the 
Moosomin area that Manitoba people use, and we also have a 
facility in the Yorkton area that Manitoba people use. 
 
So there has . . . the one interesting fact — and it is a fact — is 
that there’s been basically no change in our people going to 
Alberta. There’s has been a change in the numbers of people 
coming from Manitoba into Saskatchewan under a Conservative 
government. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, and Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I have to take your word for it that there is not an 
increase in the amount of people that are being paid for . . . to 
go elsewhere for health care. But there are a significant increase 
in people that are taking it upon themselves to spend the money 

out of their own pocket to go for health care instead of waiting. 
 
They’re going every day to Minot for an MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging). They’re going to Edmonton, to Calgary for 
CAT scans (computerized axial tomography) and MRIs because 
they cannot get them in the province of Saskatchewan. That is 
the issue. 
 
I would like to ask you, Madam Minister, how is it affecting the 
care received by people that are residents of Saskatchewan 
when we are bringing people in in increasing numbers from the 
province of Manitoba to access care, and who gets priority? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In this country we have this Act that’s 
called the Canada Health Act which is the principle, a document 
that outlines the principles of Canada’s national health system. 
 
And I know the member may find this hard to believe, but this 
government subscribes to those principles which means that it 
doesn’t matter where you live in this country; you should have 
access to health services. What I can say to the member is that 
people on the Alberta . . . or Manitoba border have access to our 
services and vice versa. And people on the Alberta border have 
access to our services and vice versa. 
 
What I will also say to the member is the number of citizens 
accessing our services from Alberta have basically not changed 
as well, and that’s called portability. It doesn’t matter where 
you live; you can have access to services in this province and 
vice versa. And that is one of the principles of the Canada 
Health Act which I know her party refers to as mindless 
slogans, but which this coalition government adheres to. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, and Madam Minister. We can talk 
about portability all we want, but what we’ve come to know in 
Saskatchewan is that we have to go elsewhere to get our health 
care. We would like to know on this side of the House . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. I . . . order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, in 
Saskatchewan the people would like to know if they have a 
priority and if their name is on the list above those from other 
provinces. 
 
Many times I have phoned health . . . doctors’ offices and asked 
about when a client was going to be able to get in for health 
services. And they have been told — the clients — the patients 
have been told well, you’re on the urgent list. 
 
But upon phoning the doctor’s office, I find out that there’s an 
urgent A list and there’s an urgent B list. And the people are 
never told this. They think because they’re on the urgent list 
that somehow they’re going to have a priority. That is simply 
not the case. 
 
And when you talk to the doctors, they say I’m sorry, I am only 
allocated so many hours of operating time so I have no option. I 
have to do this. 
 
Now I would like you to tell me how you determine if a patient 
is coming from Manitoba or Alberta, or wherever else, how 
they are fit on the list of urgent or urgent A or B. 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2005 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — When I talk about health services, I’m 
not only talking about access to acute care services, but I’m also 
talking about access to physician’s services, whether it’s 
general practitioner or whether it’s a specialist. 
 
What I can say to the member is that . . . and this is not 
something that’s peculiar to Saskatchewan. In this country we 
have various definitions for what is considered urgent, emergent 
and elective. And there is this initiative called the Western 
Canadian wait list initiative on certain surgical procedures 
where the provinces are trying to align their definitions in terms 
of urgent, emergent, and elective in some categories of surgery. 
 
But I can also tell the member is that if you look at the numbers 
of surgeries that we perform in this province, and you compare 
it to surgeries performed in other provinces, Saskatchewan on a 
per capita basis ranks number one or two in this country. Which 
means that we have an extraordinarily efficient health system, 
and that we are putting out more surgeries on a per thousand 
basis than any other place in this country. When you come with 
13 out of 16 procedures, and you’re ranked at the top in the 
country, that means you’re doing a good job. 
 
And that is through the CIHI (Canadian Institute of Health 
Information) data not some antidotal evidence. This is CIHI, the 
Canadian health information system. 
 
But I can also say to the member . . . and what was so 
extraordinary about the waiting list initiative where we 
increased the numbers of surgeries in this province over the 
year before, that did not stop the waiting list. And what the 
member needs to know is that we do not yet have clinical 
practice guidelines around many of the procedures that are 
provided for in our hospitals or in our acute care settings. And 
this is something that all ministers of Health in this country are 
grappling with. 
 
Now there are some provinces like British Columbia — and this 
is where Ken Fyke will be so important — there are some 
provinces like British Columbia that have been able to put 
clinical practice guidelines around various procedures, surgical 
procedures. And that has helped them manage their wait list. 
 
Because we know that there are differences between physicians 
and how they deal with those wait lists in various parts of the 
country and in various parts of the province. And that’s why we 
have a surgical access committee that is looking at this very 
question. 
 
Now the other point that the member raises, she says that 
people are leaving this province to get access to CAT scans and 
MRIs. What I can tell the member is that we have seen a 
significant increase in the number of CT (computerized 
tomography) scans in this province. In fact, year over year, 
we’ve seen about an 8,000 increase in CT services. And we 
now have a mobile CT going between the city of Moose Jaw 
and the city of Swift Current in order to allow accessibility, 
particularly for those folks in the southwest part of 
Saskatchewan, and it seems to be working quite well. 
 
As well, I can tell the member that we have tripled the numbers 
of MRIs in this province since the member from Eastview and 
myself have become the ministers of Health, and that has 

significantly increased the numbers of MRIs in this province. In 
fact they’ve grown by 70 per cent. 
 
My point is that we can have all the MRIs in the world, we can 
have all the CT scans in the world, we can have all the 
diagnostic equipment in the world. The real issue is demand, 
demand for the service. And this is why we have a health 
commission that is looking at health services in this province, 
how we fund those health services, how we deliver those health 
services to ensure the long-term sustainability of health care — 
publicly funded, publicly administered health care. 
 
Now the member over there can talk doomy and gloomy about 
Canada’s publicly funded health system. And I think that the 
member has put it on the record that she supports private health 
care. And what I say to people like herself that day after day are 
critical of a publicly funded and administered health care 
system, what they are trying to do is to undermine it, undermine 
the public’s confidence so we will go to two-tiered health in this 
country. Well I can say to the member that the people on this 
side of the House are committed — committed to what makes 
Canadians different than their American cousins, and that is 
Canada’s health system which is the best in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair . . . Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, you 
can throw all the slurs that you want at me and you think you’re 
hurting me in some way. You’re not. I’m doing this because of 
the people in Saskatchewan that are out there that are waiting 
for surgery, are waiting for tests and are put on lists and have 
nowhere to go. There is absolutely no solution . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Now . . . Order, order. Will the 
member for Athabasca come to order. Now committee 
members, it is quite obvious that feelings are very high on this 
issue and that is quite proper for feelings to be high on both 
sides. I cut the member for Weyburn off. The member did not 
realize it and I’m going to ask her to repeat, and I’m going to 
. . . Order, order. Order! Order. 
 
And I just wish to remind all members that when I cannot . . . 
when the Chair cannot hear either the minister answering or the 
member either making a statement or asking a question, I will 
take over with the light. And I just wish to remind all members 
that simply means, by what we’re doing, that the night goes on 
and on and on. And so I’m really in your hands, collectively. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, and Madam Minister, I would just 
like to reiterate that our care on this side of the House is for the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan who are tired of 
waiting for access to services, whether it be for surgery, 
whether it be for tests — whatever. They are tired of a 
government that says, sorry, we don’t want to look at any other 
solution; as long as we have medicare, we’re all just fine. 
 
It doesn’t have to mean anything to anybody. It doesn’t matter 
if you pay your taxes and you were promised . . . you’ve been 
promised since the days of Tommy Douglas that you would 
have free health care in this country and you would have it 
when you need it. 



2006 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

Well, I’m sorry; today in this province, we keep paying but we 
do not have the care when we need it. And that’s why people 
are lining up, and that’s why people are dying in this province, 
waiting for health care. And this government sits there and says, 
it’s okay. 
 
And I would like to put on the record and clarify for what the 
members opposite want to keep quoting from what I said in the 
Weyburn Review. We have the Premier that has quoted it. We 
have the deputy minister, we have the Minister of Health, want 
to quote what I said. Well I will read to you from the Weyburn 
Review because I took it upon myself to look this up. I finally 
thought, I’m going to find out what I actually said that was so 
terrible. 
 

One option Bakken put forward during the course of her 
campaign was the privatization of health services. 
 
I think it should be an option. Why should we continue 
down the path we are when people are being driven out of 
the province to look for health care? Why are we not 
looking at having privatized care in Saskatchewan and 
keeping the money here if that’s what we’re going to do? 
 
If not, we need to find ways for people to have better 
access. It makes absolutely no sense to have people going 
out of the province for health care, and with them goes the 
money and the jobs. 
 

We can stop that by improving health care in this country and 
this province, but no, we don’t want to look at that; we don’t 
want to provide the service here. We would rather send the 
people out of this province and let the jobs and the money go 
somewhere else. 
 
We are not providing accessible health care in this province, 
and it’s time this government started facing up to the fact and 
deciding to do something about it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I really do have to respond to that. 
 
In 1962 in this province, which that member talked about . . . 
and that member represents Weyburn, the place that Tommy 
Douglas represented from 1944 to 1961. And what does that 
member who represents Tommy say and the people who voted 
for Tommy. What does she say? She says it’s time to have a 
two-tiered health system. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chair, I’m going to say this. In 1962 
the people of this province decided that they were going to have 
a publicly funded health system in this province. It meant that 
never again would people be denied access because they didn't 
have the change in their pocket to pay for it. 
 
And you know what? In 1967 and ’68, the Government of 
Canada, under the Liberals, decided to bring a national health 
care plan to this country. And so in this country, we have 
people who have access to health services — not on the basis of 
their ability to pay for it. 
 
And that member is promoting — and we just heard her say it 
— she is promoting private health care. She promotes the 
notion that is being put forward by Ralph Klein in Alberta. And 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, it is my view that the citizens of this 
province, in the next provincial election — and I’m glad she’s 
put it on the record — are going to reject that notion of 
privatized, two-tiered health care where people will have 
access, not on their basis of need but on their ability to pay. 
 
And that member said that people don’t have access to health 
care. Well I want to say to the member, what does it mean when 
4.7 million citizens or visits are made to a general practitioner 
in this province? I call that access to health care. What does it 
mean when 925,000 visits to a specialist? I call that access. Mr. 
Speaker, I call . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. I know the hon. member, the Minister of 
Health, is not finished. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What do we call 92,000 surgeries in 
this province? Not on the basis of getting into a private, surgical 
clinic in Alberta, but on the basis of getting in to surgical clinic 
in the hospitals paid for by the citizens of this province and 
administered by the citizens of this province — I call that 
access. 
 
What do we call 54,000 CAT scans? What do we call millions 
and millions of tests for blood and bacteria and viruses? I call 
that access. What do we call access to 9,200 long-term care 
beds and home care services, and every other kind of service 
you could imagine? I call that access. 
 
I have been, as has the Associate Minister of Health, I have 
been to countries, I have been to countries where they don’t 
have that kind of access. I have been to countries where middle 
income people are devastated by the private for-profit system. 
And I’ll just use the United States of America where middle 
class people like teachers and social workers and engineers and 
the middle class get wiped out because of a heart attack. And 
that does not happen in our province. 
 
And that’s what that member had . . . (inaudible) . . . And I have 
been to countries where the poor do not have access to decent 
water and decent sewage and decent health services, and they 
died prematurely in those countries. 
 
We have one of the highest ages in this world, and why is that? 
It’s because we have a publicly funded and publicly 
administered health system. These people over here would 
undermine that system. They would devastate that system. They 
want an American style of health care. And I can say to the 
members over there that we will fight you every step of the way 
— every house, every farm, every business in this province. We 
will fight you, and we will defeat you on that issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, well I think that 
we have already fought this issue in the last election and, 
believe me, the people of this province spoke loud and clear and 
then they spoke loud and clear in the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy when they said we want no more part of 
an NDP government . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order! Order. Order. I just wish at 
this time to invite all members that are not participating directly 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2007 

in these estimates to take your conversations outside of the 
Chamber so that we can get on with the business of the evening. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, you talk about Tommy 
Douglas and how he comes from the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. Well that was in 1962 when this was 
introduced and things have changed a lot since then, and it’s 
time that we address the issues of today and quit living in the 
past. 
 
We have been . . . many people . . . you talked about Tommy 
Douglas and how he brought in medicare so people would not 
be denied access to health care. Well today many people in this 
province are being denied access to health care. And it’s time 
you started to look around, and today, and see how that people 
that have the ability to pay are being treated differently than 
people that do not have the ability to pay. 
 
I have a lady in my constituency who could not get into Regina 
to have a test. She needed a CAT scan. She couldn’t . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . no, a CAT scan. She could not get in. 
So somehow through a relative of hers she got an appointment 
in Saskatoon, but the problem was that this lady did not have 
the funds to get from Weyburn to Saskatoon to access the care. 
 
And you tell me we don’t have two-tiered health care in this 
province? We do have two-tiered health care because it depends 
where you live and if you can access the care. And if you can’t 
access the care here, then you need to be able to go out of 
province or out of country, and the only way you can do that is 
if you have the funds that you can pay for it yourself. So we do 
have two-tiered health care in this province and it’s running 
rampant and it’s abundant and people are sick and tired of it. 
 
We also have two-tiered health care in the long-term care 
sector. You tell us we don’t have two-tiered health care. We 
have now almost 3,000 beds in long-term care that are privately 
run and privately funded. You tell me where those people 
would be if we did not have private home care beds in this 
province. Where would they be? Out on the street? 
 
And now you’re cutting home care further for people that need 
a little bit of home care so that they can stay in their homes. 
Where are those people supposed to go? We no longer have 
publicly funded level one and two health care . . . long-term 
care in this province. Where are those people supposed to go 
that cannot afford to pay to go into a private home care 
situation? 
 
But that’s okay, we won’t worry about those people. They’ll 
drop off the bottom somewhere and no one will ever hear from 
them. That’s your idea of access to health care in this province. 
So what we need to do is we need to start looking at the real 
issues and finding a solution instead of living in the past and 
pretending that everything is wonderful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — I have no further questions. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, obviously the member did 
not have a question, but I will say this. I will respond to her 
during Health estimates because I know people want to wrap 

this up. But I just can’t let that go because there is a thing called 
the Canada Health Act. It’s about hospitals, doctors, and nurses. 
And there have been many add-ons to health care in this 
country but it is not cost-shared by the federal government, but 
the member fails to recognize that point. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, I would like to thank you for 
this debate. I think it . . . this will not be the end of it, very 
enlightening, and I’d like to thank your officials for attending. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — Before I do the coming into force, committee 
members, I’m asking for your permission to revert to a House 
amendment on clause 1 which your Chairman, believe it or not, 
actually forgot to call . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I believe it. 
I believe it, too. Do we have permission to revert to the House 
amendment? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes I want to: 
 

Amend Clause 1 of the printed Bill by striking out “The 
Department of Health Amendment Act, 1999” and 
substituting “The Department of Health Amendment Act, 
2000”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 1 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee 
rise, report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I was still stuck here before 5 
o’clock, Mr. Chair, so I would ask for leave to withdraw that. 
 
The Chair: — The Government Deputy House Leader has 
asked for leave to withdraw the motion we just passed. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Regulatory Reform) Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the Hon. 
Minister of Justice to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair. To 
my right, Susan Amrud who is the director of legislative 
services, and behind her, Linda Ens from legislative services 
also. 
 



2008 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

The Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. And, 
Mr. Minister, welcome through you to your officials here to the 
Assembly tonight. 
 
We have a number of Bills I guess we’ll be dealing with here in 
committee. And although I thought about it for awhile, you’ll 
be happy to know that I, for the time being, won’t be deferring 
to the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy who’d like to talk 
about the five pillars of the Canada Health Act as it relates to 
the miscellaneous statutes repeal Bill. 
 
But anyway, Mr. Chairman, there are just a very few questions 
that I have on this Bill for you and your officials. 
 
There’s a whole series of statutes that are repealed in the Act. 
And I wonder if you could tell us — inform the members of the 
committee — what the standard was that the department uses 
when they’re going through existing legislation to determine 
those that should be repealed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the member’s 
question, each of the departments of government assesses 
whether or not they have legislation which is obsolete and is no 
longer necessary for their purposes. They then pass those pieces 
of legislation or that information on to us, and then we put it 
together in an omnibus Bill of this sort. 
 
So the individual departments wouldn’t necessarily tell us why 
they were obsolete, but in our speeches we’ve indicated why 
that was the case. And for example I can indicate to you The 
Grain and Fodder Conservation Act, which was passed in 1946, 
that Act hasn’t been used for 10 years for example. That would 
be the rationale there. 
 
Others are no longer required because of . . . for example The 
Horticultural Societies Act, they are now incorporated under 
The Non-profit Corporations Act, 1995 and therefore that 
statute is no longer necessary. 
 
The Industrial Development Act, SEDCO (Saskatchewan 
Economic Development Corporation), which dealt with 
SEDCO, that was dissolved in 1995 and therefore that statute is 
redundant. 
 
So those are the kinds of reasons, Mr. Chair, for these Acts 
being included in this omnibus repeal legislation. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, and Mr. 
Minister, thank you for that answer. And I guess the subsequent 
question is, has the department ever contemplated being 
proactive? In your answer you just indicated that departments 
report to you or advise your department as to Acts that they 
believe can be repealed or should be repealed. Does your 
department do anything on a proactive basis, or any other 
department for that matter, to look at government across the 
piece and try to determine which of these statutes can be 
repealed? I know in the Department of Economic and 
Co-operative Development they had an exercise wherein they 
met with a number of groups across the province to determine 

ways to lower red tape and sort of get rid of regulations and 
legislation on the books that wasn’t really performing any 
useful function. And so I wonder if you could tell me if your 
department’s thought about being more proactive in this regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Chair, the accumulation of 
these pieces of legislation are as a result of the department being 
proactive in the sense that it every year will ask the various 
departments of government whether or not they have legislation 
which they no longer need. And if they do, they pass that on to us. 
So each year we ask each department to assess whether there is 
legislation which is redundant and which should be repealed and 
this is the product of that process. And the member will know that 
in a general sense there is significant strategy within the 
government to reduce red tape and that that is a process we pursue 
on a regular basis to ensure that we have no more regulations there 
than are absolutely necessary. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, and 
Mr. Minister. With respect to Bill 29, The Residential 
Tenancies Amendment Act, we have a few more questions, I 
think, than on the previous Bill. 
 
Late in the fall of last year I had the chance to meet with the 
Saskatchewan rental housing association, and they outlined a 
number of concerns that they had with current legislation as it 
relates to these issues. And they also indicated that they had 
already had a meeting with yourself and that they had put 
forward the case, a similar case that . . . well I imagine it was 
the same case that they put forward with myself during our 
meeting. And a lot of their concerns, frankly, that I understood 
from that meeting have been addressed in this particular piece 
of legislation. 
 
I guess I would have a couple of questions on the rationale for 
some of the timelines that you’re using, specifically . . . and you 
know, probably one of their greatest concerns centred around 
the hearings, landlord versus tenant hearings when damage 
claims are in dispute. And you . . . the legislation has been 
drafted such that the existing timeline that was given landlords 
to make their case was five days. It’s been expanded in this Bill 
to seven, not including weekend days. 
 
And I wonder why you picked that number because frankly it 
doesn’t seem like much of a break when landlords are trying to 
make their case. And I know what the association said one thing 
when I’ve talked to some landlords myself who wonder really 
what the great benefit of moving from five to seven days is 
when they have to make a fairly strong case for the claim that 
they are submitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well in response, Mr. Chair, to that 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2009 

question, the member’s right. There’s a seven-working-day time 
period which amounts to at least nine and sometimes more than 
that. 
 
That was in the circumstances of trying to ensure that these 
issues are dealt with as quickly as possible. It was thought that 
those seven working days were enough to respond to the 
concerns of landlords. They initially did talk about having a 
longer period of time but seem satisfied with this compromise. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair. Thank you, Minister, for that 
answer. What did the various groups that you or your 
department would have consulted with, what did they have to 
say about the issue of representation at these hearings? Because 
that was a concern on the part of landlords who for, you know, 
very small sums of money were having to go through quite a 
bureaucratic effort to make their case. And if they happen to 
retain professional counsel to help them do that, they wondered 
about whether or not, you know, that was really worth their 
time and effort. And yet the principle of the thing is, of course, 
they have to make their case; otherwise they are not going to be 
able to be very successful with other claims they have. 
 
So I wonder if you could tell the members of the committee 
what was the input from different groups you met with on this 
particular issue, and how was that considered by the department 
in drafting the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I 
apologize; I should’ve introduced Terry Chinn, who is the 
Rentalsman on my left, who has met, as has Linda, with both 
landlord groups and tenant groups on a number of occasions. 
 
There were no specific representations made leading up to this 
legislative change regarding representation, and indeed lawyers 
would appear — I understand it — in very few cases, maybe 1 
per cent of the cases. The process is very informal and one in 
which a landlord and a tenant could present their case quite 
effectively without the assistance of a lawyer. And indeed the 
purpose really behind the whole process is to ensure that it is as 
informal as possible. 
 
So I think the lack of participation by lawyers assists in that 
process. 
 
But in answer to the member’s specific question, there were no 
representations made during the discussion process leading to 
this legislation. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees. Thanks, 
Minister, for the answer. And I have no further questions 
actually for this stage. 
 
However, I would like to just offer the following comment. 
Having spoken to a number of landlords and the association 
itself, and having been . . . I’ve never been a landlord but I 
certainly have been a renter, and in university perhaps not 
always the most responsible renter. And the member for 
Saltcoats says he heard that, and I’m not so sure that’s the case. 
 
But in any event, I’ll tell you, Minister, that I think the direction 
of this Bill is sound because for too long in this province I think 
we perhaps viewed — either purposefully or perhaps not 

purposefully — we have viewed landlords as the bad guy on 
almost every situation. Sort of a societal view. 
 
And you will know, sir, and I certainly know from personal 
experience as an economic development officer in the city of 
Swift Current, that one of the things that is in great demand is 
rental accommodation in the province of Saskatchewan. And it 
is a rural and an urban issue. It is certainly the case here in 
Regina and Saskatoon. And it’s also the case in places like 
Swift Current. 
 
And I can tell you from firsthand experience that there isn’t any 
interest at all in the city of Swift Current on the part of people 
to put up certainly new rental accommodations. There is a lot of 
bureaucracy, there’s a lot of red tape. And up until now, up until 
the kinds of changes that we see in this Bill, there really seemed 
to be a dim view taken towards landlords on the part of 
government. 
 
And so I’d just encourage your department, and the Rentalsman 
and his office, to continue to realize that while absolutely 
tenants have to be afforded protection — there’s no question 
about that — but we also need to recognize that if people 
slowly condominiumize all of their properties, or simply new 
properties aren’t being put up, where will the rental 
accommodations come from in the future? So I think the 
direction of this Bill is the right one. And I congratulate you for 
meeting with the association and for acting on their concerns. 
 
And I, through you, thank your officials for their attendance 
here tonight. 
 
(2015) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Let me 
also thank the staff, Terry Chinn and Linda Ens, who, as the 
member opposite indicated, have spent many hours trying to 
find some mutually acceptable solutions to what are often very 
difficult issues. I thank the member from Swift Current for his 
support of that and for his useful questions. I would move that 
we report the Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 77 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — I’d like to invite the Minister of Justice to 
introduce the officials that have just entered the Chamber. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m 
pleased to introduce on my right, Madeleine Robertson from 
legislative services, and on my left, Tom Irvine from the 
constitutional law branch. And it’s my pleasure to ask members 
to welcome in the gallery, Donna Scott, who is the Chief 
Commissioner for the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission. And she’s actually with Lionel McNabb from 
maintenance enforcement there too. 
 



2010 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, and 
Minister. Once again, welcome to your officials and welcome to 
those in the gallery. We do have a few more questions with 
respect to this Bill. 
 
I guess to start with — and like I said, we have a number of 
questions — but I guess to start with, could you please provide 
us the rationale for the creation of the human rights tribunal. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the member asked 
what was the rationale behind establishing a professional 
tribunal I think, rather than the ad hoc system which we have at 
the present time. It requires us to appoint a person to investigate 
the Human Rights Commission as and when issues arise. 
 
So that ad hoc process enables us of course to just appoint 
people when they are needed, but it doesn’t really develop any 
particular consistency or predictability in decision-making 
because of the large variety of those people who are 
adjudicating. Whereas a professional tribunal will enable that to 
take place. 
 
So it’ll enable people to — who are on the tribunal — to 
acquire some greater expertise as they spend more time 
adjudicating on these questions and also to provide a greater 
consistency and predictability for citizens of Saskatchewan both 
who are . . . who may be the subject of a human rights 
infraction or who might be charged with having infringed 
someone else’s human rights. So primarily it provides some 
consistency and predictability into the system. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. What 
do you anticipate being the qualifications of those who would 
serve on this tribunal? And how will they come to serve in that 
position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Chair. In section . . . 
the new section 29(4) there is set out the qualifications for those 
who may be appointed to the human rights tribunal. They must 
be a member in good standing of the Law Society of 
Saskatchewan or of some other province or territory and have 
been a member for at least five years, or they should have 
experience or expertise in human rights law. They might for 
example be an academic with that experience or expertise but 
yet not a member of the law society or of any other law society. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Some of the questions I have now are perhaps more of a general 
nature as it relates to the functioning of the Human Rights 
Commission. But certainly it’s not frequent perhaps that an 
important piece of legislation such as this is opened up for 
amendment. And so I wouldn’t want the opportunity to go past 
without speaking to some of those general concerns that we 
have. 
 
And I guess they all revolve around a couple of different 
concepts which probably could be best summarized with the 
words flexibility and common sense in terms of when the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission is making its 
decision and conducting its investigation. And frankly, I noticed 
that, Mr. Minister, in your second reading speech, you refer to 

some of the amendments as streamlining and adding flexibility 
— and I’m paraphrasing here — but streamlining and adding 
flexibility to the complaint process. 
 
And it’s a bit of a theme that is throughout that particular 
speech, I thought. And you know, there are a number of specific 
examples, and I’m going to primarily deal with two, one that’s 
probably known more widely here in the province of 
Saskatchewan involving an art gallery here in Regina. And the 
other involving a specific incident that occurred in Swift 
Current that was brought to my attention as the MLA (Member 
of the Legislative Assembly). 
 
Maybe I’ll deal with the latter first. It’s a small restaurant on the 
south side of our city. It’s the only restaurant on the south side 
of our city, actually. It’s a family-run restaurant, and due to a 
complaint that they received, that the Human Rights 
Commission received, the family that operates this restaurant 
complied and built quite an elaborate and substantive 
wheelchair ramp so that people on wheelchairs could get in. 
They had about three steps ups to the restaurant, but it just 
wasn’t that easy to get in. And certainly I think they spend — 
I’m not just sure, Mr. Deputy Chair — maybe in the order of 
$3,000, but frankly from having very candid discussions with 
them, and I have every reason to believe them, it’s probably 
$3,000 they didn’t have. 
 
And then subsequent to that, a further complaint was made by 
the same individual, as my understanding, who from time to 
time occasions this restaurant, and they were also ordered to 
renovate their washrooms. And they felt that this probably 
would . . . and I’m not sure where it’s at today; they may be 
underway with the work, but they were worried that this would 
really sort of undermine the solvency of their business, and I’m 
not sure I disagree with them, based on the candid and honest 
discussion that we had. 
 
And so really the question that I have relates to common sense 
when these things are being enforced. And I understand, after 
doing at little bit of research on behalf of that constituent that 
there are special discretionary powers that Human Rights 
Commission has to not enforce certain orders that it normally 
would if it was felt — and I don’t know the exact words — but 
if it was felt that it would be an undue hardship to the business, 
to the bottom line of the business and end up closing the 
business, excepting a number of things including the washroom 
access. And you know, I guess I have some difficulty with this 
because I certainly understand the importance of people, all 
people, to be able to access an establishment like that. 
 
But I firmly believe it’s entirely possible that due to the order 
that restaurant may not be there, one that’s been there since I 
. . . That’s where I grew up, on the south side of Swift Current; 
it’s been there as long as I can remember. And it’s been the 
same restaurant and the same family. And I really wonder 
whether it will be there. And perhaps it will, and perhaps it 
won’t. But that’s not the point. 
 
The point is, where does common sense come into play? And 
does this Act, anything that you are proposing in this particular 
. . . in these amendments, address that situation, that would give 
latitude to the Human Rights Commission to look at a situation 
like the Golden Garden restaurant in Swift Current and say, you 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2011 

know, if we make them comply with all of these things, they 
may not be in business, and then of course it’s not accessible to 
anybody, whether they’re in a wheelchair or not. 
 
And so I wonder, sir, if you could tell me if anything in this Act 
or anything that you may have contemplated for amendments in 
the future — hopefully in the near future — would contemplate 
that sort of a dilemma? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, well the member 
raises an interesting and difficult issue. And indeed very many 
of the accessibility concerns are difficult because I think the 
member would agree that it’s good public policy to ensure that 
public facilities that . . . facilities accessible to the public should 
be accessible to all and that arrangements should be made to 
ensure that that is the case. 
 
In fact, there are not large numbers of these cases. Since 1996 
there have only been 27 complaints from individuals 
concerning accessibility over what is now almost a 5-year 
period. And 21 were filed against public services such as the 
member is suggesting: hotels, restaurants, and theatres. 
 
And of those 21 — I can just give the member a few details 
here — seven were withdrawn; two were resolved through early 
resolution; and six were dismissed upon investigation. One was 
dismissed by the Commission on appeal. Two were not 
accepted as valid complaints at the beginning, and the 
remaining nine are pending. 
 
So the member can, I think, see that large numbers of these 
cases are dealt with, as he would suggest, in a common sense 
way. They are addressed by responding to the issue but without 
enormous inconvenience to the business in question. 
 
And in fact it is very often the case that businesses, once faced 
by a complaint of this type, will move directly to compliance 
without ever expecting the Human Rights Commission to be 
concerned. In other words, they respond to the public consumer 
pressure. 
 
But I should say that while this legislation will not make any 
changes in this regard, it is the case that where an employer or a 
business can show that bringing their business to compliance 
would create undue hardship on the business, then the 
Commission may dismiss that complaint. And undue hardship 
will include intolerable financial burden, and indeed complaints 
have been dismissed by the Commission for this reason. 
 
So I think while the issues when they arise are sometimes 
difficult, and certainly in the case of a small restaurant perhaps 
not terribly lucrative, but the expense can be fairly substantial. 
But the Commission makes every effort to ensure that the 
concerns of the person complained against are given due weight 
and makes a decision which is as useful and which bears in 
mind all of the issues as is possible. And of course the 
Commission will continue to try to mediate between disputes in 
as constructive a way as possible. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I think in this particular case I spoke of, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, Mr. Minister, there is some mediation happening, and that’s 
where it was at about three weeks ago and hopefully there was 
some resolution. 

However, just to clarify something, and it’s not related to the Bill, 
but maybe the minister would indulge me. My understanding is 
that the latitude that the Human Rights Commission can exercise 
with respect to some sort of action that would cause undue 
hardship is not . . . there are certain exemptions from that. For 
example, my understanding is wheelchair accessible washrooms 
are excepted from that. That indeed even if those renovations 
would cause undue hardship . . . at least I contacted the Human 
Rights Commission office and that was my understanding. And 
I’m not pointing any blame at any officials; I may have understood 
it incorrectly. And I guess I would just like to find out if accessible 
washrooms are not a part of the undue hardship provision. 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I think, Mr. Deputy Chair, in response 
to the member’s question, if the member looks under the section 
dealing with dismissal of complaint, section 31.2, he’ll see that 
the human rights tribunal can dismiss a complaint where it finds 
that, and I’ll quote subsection (b) that: 
 

(b) the only basis on which the complaint could be 
substantiated . . . 

 
And then it goes on to deal with facilities or: 
 

. . . proper amenities for persons with disabilities . . . 
 
And then it goes on to say that: 
 

. . . many measures be taken . . . (which) would cause 
undue hardship to the person complained against. 

 
So it would seem to me that that would be included within the 
undue hardship exemption here. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and one final general 
question relates to that other scenario that we talked about 
previously, which was related to the art gallery owner here in 
the city of Regina. 
 
I wonder if anything in this Bill, in your estimation, addresses 
the concern that a number of people had, not the least of which 
was I think the owner of the art gallery himself, which was that 
the Human Rights Commission could effectively order building 
code changes, I guess if you will, that really were over and 
above what the laws of the city of Regina were, what the city 
required and what any provincial provisions required. 
 
So here you have two duly elected institutions, one is the city of 
Regina city council who are duly elected and can pass bylaws, 
the other is the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. And yet 
an appointed body seemingly could overrule both of those 
institutions and require something greater — something more 
onerous of an owner of a facility. 
 
And I think I know the answer to it, but I would wonder if you 
could clarify that there is really nothing in this Bill that limits 
that kind of power. Which I think people should be rightly 
concerned about, when they have duly elected bodies like city 
councils and legislative assemblies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Deputy Chair. Well in 



2012 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

regard to the general question the member asks about situations 
in which a building code and the Human Rights Code may be in 
some kind of conflict, he’ll know that this matter is actually 
before the Court of Appeal at the present time, and so I’d rather 
not respond to that. 
 
But in terms of his question regarding the Human Rights Code 
being able to, or Human Rights Commission essentially 
overriding a decision of the legislature, which I think was the 
last question, by section 44 of this Act the legislature in fact 
provides the Human Rights Commission with the power to do 
that. In other words, the legislature has really handed or 
delegated the power over those matters to the Human Rights 
Commission. So it’s not a question of the Human Rights 
Commission doing anything contrary to the wishes of the 
legislature, of the Legislative Assembly, because the Legislative 
Assembly has already handed that power over to the 
commission. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, and that of 
course is true and this venerable institution operates on the basis 
of the majority rules. But I am not sure. I won’t speak for my 
colleagues, but I’m not sure, should we be ever in that position, 
that we would agree, frankly, that that should be the case. But 
we’ll leave that for another day, and perhaps look at the Bill on 
a clause-by-clause basis, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, yes, I would like 
to propose a House amendment for Bill No. 77. And section 3, of 
course, deals with all of the various grounds and basis upon which 
any sort of discrimination will basically not be tolerated by the 
Human Rights Commission, and I guess ergo by the province of 
Saskatchewan. And the list is very lengthy, Mr. Minister. The list 
includes religion — I won’t read it all — creed, marital status, age, 
colour, sex, nationality, sexual orientation, race or perceived race, 
and the list is very long. 
 
And we would like to propose that a couple of other categories be 
added to this list, because we have seen both in this province and 
across the country on a number of occasions where other groups 
of people frankly have had acts of discrimination perpetrated 
against them, be it verbal or otherwise, without any retribution 
from any human rights commission in any province as far as 
we’re aware. And we have the opportunity now with this Bill to 
address that problem at least as it relates to the province of 
Saskatchewan. I think we’re all very familiar with the — and 
rhetoric would probably be an understated term — some of the 
mean-spirited attacks that have been perpetrated, verbal and 
otherwise, on either unionized employees or non-unionized 
employees especially in the case of a dispute, a workplace 
dispute perhaps is the best example that we can use. 
 
And so this particular amendment seeks only to add both of 
those people to the list, unionized employees and non-unionized 
employees, that you cannot be discriminated on the basis of 
being either one of those things. I think there’s a lot of people in 
the province of Saskatchewan, a lot of workers, who would like 

that kind of protection, who would like to be able to go to work 
and know with surety and know with assurance that they will 
not be discriminated against by their employer or by their union 
based on the fact that they are either unionized or 
non-unionized. 
 
We have seen in this legislature how heated debates can be on 
these issues, on labour issues in this province and in frankly 
every other jurisdiction. And in every other area where debates 
can get heated, where people can really get excited about what 
they’re talking about, we have sought to provide those people 
protection from discrimination or discriminatory acts. So why 
wouldn’t do that here today? And that’s what our amendment 
speaks to, Mr. Deputy Chair, simply that we would protect from 
discrimination unionized employees and non-unionized 
employees. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, I would move the 
House amendment — I guess I should read it into the record . . . 
I will read it into the record then: 
 

Clause 2(1)(m.01) as being enacted by clause 3 of the 
printed Bill is amended by: 

(a) striking out “and” following subclause (xiii); 
(b) by adding “; and” following subclause (xiv); and 
(c) by adding the following subclause after clause (xiv): 

“(xv) employment status as: 
(A) a unionized employee; or 
(B) a non-unionized employee”. 

 
I so move, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — The hon. member for Swift Current has moved a 
House amendment to clause 3 of the printed Bill. Will members 
of the committee take it as read? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
believe that this is indeed as my colleague said a very, very 
important Bill. As we have seen, Mr. Speaker, over time that 
various people have certainly used discriminatory language and 
discriminatory practices when it comes to dealing with union 
members or non-union members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact is I can think of a quote from Mr. Daryl Bean that . . . 
it goes along the line that a scab . . . and a scab, Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Chairman of committee, is someone who works while the 
union is on strike, that they should be either hung or drowned in 
a pool of puss. 
 
That kind of language, Mr. Speaker, if used in context with any 
other minority would be clearly described as discriminatory and 
would be ruled against by the Human Rights Commission. 
 
Why then, Mr. Chairman of committee, must people because 
they are either unionized or non-unionized suffer those same 
kind of insults, those same kind of disruptions in their lives and 
discrimination against their work. That, Mr. Chairman, is why 
this amendment is needed and needed desperately, and I would 
certainly encourage the members of this House to support it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2013 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll just rise to speak against the 
amendment very briefly because in The Trade Union Act and 
under the ruling of the Labour Relations Board, if anybody 
engages inappropriately in language or behaviour during an 
organizing drive — either the union or the employer — that 
becomes an unfair labour practice, and it goes before the 
Labour Relations Board. So we already have the mechanism to 
deal with that, so I speak against the amendment. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad that 
the Minister of Labour rose and spoke on this. What happens 
though in the case where it’s not in an organizing drive, but it 
happens during a labour dispute in an area where it’s already 
organized, Mr. Speaker? The member opposite, the Minister of 
Labour, didn’t address that issue where it’s already been 
organized and people are being disallowed to access their 
labour even when they want to. 
 
And they’re being described in the terms that I mentioned 
already. And the quote is certainly a lot longer and a lot more 
vicious than I quoted, Mr. Chairman, and would clearly, if you 
included words that indicated any other minority, would be 
clearly beyond the pale, Mr. Speaker. But because it . . . We 
already have a member talking exactly like that, Mr. Speaker, 
the member from Saskatoon — Saskatoon Meewasin is already 
engaging in that kind of activity that discriminates against 
people that want to work whether they are unionized or 
non-unionized, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why this legislation is 
clearly needed. 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Well I can only share the Minister of Labour’s point of view. 
This, as we know — as we would all know, is a new ground the 
member is proposing. And I suppose this illustrates a new 
development for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
This provision is not contained in any other code or charter 
across the country. So Ontario is not right wing enough for the 
Saskatchewan Party I suppose — not anti-labour enough. And 
neither is Alberta. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, this goes beyond anything that 
anybody else has ever proposed. And as the Minister of Labour 
points out, any of the conduct that the members opposite are so 
concerned about would be dealt with in the normal way. 
 
I might also say that if the members want to propose 
amendments and have some chance of them being considered 
properly; they might provide them to us before the debate so 
that we can look at them. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in short this is not an appropriate measure for 
a human rights code. The kinds of prohibitions here are the 
kinds which are referred to as being immutable characteristics 
like ancestry, like colour, like disability; not whether or not the 
people are members of unions. 
 
The division bells rang from 8:46 p.m. until 8:51 p.m. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Will members take the proposed House 
amendment as read . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, I would 

be pleased to do that. 
 
Clause 3 of the printed Bill before us is being amended, and the 
effect of the amendment is to add two additional items under 
which discrimination would be prohibited, basically for a 
unionized employee or a non-unionized employee. I’ll read the 
full amendment: 
 

Clause 2(1)(m.01) as being enacted by clause 3 of the 
printed Bill is amended by: 

(a) striking out “and” following subclause (xiii); 
(b) by adding “; and” following subclause (xiv); and 
(c) by adding the following subclause after clause (xiv): 

“(xv) employment status as: 
(A) a unionized employee; or 
(B) a non-unionized employee”. 

 
And that is moved by the member for Swift Current. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 15 
 
Hermanson Elhard Julé 
Krawetz Draude Boyd 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont Weekes Wakefield 
Wiberg Allchurch Kwiatkowski 
 

Nays — 27 
 
Trew Hagel Van Mulligen 
Lingenfelter Melenchuk Cline 
Goulet Lautermilch Thomson 
Lorje Serby Belanger 
Nilson Crofford Hillson 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Jones Higgins Yates 
Harper Axworthy Junor 
Kasperski Wartman Addley 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 4 to 41 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And let 
me thank too the staff, Tom Irvin and Madeleine, for being here 
this evening, and to thank members opposite for their questions. 
And I would move that we report the Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 15 – The Department of Justice 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — I’d like to invite the Minister of Justice to 
introduce the officials that have joined him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. To my . . . I’m glad to introduce to the Assembly to my 
right Darcy McGovern, who is with legislative services, and to 
my left Chris Lafontaine, who is executive director of the 
Aboriginal Courtworker program. 



2014 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees and 
Minister, and to your officials, and a special welcome to Darcy 
McGovern. Darcy’s mom is our neighbour in Swift Current, 
and we see him often there in the summer, helping out at his 
mom’s place and visiting, and so welcome here. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Does he mow the lawn? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Actually, I don’t think I’ve ever seen him mow 
the lawn, neither his mother’s nor mine, as I recall. Well he 
helped out with other things. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, a couple of questions. In the minister’s 
second reading speech he indicated that the . . . that these 
amendments in part are generated by recommendations from the 
Aboriginal Courtworker program advisory board. Could you 
please tell the members of the committee the nature of that 
input and who is on that board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, in response to the 
member’s question, the board has five members — two are 
from the Department of Justice, one is from the Metis Nation of 
Saskatchewan, one from the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations, and there is an independent chairperson. And actually 
also the Department of Justice — federal Department of Justice 
— sends an observer to all meetings and the board makes 
decisions based upon a consensus. 
 
The members of the board. The Chair is Kathleen Makela. 
She’s the independent Chair. Eugene Gamble from the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Art Durocher from 
the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan, and the two Department of 
Justice members are Doug Moen and Barbara Hookenson. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What you didn’t touch 
on though is, I guess, what precipitated the particular Bill and 
the changes that are being made. And I guess we ask that 
because it is a . . . certainly a solemn and serious thing is the 
solicitor-client relationship and the privileges of that 
relationship that this Bill would afford the courtworkers and 
their clients. 
 
And so could you please outline some of the input that your 
department received from that board that led to this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, in response to the 
member’s question, what early advice did the board provide for 
which suggested the changes in question. I can say that all 
involved have identified the need to ensure that clients 
accessing Aboriginal courtworkers’ programs enjoy the same 
confidentiality with respect to the services provided as would be 
the case in other confidential relationships. 
 
And particularly important to the Aboriginal courtworkers who 
need to be as open as possible with their clients, to provide as 
much assistance as possible, but who need to know — and this 
would provide them with that comfort — that they would not be 
involved as witnesses or something of that sort at a later date. 
 
So it enables them to be — and this is the advice presented by 
the board — enables them to be as open as possible without any 
fear of any result, any detrimental result, in the future. 
 

So it was identified by the board and by others, other 
stakeholders in the province. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Justice to move that the 
committee report the Bill without amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I’ll do that, Mr. Speaker, after thanking 
the staff for their assistance, not only here today, but also in the 
difficult work they do in ensuring that all those who need help 
in our system are provided with it in a confidential and high 
quality way. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — I invite the Hon. Minister of Justice to introduce 
his official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Members 
opposite will be familiar with Andrea Seale from legislative 
services to my right who is here this evening. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair of Committees, and to the Minister, 
welcome to your official. And we have some questions on Bill 
28 here this evening. 
 
And specifically they relate to what seems, to me frankly, to be 
a bit of an inconsistency in the relationship for these two 
officers of the Assembly. And specifically what I’m questioning 
is, why is it that the Bill has prescribed that cabinet has the 
fundamental power to direct these two officers in very real 
terms, but their remuneration is the responsibility of the Board 
of Internal Economy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I must admit the 
member has raised this issue before. I’m not quite sure what 
point he’s getting at, but maybe he’ll clarify it in a moment. 
 
In fact what this Bill does is do one thing which would increase 
the gap between the Children’s Advocate and the legislature 
and particularly the cabinet. This Bill in fact removes the ability 
of Lieutenant Governor in Council, the cabinet, to assign duties 
to the Children’s Advocate, so there’s that greater distancing. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the Act has always provided that the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council could refer matters to both the 
Ombudsman and the Children’s Advocate for investigation and 
report. This is not a new provision and hasn’t given rise to any 
difficulty in the past. Indeed it seems to me useful for the 
government to be able to refer matters to the Ombudsman and 
the Children’s Advocate for their advice and for their 
investigation. 
 
And the member will know that the Ombudsman has 
investigated, for example, or is in the process of investigating 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2015 

. . . or continues to investigate actually the condition of the 
Regina Correctional Centre. We worked fully with the 
Ombudsman. We participated and were pleased to participate 
with her in whatever way we could, and we’re pleased to 
receive her report and recommendations. And indeed she 
responded by indicating that we had worked together well. 
 
So I’m not quite sure what the member is after, but perhaps he 
can illuminate us. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair of Committees, and Mr. Minister, I’d 
be happy to try. And perhaps I’m misunderstanding it, and I’d 
appreciate your clarification. 
 
And I guess where I’m coming from is that basically the Act 
that we’re speaking about today provides that the Ombudsman 
and the Children’s Advocate’s salaries and benefits will be 
determined by the Board of Internal Economy. And yet there 
are very specific references to the fact that the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council, the cabinet, for example, could suspend 
the Ombudsman . . . this is actually from your second reading 
speech, may suspend the Ombudsman and the Children’s 
Advocate while the legislature is not in session on grounds of 
incapacity to act or neglect of duty. 
 
That’s the premise for the question. And maybe it’s 
oversimplifying it, but . . . And a lot of people would believe 
that whoever is paying the piper will call the tune. In this case, 
it seems that the Board of Internal Economy is paying, and yet 
the cabinet is retaining quite a bit of authority to act when the 
House isn’t in session. 
 
And I guess that’s my question because the colleagues that have 
been here longer than I have, have informed me that the Board 
of Internal Economy meets regardless of whether the legislature 
is sitting. And I would imagine that meetings can be called 
quickly, that members of the committee can be summoned to a 
meeting or held by telephone or at the call of the Chair, as the 
member for Kindersley says. So why then wouldn’t you rest all 
of the powers to provide the kind of direction, and frankly 
sweeping powers, to suspend these two officers — why 
wouldn’t you rest them with the same body that can work very 
flexibly and quickly, that is also the body charged with paying 
the salaries and setting the salaries and benefits for these two 
officers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well that does 
help a bit. As the member probably is aware, this is a relatively old 
power, the power on the part of the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council to suspend and not remove these officials, but suspend 
them until the legislature is in session. It’s never happened. 
 
But I would say to the member that this is not a new provision and 
it brings the positions of the ability to suspend the Ombudsman 
and Children’s Advocate into line with the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner and the Conflict of Interest Commissioner 
so they will now all be addressed in the same way. 
 
And the Bill really updates the grounds upon which the 
Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate could be suspended when 
the legislature is not in session and it removes phrases such as 
disability and bankruptcy and adds incapacity to act. And the 
grounds now will be incapacity to act, neglect of duty, or 

misconduct. And I should say to the member that both the 
Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate requested this amendment. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister, for 
the answer. I think we’ll agree to disagree because whether it’s 
something that . . . well you know, I’m not sure the rationale that 
that’s the way we’ve always done it is perhaps good enough. 
We’ve got the legislation open now. It strikes me that it would be 
a great opportunity to clean it up and rest the authority to provide 
direction to these officers with the same body that has the ability 
to set its salary and determine its remuneration. So I’m not sure 
we’re going to agree on that. 
 
I would ask though, Minister, if you could tell me what has been 
the arrangement with respect to remuneration for these two 
officers since April 1 of this year, because as you have quite 
rightly pointed out in your comments, Mr. Minister, the salaries of 
these two officers were previously tied directly to those of 
Provincial Court judges. And now of course we see a significant 
increase in salary for Provincial Court judges effective April 1. I 
understand that part of the rationale for this Act is that the 
government isn’t interested in tying the salaries of these two 
officers together, and frankly wasn’t interested much in a raise of 
that proportion for these two officers of the Assembly of the 
same proportion that the Provincial Court judges received. And 
so I wonder if you could tell members of the committee what 
has been happening in the meantime since April 1 with respect 
to the salaries for these two officers, and what arrangements 
have been made if any. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Yes thank you, Mr. Chair. The 
member’s quite right. The Ombudsman’s salary has been set at 
the same level as that of a Provincial Court judge, and so has 
essentially risen to $143,000 as of April 1, 2000. That, as the 
member will know, is as a result of the recommendations of the 
Provincial Court Commission which increased the Provincial 
Court judges’ salaries. The Children’s Advocate salary is fixed 
presently at 85 per cent of the Ombudsman’s salary. 
 
The Bill retroactively will put the Ombudsman and the 
Children’s Advocate salary back to where it was, plus the 
increases that others have received. And from now on they will 
be set by the Board of Internal Economy, which ensures that the 
members opposite have an opportunity to participate in the 
salaries and salary increases for the Ombudsman and the 
Children’s Advocate. We thought that the salary level being 
commensurate with that of Provincial Court judges was . . . that 
it would be better that it was not quite so high. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman . . . Thanks, Mr. Minister. 
Although I wonder if you can address the question: what has 
been done in the meantime between April 1 and now? 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well because the legislation in place 
required the salary for the Ombudsman to go to $143,000 and 
for the Children’s Advocate to go to 85 per cent of that, those 
salary changes were provided for. There was nothing that would 
enable them to be changed in any way. So they have been 
receiving or have been able to receive their salary at that new 
level. 
 



2016 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

This piece of legislation will though retroactively place the 
salaries for the Ombudsman and for the Children’s Advocate 
within the powers of the Board of Internal Economy, and so 
consequently any increased amounts up to those levels will be 
repayable. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Clearly those officers — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 
Minister — clearly these officers will obviously know that. 
They’d have to do some substantial planning. We’re talking 
about large sums of dollars. 
 
So they’ve been being paid at the level of the Provincial Court 
judges. I understand the difference in the two positions with 
respect to their remuneration. And I guess they will have . . . it’s 
been up to them to do the planning for the day that may come 
when the Board of Internal Economy retroactively requests it 
back. I think the member of Cannington has some questions on 
this Bill, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I have a question in dealing with the Ombudsman and 
Child Advocate. To whom are they responsible? Are they 
responsible to yourself as the minister in charge of this 
legislation, or are they responsible to the Legislative Assembly 
as an institution and only responsible to the Legislative 
Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, I think the member will 
know that both the Ombudsman and the Children’s Advocate 
are answerable to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
would you happen to know if the services of the Ombudsman or 
the Child Advocate are available for hire or for performing 
other duties other than those directed by this legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well in response to the member’s 
question, not for hire I think, but their job is to respond to 
complaints from the public. So while the legislature as a whole 
would be the body to which they are answerable, they are also 
— and it’s reflected I think in the nature of that appointment 
flowing from the Legislative Assembly — they’re answerable 
to the public of the province in a very meaningful way. 
 
And consequently any complaints which come from the public 
to those two officials are treated seriously by them and can lead 
to inquiries on their behalf and indeed have led to inquiries on 
the public’s behalf. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When they 
would receive a complaint or an inquiry who would they 
present that report to? Who would be the sole entity to which 
they would report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I should say also that departments can 
refer matters to the Children’s Advocate and the Ombudsman 
too. The reports would be to this Assembly, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So when the 
Ombudsman prepares a report would they distribute it to 
whomever might be interested prior to this Assembly or should 
it come solely to this Assembly? 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — It would come to the Assembly first, 
Mr. Chair, in fact that is where I received it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would it be a 
breach of their legislative duties if they were to present that 
report to anyone else? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member I think is asking, would 
anybody — for example, a complainant or department — learn 
of the contents of the report prior to the legislature? That’s I 
think the member’s question. 
 
And she will, and she has in the past, provided a draft report to 
departments prior to the final report being presented to the 
legislature. But the final report, her report which is made public, 
comes here first. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That would 
seem to me to be rather inappropriate. If the minister . . . if the 
Ombudsman or the Child Advocate is doing a report on a 
department, why would that report be given to the department 
for whatever reason? The department may not like what was in 
the report; the department may like what was in the report. Why 
should that department be given an opportunity to make 
changes to that report before it comes to the legislature? 
 
Their duty is not to that department and not to the minister 
responsible for that department. You, yourself, Mr. Minister, 
said that those reports . . . they are responsible to this legislature 
and they should come to this legislature. 
 
Why should it be any different if it’s a department? What gives 
the Ombudsman or the Child Advocate the authority to direct 
that draft report to anyplace other than this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, I think the answer to the 
member’s question is that the Ombudsman or the Children’s 
Advocate . . . and he’s probably thinking of the Children’s 
Advocate report in particular, the last one she did, would be 
presented to the department really, I think, as a courtesy to the 
department. 
 
But certainly there’s no expectation and no ability on the part of 
a department to suggest changes to the Children’s Advocate or 
to the Ombudsman leading up to her report. And I think the 
member would know that by reading the reports that have come 
lately. And for example, one dealing with corrections . . . the 
Regina Correctional Centre, within my jurisdiction, and the 
Children’s Advocate report dealing with the jurisdiction of the 
Minister of Social Services, you could hardly say, I think, that 
departments have had any influence to change the tone or the 
content of those reports. 
 
They both indicated some very helpful suggestions on the part 
of the Ombudsman to the two departments in question for 
changes to procedures and indeed brought to light useful 
information for both of us. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How do we 
know that there weren’t changes made? How do we know that 
the tenor of the report hasn’t been changed? 
 
Mr. Minister, would you be willing to present those draft 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2017 

reports unedited, unchanged that were presented? If they were 
presented to your department, would you present yours? The 
Minister for Social Services is sitting next to you, consulting 
with you on this very issue. 
 
Would those departments be prepared to submit those drafts 
that were presented to those departments by the Ombudsman or 
the Children’s Advocate before the ministers and their 
departments had a chance to see them? I really think that’s a 
breach of this House, Mr. Minister, a breach of the privileges of 
the members of this House. 
 
Those officers are responsible, answerable to this Assembly and 
this legislature. They are not responsible or answerable to the 
ministers, be it yourself or the Minister of Social Services. Those 
reports should come to this Assembly and this Assembly only. Not 
to be vetted, not to be scrutinized, not so that the ministers can 
have a response ready when the report is finally presented. I think 
that is highly inappropriate, Mr. Minister, and those reports from 
any of the Legislative Assembly’s officers should come to this 
Assembly and not to ministers of the Crown. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I think the appropriate response for the 
member is to in fact ask the Children’s Advocate and ask the 
Ombudsman for their perspective. They will tell you what they did 
and I think you can clear it from there. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, it’s this Assembly that 
establishes the rules and criteria under which those offices operate. 
Clearly the rules and procedures for those offices is that they 
report to this Assembly. It doesn’t say, well you can send umpteen 
dozen drafts to whomever might have an interest in it. Because we 
certainly had an interest in it, Mr. Minister, and there was no draft 
copies advanced to us on this particular issue. So why should they 
be advanced to the minister and the department being investigated, 
especially when that investigation was highly, highly critical of the 
department and the minister. Those responses, those reports 
should come to this Assembly without being vetted by the 
department and the minister responsible. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well I restate, Mr. Chair, I think if the 
member has a concern, he should address those concerns. Either 
he can do it as a citizen or through the Board of Internal 
Economy with the Ombudsman and with the Child’s Advocate, 
and he can take the matter up with them. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, the report on the Regina 
Correctional Centre, were you privy to a draft copy of that 
before that report was presented to this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I think I was, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Can you reconfirm, Mr. Minister, that 
the Minister of Social Services and his department were privy 
to the Child Advocate’s report prior to release in this 
Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well I should make it clear — I think 
the member’s aware of this — that it was, it is drafts that I 
received or that the department received and the Department of 
Social Services received. Not the final report which quite 
properly came here to the Legislative Assembly first. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m glad 
you confirmed that it was drafts. That means that changes could 
be made subsequent to the presentation of those reports to the 
departments and the ministers involved. 
 
Were any changes, Mr. Minister, made in your department . . . 
in the report that was presented, the draft that was presented to 
your department and subsequently presented to this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — He, I mean I think the member has 
every opportunity to ask the Ombudsman and the Children’s 
Advocate. In fact, he could do it first thing tomorrow. And he 
should take it up with those two officials. 
 
They are officials who are answerable to this Assembly and I’m 
sure that they will be only too happy to speak with the member 
about his concern. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Perhaps you 
could then answer why you’re unprepared to answer the 
question whether there was any changes made to the report — 
the draft report — that you saw. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well I’d have to look at the draft and 
I’d have to look at the report before I could answer that 
question. 
 
But again, I think the member knows full well that the 
appropriate person to address concerns about a report and about 
the way in which a report was presented is the author of the 
report. And that being particularly the case here, Mr. Speaker, 
because both the Ombudsman and the Children’s Advocate are 
answerable to the Legislative Assembly; not to any particular 
minister. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. That is 
exactly the point — they are answerable to this Legislative 
Assembly, and this is the place those issues should be 
discussed. Not with the advocate and the Ombudsman. 
 
This is the place where that policy and those rules should be 
discussed, whether or not they are responsible to this Assembly. 
Therefore, their reports come exclusively to this Assembly or 
whether they are giving drafts to the members of the 
government side, to the ministers of the Crown for their perusal 
and enjoyment on a Saturday evening. Mr. Minister, whatever 
changes happened in those draft reports from the time you saw 
them to the time they hit the floor of this Assembly are 
therefore suspect, Mr. Minister. So why can’t you tell us what 
changes occurred within the report in your department before it 
came to the floor of this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well the member has every 
opportunity to address these issues with the authors of the 
report. I’m not sure if the member’s alleging that something 
improper took place or that the Ombudsman or the Children’s 
Advocate changed their reports or anything of that sort. If he is, 
I think he should be careful about that. He could always try that 
outside if he wanted to I suppose. 
 
But I think the appropriate thing to do here, Mr. Chair, is as I’ve 
said, and I think the member knows fully well to speak with the 
Children’s Advocate and with the Ombudsman, and I’m sure 



2018 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

that he will receive full satisfaction from both of them. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, it 
surprises me though that the minister seems to be most 
unwilling to answer a very simple question. He said that he saw 
the draft report, that there was a draft report presented to this 
Assembly — not a draft — a final report presented to this 
Assembly. Why can’t you possibly tell us what changes might 
have occurred within that? What are you trying to hide? Why 
. . . 
 
(2130) 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. The minister has I believe 
quite . . . The minister has indicated that the details of the 
Provincial Ombudsman and/or the Children’s Advocate Act are 
best taken up with either the Ombudsman or the Children’s 
Advocate. This Bill deals with the process and if there are 
process questions, the Chair will certainly allow them to 
continue. If there are detailed questions about reports, those are 
properly taken up with the respective authors. 
 
Now I cut the hon. member off before he was finished. Would 
you wish . . . 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is 
indeed about process. It is about the process in which reports 
are collected, the conclusions that they are drawn and presented 
to this Assembly. Do they get sanitized, Mr. Chairman, before 
they see this Assembly? We don’t know. That’s why we’re 
asking the questions, Mr. Chairman. This is the place to ask 
those questions, on the floor of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I don’t understand why the minister responsible for this 
Act cannot be responsible enough to answer questions in 
relation to that, to whatever changes may have occurred in the 
process. I’m just . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. I maybe wasn’t as clear as I could have 
been in this. The process is not what the Ombudsman or the 
Children’s Advocate may or may not have put into their report. 
The process is how that report is received by the Assembly and 
how it plays out there. 
 
If the hon. member has a question of content of the reports, 
that’s out of order. If you have a question of the process, it’s in 
order. And frankly I was hearing an awful lot more content than 
I was process. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I said 
earlier, this is indeed about the process. The Child Advocate 
and the Ombudsman did a study into two . . . one into a 
department and the other into an institution that the department 
is responsible for. Reports were prepared. Obviously you have a 
number of drafts that you go through in the preparation of a 
report. The responsibility as outlined originally by the minister 
was that those officers of the legislature are responsible to the 
legislature. They’re not responsible to the department, they’re 
not responsible to a minister of a department — they’re 
responsible to this Assembly. 
 
Therefore I’m . . . I would advocate that the reports presented or 

collected and prepared by either the Ombudsman or the Child 
Advocate should come to this Assembly without having an 
opportunity for any changes, any reviews, any discussion or 
consultation as to the content of the report by either the 
department or the minister. 
 
The Child Advocate or the Ombudsman should certainly be 
questioning what’s going on if they’re investigating a 
department, to make a determination as to what they see 
happening, either rightly or wrongly. But when they prepare 
their report and their analysis of their studies, that report comes 
to this Assembly — not to the department or to the minister for 
their perusal prior to that of any other member of this 
Assembly. 
 
The ministers responsible for their departments have no more 
right to see that report than I do before it’s presented to this 
Assembly, and that is what’s happening. And I believe that is a 
breech of the privilege of each and every member of this House. 
That is the Child Advocate and the Ombudsman is not 
responsible to the department or to the member, but responsible 
to this Assembly, and that is not what has been occurring, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you agree and would you investigate to 
determine whether or not the Child Advocate and the 
Ombudsman have been meeting the requirements as laid out by 
this Assembly for their duties and reporting to this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well somewhere at the beginning of all 
of that, Mr. Chair, the member asked if I could indicate any 
possible changes between the draft that I saw. I can’t actually 
quite remember when I saw it, but the draft and the original 
report. And I mentioned to him before that I would have to look 
at the two and compare them. 
 
I should say that I think the assumptions underlying the 
member’s questions are disturbing to say the least. I’m sure that 
both the Ombudsman and the Children’s Advocate will be 
interested to read the member’s comments and the allegations, 
the implicit allegations he raises of their conduct. 
 
Mr. Chair, the appropriate place for the member to address 
these concerns, the appropriate person is the person who drafted 
the report, the Ombudsman or the Children’s Advocate which 
ever he may be concerned with. And he can do that in a number 
of fora, but he can certainly do that tomorrow by asking them. 
 
But I do think, Mr. Chair, that the assumptions underlying the 
member’s questions, that there is something improper here done 
by the Ombudsman or Children’s Advocate, that either of them 
would respond to anything other than their obligations under the 
legislation and to this Assembly, I think he should be very 
careful about that. And I’m sure the Ombudsman and the 
Children’s Advocate will be interested to know his lack of trust 
in them. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of Committees. I think 
the minister can see now what can happen when you don’t take 
full advantage of a Bill such as No. 28 coming before the 
Assembly and clearly outlining in the legislation that the 
officers in this particular case who are responsible to the 
Legislative Assembly, to the Board of Internal Economy, 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2019 

should be just that. And that’s the question we led off with 
today. 
 
Those who set the salary for these officers seemingly are asked 
or charged in this Bill only to do that and very little else. And 
the cabinet of the day, the government of the day, retains a great 
deal of power to be able to direct them and even suspend them 
for various reasons, including what the cabinet might determine 
as neglect of duty. And I think that’s part of the point that the 
member for Cannington has made. 
 
This Bill was also an opportunity to clarify the process of 
tabling documents for these two important officers of the 
Legislative Assembly. And so we’ve stated those concerns and 
it appears we’ll agree to disagree. And we would have no 
further questions for this Bill in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Clause 1 agreed. 
 
Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman of Committees, just before you 
make that invitation to the minister, I would just like to thank 
the minister and especially all of the officials that were here for 
the five different Bills. We appreciate the information that they 
were able to provide tonight and we look forward to discussing 
it, as it turns out, many more Bills in the coming days. Thank 
you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I do so move, Mr. Chair, and thank the 
member for his comments and thank Andrea Seale for being 
here today and for the great work she does, not only here, but 
over the year. Thank you very much. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Public Libraries 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the minister 
responsible for public libraries to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. The 
officials with me tonight, seated to my right is Marilyn Jenkins 
who is the acting director of the public library services and to 
my left, is Mr. Keith Comstock who is the policy manager with 
the Municipal Affairs, culture and housing. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister I’d 
like to welcome your officials here tonight. Really I think we 
agree with most of the things we see in here. I think really all 
we need tonight, Mr. Minister, is maybe some clarification so 
that we are exactly understanding that what is in the Bill is 
actually what you are trying to do here. 
 
The first part I . . . question I maybe have, Mr. Minister, is to do 
with the boundary changes. And I believe that the amendments 
will provide for a voluntary boundary changes, not mandatory 
ones, so that they would have the right to set them up and go 
wherever they wanted themselves. Would you comment on that, 
Mr. Minister? 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, that’s exactly 
what the Bill is, the amendments are projecting, is that they 
would permit for voluntary boundary changes. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
next part that I noticed in here and I think I agree, it’s probably 
a plus, is resolving local conflicts. And if I understand what 
you’re doing here, and I think it’s a good thing, is that you’re 
actually removing yourself as minister from resolving these 
conflicts and setting up a process other than the minister’s 
office. And if you would comment on that, Mr. Minister; but if 
that’s what you’re doing I think that is a very good way to go. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, that’s exactly 
what . . . the way in which the member defined it is we’re going 
to be doing. And the member probably will recognize some of 
the rationale around it. We had a little situation in our own 
community which you are likely aware of, with the public 
library director in some concern there and some conflict, I 
might say, and there needed to be a resolution to that particular 
piece. And this part of the legislation is hoping to address those 
kinds of incidents into the future. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes I’m 
aware of the problems that you talked about and I think this is a 
plus by not having the minister have to get involved, especially 
in the case where it was happened to be your own local area. 
 
Another clarification may be, and I think we understand what’s 
being done here, but it’s to do with the allowing urban 
representation on exec committees would be relative to the 
population; and I believe the regional library boards already 
have that, if I’m not mistaken, Mr. Minister. And is that the 
reason this is being done? Actually what is being done if that is 
the reason? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, what we’re 
trying to do here — and you’re correct in your description — is 
to try to provide some greater representation in particular from 
some of your larger communities that are assessed a higher rate 
and are responsible for making a greater contribution to the 
regional library system. 
 
There is a concern that the representation today isn’t sufficient 
from the larger municipalities that provide the greater piece. 
And what this amendment will do is provide for greater 
representation on the executive committee from those 
municipalities that are providing the greatest contribution to the 
regional library system. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
That’s probably all the questions we would have on this Bill at 
this time. So, Mr. Minister, I would like to thank your officials 
for clarifying those for us. And that’s all the questions we 
would have. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 



2020 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

Bill No. 69 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the Hon. 
Minister of Municipal Affairs to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This evening I have 
with me three department officials. Seated right next to my right 
is Mr. Keith Comstock, who is the policy manager with 
Municipal Affairs. To my left is Mr. Ken Kolb, who is the 
senior policy analyst, and directly behind me is Lynnette 
Skaalrud, who is the legislative and registration specialist — 
regulation specialist — sorry, Mr. Chair. Those are my officials 
this evening. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. Minister, 
again I welcome your officials here tonight. 
 
Just a few questions again on this Bill because I think we also 
have checked a number of people that are involved in what’s 
happening on this Bill, Mr. Minister, and I don’t think we have 
too many concerns, although we may need a few clarifications 
here as well. 
 
Possibly, in your bringing in the base tax, Mr. Minister, could 
you maybe explain if there is or what is your explanation of the 
difference between a base tax and a minimum tax would be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, as the 
member is aware that in the past we’ve had in Saskatchewan the 
minimum tax which would allow municipalities to make a 
determination when they’re doing their assessment and then 
providing an allocation as to what the new tax might be after 
the reassessment. They would have a choice of either using the 
assessment process under the ad valorem system and then using 
that tax and then applying the tax rate to the assessment or 
determining what level of services a municipality might be 
providing and then using a minimum tax application to it and 
using either one of those principles, is what we’ve had in the 
past. 
 
What this amendment permits to happen here is that 
municipalities can now use a combination of both or either or 
neither one, where in fact they may make a decision that for a 
variety of different services in a community you might assess 
certain values to things like fire protection, police services, the 
streets and roads, and charge or assign a particular allocation 
which would then be called the base tax. Over and above that 
then they would then proceed to use the ad valorem system on 
the assessment process and apply them collectively then to get 
what the new tax rate might be for a particular resident within 
the community. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You actually 
answered my second question along with that explanation. 
 
I believe this amendment also removes the assessment of 
business property to tax businesses. Does this mean all 
municipalities, when this Bill is passed, must cease collecting 
the business tax immediately? 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, that provision 
would come in in 2001, January 2001. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It also appears 
you’re making some changes as far as removing some of the 
impediments to voluntary amalgamation or creation of resort 
communities. Does this amendment apply only to resort 
communities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — What this allows, Mr. Chair, to the 
member, is that if in fact there is consensus or agreement by the 
municipalities if they choose to proceed down that particular 
path, what this really does then . . . permits for this to occur just 
through a minister’s order so that the minister would just simply 
sign an order, as opposed to it having to go to an 
order-in-council approval. This is basically a procedural 
process. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
amendment changes the method in which clerks, treasurers 
would be let go or dismissed. Can you explain the changes and 
actually why are these changes being made, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, today what 
happens, of course, is that the board of examiners would be 
looking at two particular functions. One would be the 
qualifications of a particular individual which in fact in many 
cases wouldn’t permit for an investigation process but more of 
an advisory one. And what would happen under this process is 
that the labour issues would now be dealt with in the court 
system as opposed to being dealt with in the municipal system. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
there are a number of changes to the assessment procedure in 
this Bill. And could you just maybe briefly . . . and I don’t want, 
you know, you don’t need to give us a long, elaborate 
explanation, Mr. Minister. But if you could just quickly give us 
a brief explanation as how these apply to urban municipalities 
and how they’re intended to improve the system that we have 
now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, there are about 
six or seven different areas here, maybe eight different areas of 
which I think you might be interested in seeing. I might just 
touch on two or three of them and then have this available for 
you and send it over for you so that you can explore them more 
fully. They’re really called the third group of amendments that 
improve sort of the effectiveness of property tax assessment. 
 
And I might just read two of them into the record here for us 
and then have this available for you. 
 
One is to clarify that a notice of appeal is given to the secretary 
of the board of revision and not the assessor — being one. 
 
Secondly, to clarify that where two or more persons are owners 
of land or improvements, the owners shall designate to whom 
the assessment notice shall be sent. 
 
And the third one that you might be interested in is eliminate 
the property for tax agents to exploit the recent Court of 
Queen’s Bench decision which restricts the circumstances under 
which the board of revision can dismiss an appeal by submitting 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2021 

generic notices of appeal. 
 
And then there are six others here that you might be interested 
in seeing and I’ll have these available for you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, yes 
that would be quite adequate if you’d send them over. 
 
And at that time, that’s all the questions we have at this time, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 21 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To clause 21 of the 
printed Bill, we’d like to: 
 

Amend subsection 237.1(4.2) of The Urban Municipality 
Act, 1984, as being enacted by Clause 21 of the printed 
Bill, by striking out “consecutive”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 21 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 22 to 60 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
(2200) 
 

Bill No. 68 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, this 
Bill deals with the long-standing issue surrounding 331(1)(q) 
and I think most are familiar with the discussion surrounding 
the different tax situations in White City and Emerald Park. Are 
there other areas in the province that this also would affect by 
these changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, there would be other areas of 
the province where there is seasonal residential that would be 
affected and/or where you have larger rural regional centres as 
well that would be affected by that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What effect on 
the taxes say for a retired farmer who continues to live on their 
home property but no longer farms, Mr. Minister? How would 
this affect them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, if the retired farmer still 
continues to own or lease the agricultural land, it would still 
apply. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
unlike the urban Bill where disputes surrounding dismissal of 
administrators or clerks would go directly to court, in the case 

of the RMs (rural municipality) now you’re creating a board of 
reference to handle these issues. Can you tell us why the two 
types of local governments would handle these matters so 
differently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, in the 
consultation process both SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) and the rural administrators were very 
interested and keen in maintaining their role in this particular 
process. And so what we’re doing is leaving the interest and 
their intent in the legislation. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
you’re changing also some of the rules surrounding the 
assessment of oil and gas wells, and could you just give us a 
quick overview of what you’re doing in this area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. What we’re 
doing is we’re really backing up here the reporting period by a 
period of about four months, to allow both SAMA 
(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) and the 
industry and the RMs to review the process. And that’s what 
we’re doing with this particular amendment. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
RMs will now also be able to levy the base tax. Will it apply to 
rural property any different? Will this be any differently applied 
to rural property than it would have been to the urban property 
or is it exactly the same? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the base tax is applied exactly 
the same. They’ll have some additional application that they 
can . . . to organize hamlets. But the intent is exactly the same. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 
that’s all the questions I have on this Bill. One of my colleagues 
will have some questions now. I just want to take this 
opportunity to thank your officials for the answers you’ve given 
us. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, the changes in section 331(1)(q) of The Rural 
Municipality Act is going to have some massive, dramatic 
effects upon taxation issues involving rural residents in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now of course as we’ve gone through the last election, we’ve 
found out that there’s quite a split in this province between the 
chosen members in this Assembly between the urban centres 
and rural centres. And of course there’s always a great deal of 
concern on this side of the House, and we hope that there will 
be some concern on that side of the House, that when we end up 
with rural and urban splits that this change in 331(1)(q) will not 
enhance that split. 
 
And what we’re looking for is some reassurance from the 
minister somewhere along the line that we’re trying to close the 
gap between the differences between rural and urban 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the concerns that has been brought forward to me, Mr. 
Minister, is this change to 331(1)(q) so that rural municipalities 
will no longer be able to exempt the least of assessed in 



2022 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

properties when it comes to non-agricultural properties, whether 
that assessment applies to either the buildings on that property 
or whether it’s to the property itself. 
 
Has your department spent any time in the last few weeks, or 
few months, trying to come up with some sort of dollar figure 
of how much the assessment change is going to take place in 
this province, surrounding the changes, the 331(1)(q)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, just a couple of 
points that I want to make in terms of how we got to this 
particular amendment in the legislation. 
 
In 1997, as the member is probably aware, there were two 
committees that were struck, of which you had . . . we had 
representation from both SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) and SARM, and the department and 
the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association). 
 
And what this body of men and women did, is they went around 
the province and they consulted extensively about a whole 
number of issues as it relates to tax abatements and exemptions 
across the province. And then produced a fairly significant, 
substantive report as to what, in fact, should happen in terms of 
providing fairness and equity, which is your concern, and a very 
appropriate one, as we share as well. 
 
And so when it came to this particular issue around 331(1)(q) 
there was a great deal of debate and discussion about how you 
still might be able to preserve the benefit to the agricultural 
producer or the lessee of agricultural land, because that was 
really the intent of the policy initially, when it was established. 
And was really not there to benefit some of the other 
individuals who were, in fact, using the benefit of 331(1)(q) but 
really were not related to the agricultural industry at all. 
 
And so the committees recommended that we go down this 
path, and so what we’re really taking is the wisdom of those 
people who consulted around the province and then made this 
recommendation. And it’s really the committee’s 
recommendation that we’re bringing forward here this evening. 
 
Now the question that you ask about, you know what will be the 
assessment changes here, will be difficult for us to determine 
yet because you have a whole host of properties yet who have 
been exempt. And so once we have a better appreciation of 
what those properties will be assessed at, then we’ll be able to 
describe more fully what those values will be. But yet we don’t 
have them because those properties were exempt to date. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, 
obviously you should be paying a little more attention to your 
answer, because in it you said we don’t know what the changes 
are going to be because of those . . . assessments were 
exempted. Well, they couldn’t have been exempted if we didn’t 
know what the assessments were. 
 
Mr. Minister, in order to exempt something you have to know 
what it is you’re exempting. I think it’s important, Mr. Minister, 
to understand that since 1991 the downloading that has taken 
place from this government onto school boards, and all 
municipal governments in this province, has been one of the 
most dramatic in the history of this country. 

And it’s fair that rural municipalities at this time, who are going 
to be the tax collectors because of this assessment readjustment 
so to speak, Mr. Minister, that the school boards out there, 
specifically those ones that have rural municipalities in their 
jurisdictions, would have to have a very good grasp, Mr. 
Minister, of how much the assessment change is going to affect 
them. Because as you pointed out, somewhat correctly, is that 
because this property was exempted it was not taxed. 
 
Well properties not being taxed of course were not taxed by 
school divisions and now the school divisions are going to have 
their assessments dramatically increased. And as we are well 
aware, Mr. Minister, when the increases take place in 
assessment for school divisions, what happens is that the 
transfer payments from the provincial government to those 
school divisions are reduced on a dollar by dollar basis. 
 
And so then I think what we need to hear, Mr. Minister, from 
you, is how much that assessment is going to go up in this 
province so that the school boards out there are going to be 
fully aware of the consequences and how they’re going to be 
able to start the process of beginning to understand how much 
transfer payments from the Department of Education and from 
this government is going to decline because of the changes to 
331(1)(q). 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I just want to repeat to the member 
opposite that I know that in some parts of the province, and I 
know that in your part of Saskatchewan, as it is in mine, on the 
edge of regional centres, as well as the larger urbans, there will 
be a shift here. 
 
And the tax committees and the review committees that were 
examining this over the last couple of years talked about exactly 
the same issues that you’re raising today; that there are going to 
be some people who in fact are going to have to pay a larger 
portion today on their tax bill, if they’re not an agricultural 
producer or an agricultural lessee. And so they won’t get the 
exemption of 331(1)(q). 
 
But I say again respectfully to the member that farm dwellings 
in RMs have been exempt to date. And so for us to be able to 
try and determine what that assessed value of those properties 
will be is impossible for us to do today until there is a process 
here to look at them. And so once we have them, we’ll be able 
to provide that for you in more detail. 
 
Today in Saskatchewan of course what’s happening is that 
we’re getting ready for our 2001 assessment process. The 
consultations are going on with the oil and gas industry, with 
the commercial, with the commercial industry . . . commercial 
and industry in this province, with agricultural producers, to try 
and figure out what the reassessment process might look like. 
 
But for us to specifically be able to provide you with that 
answer today, we’re not in a position to do that because those 
dwellings in those RMs have never had any . . . have been 
exempt to date. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
From a rural perspective, it was important to try to have those 
numbers. We were hoping that your department, as they are 
putting this Bill together, would try to put together what was 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2023 

going to happen, the ramifications this was going to have on 
rural Saskatchewan. Maybe in the very near future they would 
take the time and do this, because we certainly understood from 
your comments, Mr. Minister, that again there is going to be a 
shift in taxation onto rural Saskatchewan when this side of the 
House, anyway, is trying to work between rural and urban, to 
do some fence building after the last provincial election. 
 
We’re disappointed that this Bill then will provide a hamper to 
that so what we’re hoping then is that maybe the department 
officials could take the time, try to grasp the ramifications of 
this Bill and the changes to 331(1)(q). 
 
Just quickly to the minister, I would wish to point out that in the 
Rural Municipality of Lakeland the tax shift from the provincial 
government onto the property owners in that one RM alone will 
be $350,000 and that’s just one RM. There are hundreds of 
them so you can imagine, if we start to multiply that, the 
millions and millions of dollars that the Department of 
Education is going to be able to download onto rural 
municipalities because of the changes to 331(1)(q). 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, I wish to take this time to thank the minister 
and his assistants for being here today, and the staff, so we 
could discuss this Bill and we can move it on. 
 
(2215) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 19 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, we’re asking that the Bill be 
amended: 
 

Amend subsection 283.2(4.2) of The Rural Municipality 
Act, 1989, as being enacted by Clause 19 of the printed 
Bill, by striking out “consecutive”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 19 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 20 to 50 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — And we’ll now deal with the additional clause, 
new clause, and again I would like to invite the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs to move the House amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, House amendment Section 
339.2, 39.1 reads this way: 
 

“39.1 The following subsection is added after subsection 
339.2(5): 

 
‘(6) At the request of or with the consent of the board of 
an organized hamlet, the council may, by bylaw pursuant 
to subsection (1), provide that a minimum tax be applied 
to land, improvements or both within the organized 
hamlet that may be different from the minimum tax 
applied elsewhere in the municipality’”. 

Amendment agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 67 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs to introduce any new officials that may be 
joining him for this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, my officials remain as they 
were for the past Bill. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, welcome 
to your officials here again this evening for the fourth time. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve certainly perused the Bill. We see that it is 
generally of a housekeeping nature, and it is certainly is keeping 
the northern municipalities certainly in line with their so-called 
southern cousins. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, one of the things that of course we would 
like to see is one of the things you’re doing in this Bill . . . is 
eliminating some red tape for northern municipalities. And one 
of those areas of course that you’re removing red tape in is 
surrounding the area of dismissal of employees by a board or 
council in the North. 
 
Mr. Minister, of course we’ve already heard tonight that there is 
some degree of discrepancy between urban and rural, and I’m 
wondering if you could take a few minutes and explain to us 
why you felt it was necessary that northern municipalities who 
dismiss a clerk would be treated differently than their rural 
cousins to the South, but treat them the same as their urban 
cousins in the South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I want to first say to the member 
because on a couple of occasions this evening he’s alluded to 
the fact that there’s a need for us to work more diligently and 
collectively in trying to resolve some of the disparities that 
might exist both in rural and urban Saskatchewan, and 
rightfully he identifies also in the North. And you won’t get any 
debate on this side of the House on that issue at all. 
 
I think that collectively, we need to put our heads together and 
work at that process of trying to provide some uniformity 
amongst the legislative tools that both urban and rural people 
have at their disposal and northern folks. 
 
And clearly some of the discussion that we’re having these days 
at the round table is exactly about that — about how in fact we 
might be able to start to blend the legislation in a more 
objective fashion so that you have one piece of legislation that 
would be responsive to urban municipalities and rural 
municipalities as well as northern municipalities. And so that 
process is very much in the mix today. 
 
And as you can appreciate, we have had in Saskatchewan a 
committee of men and women who have been charged with the 
responsibility of looking at how we might re-craft legislation in 



2024 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

the province to be reflective of exactly what you’re talking 
about. And that is to blend where we might have one piece of 
legislation or one Act in the future as opposed to having three 
which in many cases say exactly the same thing with minor, 
little adjustments to areas of which are more applicable to one 
particular part of the province in terms of whether it’s rural or 
urban. 
 
Your question about the issue as it relates to dismissal of 
employees, this is exactly the same amendment that we have 
that’s applicable in the urban municipal Act, so it’s reflective in 
the northern Act that’s comparable to what we’re doing in the 
urban municipal Act. So they’re identical in both of those 
pieces of legislation. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chairman, to Mr. Minister, during the 
discussion surrounding the previous Bill, Bill 68, when we were 
referring to this exact type of legislation that is there, and of 
course as you alluded in rural municipalities, there is going to 
be a somewhat . . . the process is going to be different, and it 
was because that was at their request. 
 
Now I assume then that the urban municipalities were more in 
favour of this type of process. During this discussions with 
municipalities, then were the northern municipalities most in 
favour of this type of process that when there’s a dismissal of 
an employee, then what’s going to happen rather than go to a 
board of reference that then it will immediately proceed through 
the court system to reduce the red tape and ensure a fair and 
equitable treatment of employees by their employers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the member describes it 
accurately that in fact in the consultation process that the 
northern municipalities, basically SUMA, in their consultation 
process, have determined that The Urban Municipality Act and 
The Northern Municipalities Act as it applies to this particular 
section of the Act should in fact be applied equally. 
 
And that’s why we’re making that recommendation because it 
responds to what in fact the review committees ascertained 
from their debates and discussions across the province. So the 
member describes it accurately. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, one of the pieces 
of legislation that you’re changing here now is certainly very 
much in line with what is happening with the rural 
municipalities, and that is surrounding taxation of oil and gas 
wells. 
 
Now certainly we understand that when a new gas well is 
started up that a short period of adjustment is going to have to 
take place for assessment to be able to catch up to that, so that 
the municipality is going to be able to put an assessment on that 
and be able to appropriately tax that property and that 
improvement. 
 
But I guess what I’m very, very curious about is that of course 
this piece of legislation is even in The Northern Municipalities 
Act. It would certainly be great glee to all of us when we ever 
start drilling for oil and developing oil wells in the North 
because it’s certainly a great lack at this time. 
 
But as you’re well aware probably also too, Mr. Minister, is that 

there is a quite a good body, a pool of oil in the North and is 
being undeveloped at this time. And I guess we’re apparently 
saving it for a rainy day, and I guess if we’d have stepped 
outside this evening we’d have found out that it is a rainy day. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, we’re also seeing in this as it applies to the 
rural municipal Act is that municipalities are going to be able to 
continue taxation for one year after the decommissioning of a 
well, after the improvements are gone, so to speak, Mr. 
Minister. So I guess we have some curiosity as to the reasoning 
that your department has come up with as to how we’re going 
to go about taxing nothing. Is this a new tax that the 
government has come up with? Are we going to be able to start 
taxing nothing in this province? 
 
We tax everything else now with an expanded PST (provincial 
sales tax). So I’m wondering the reasoning, Mr. Minister, of 
how you came up with the concept of taxing an oil well that has 
been decommissioned and in fact the improvements are now 
gone from that property and nothing exists and it has gone back 
to its natural state. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, first I want to 
say that the amendments that we’re bringing forward tonight 
and that we’re examining carefully are ones that I’ve mentioned 
on a couple of occasions flow out of the tax review committees 
that have been around the province since 1978. 
 
And what we’re talking about as it relates to the oil and gas 
industry here is that this is not a new practice. This is a 
continuing practice that has been here for some time, so we’re 
not adding anything new here. What we are saying though that 
in the discussions and in the debate that we’ve had around the 
province is in fact the oil and gas industry are supportive of this 
particular amendment to the legislation, so we’re not bringing it 
here without having had that kind of discussion with them. 
 
When you talk very briefly about what’s happening in The 
Northern Municipalities Act as it relates to the future of the gas 
or well drilling industry in the North, I guess what we try to do, 
and we put legislation together and make amendments to it, that 
we’re proactive to what might be happening in fact in the future 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So as the oil and gas industry makes its way into northern 
Saskatchewan and begins its work the legislation will already 
be in place in order to accommodate them. So we might view 
this through the tax committees as being progressive legislation 
in anticipation of what the future activities in northern 
Saskatchewan might be. 
 
(2230) 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, it was certainly 
interesting that we’re now going to have legislation to tax nothing 
in this province. Certainly we talked about having the 
opportunities of having legislation in place should the oil 
companies ever decide to take the opportunity to start developing 
oil fields in the North. Of course with this type of legislation, 
where we’re going to be taxing them for nothing that they have 
there, they might be somewhat reluctant to be able to do that. 
 
So I guess from our point of view, if we’re going to attract oil 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2025 

business into the North, is that we want to be able to have the 
appropriate legislation that would allow them to operate without 
taxing them for something that they have never done or something 
that they may do. We find this rather curious. 
 
But in the meantime, Mr. Chair, I guess we’ve heard all the 
answers that we can expect from this minister. And I would 
suggest at this time that I would like to thank the minister for the 
time that he has spent with us this evening and thank his officials 
for taking this evening — it’s 10:30 at night — it’s time to start 
winding down our day. Thank you very much everyone for being 
here this evening, and I would suggest that we move this Bill on. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I thank you, Mr. Chair. The amendment is 
to: 
 

Amend subsection 193.1(4.2) of The Northern 
Municipalities Act, as being enacted by Clause 8 of the 
printed Bill, by striking out “consecutive”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 9 to 43 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I want to conclude this evening 
by thanking my officials for the work that they have done on 
these pieces of legislation, and also want to thank the members 
opposite for their discussion of these Bills, because clearly what 
we see in this legislation is a progressive legislation for the 
future and I appreciate the understanding that the members 
opposite have of the work that the Saskatchewan people have 
done on the review committees with the oil industry and gas 
industry and all of the stakeholders who have been so diligent in 
bringing this legislation forward. And I thank the members 
opposite for those questions. Thank you. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Education Amendment Act, 2000/ 
Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the Hon. Minister of 
Education to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Immediately to my right I have Deputy Minister Craig Dotson; 
and just behind me is Michael Littlewood, executive director. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair. Good evening, Mr. Minister, and 
good evening to your officials. 
 
The Bill that has been brought forward today for education has 
a number of amendments and a number of specific areas that 

have changed The Education Act, 1995. Basically I think 
there’s seven different areas of change. 
 
And in the second reading speech, the minister indicated that 
the amendments would not reflect any significant change in the 
legislation, but I do understand at the same it actually got rid of 
the Department of Post-Secondary Education out of this 
department. So that is a rather significant change that cost 
taxpayers probably a number of million dollars. 
 
But it’s already a done deal. It’s something that the government 
has decided that this is a good way to spend taxpayers’ dollars 
so it’s not an issue that’s debatable. 
 
But the one area that we are talking about that has made a 
difference to some — will make a difference in the future to 
some school divisions — is setting up a separate school based 
on a minority faith. 
 
I know that there’s been at least one in the last couple of years, 
and I believe that the one area that I need some clarification on 
is the wording that the new boundaries will be based on the 
current-day, school-attendance area. 
 
Now, I’m wondering if the minister could clarify for me what 
he means by the modern-day, school-attendance area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
thank you, member opposite, for the question. Certainly when 
we look at the existing statute, one of the provisions was based 
on old school districts which really were created around the turn 
of the century, and were based I think on . . . that were just too 
small. 
 
So what this amendment does, is it allows for a more modern 
representation in terms of drawing area based on that school 
and school division; and what it does, is it allows for really a 
more modern interpretation in terms of the drawing area of that 
school division. And we did ask stakeholders with regard to 
this, and the Catholic section, Julian Paslawski, the executive 
secretary for the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, 
basically said we agree that the existing legislation is archaic 
and the procedures dysfunctional. So the changes are welcome. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. Minister, I have no 
doubt that these amendments are, as said in your second 
reading, that they were approved by a number of stakeholders. 
 
And I guess what I need to have from you is just a description 
of what you mean by current-day attendance area boundaries. 
Are you talking about . . . if two schools would close, are you 
talking about the schools from the combined area? Are you 
talking about the old district, which is four miles by five miles? 
What do you really mean specifically by this new boundary 
area definition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, what the proposed 
legislation does is it eliminates those old four-by-five districts. 
And the definition of the drawing area for the new schools are 
determined by the school divisions themselves. 
 



2026 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

Ms. Draude: — So in the case of setting up a new area, then it 
would be up to . . . the new school board is going to be set up, 
and they’re going to determine the boundaries themselves. And 
they can decide which quarter of land is going to go in and 
which is going to go out as they determine the outside of the 
boundary; is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, if there was a 
creation of a new, separate school division, what they would 
look at is the existing boundaries of the public division, and 
they would then draw from that area in terms of setting up their 
own division. But the old divisions, which were based on the 
four-by-five mile structure, would be eliminated by these 
amendments. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, just recently, and maybe just 
before you became Minister of Education, there was a school 
division in my area, the Englefeld Protestant school division — 
I believe it’s the only one in the province — set up their own 
area, their own separate school division. And they at that time 
worked within the old, old area, the historical school area. 
 
Now if they were going to set that up today, could you give me 
an example of what they would have had to do today if they 
wanted to set up that school division. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, with regard to the 
specific question, the changes that the Englefeld School 
Division entertained in 1997, today if they were to do that it 
would be the same. It would be based on the location of that 
school, the attendance area based on the original and that would 
be the attendance area for the new school division. 
 
(2245) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I think 
the next question that I have is, by amending section 186 you’re 
making provisions for more integrated classrooms whereby 
students with disabilities or special needs will be included in the 
regular classrooms. 
 
Given the very high teacher-student ratio in most classrooms we 
know that there is going to be added workload that the teacher 
will have for preparing for this integrated classroom. I see that 
there is a clause allowing for the exemption of some students 
that have been previously determined would not fare well in the 
classroom and may in fact impact negatively on the education 
of other students. 
 
I’m wondering if you could, if you could clarify that for me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, really with regard 
to section 186, the only changes would be striking out the word 
“institution” and replacing that with “program.” So in terms of 
the general thrust there is no change in philosophy with regard 
to disabled children. What we’re doing is we’re adopting the 
more modern language of referring to program as opposed to 
institution which tends to be old language and there’s always 
the stigma with institutionalizing. And so what we’re doing is 
we’re adopting the more modern language of program in 
reference to disabled children. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You mention in the 

next clause other services, but can you explain how education 
will be provided to the students that are determined will not fair 
well in this integrated classroom? How will the education 
services be provided to those students? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, certainly when 
you’re looking at a case by case basis and individualizing 
programs, if it is the assessment of the school division that a 
particular case, particular individual, particular student would not 
fair well in a particular integrated environment then it is the 
responsibility of that division to find which programs, which 
locations would be of the most beneficial, and so it allows for a 
case by case analysis in terms of what are the programs available 
and how we maximize those programs for that individual disabled 
child. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
think it’s very important that each child be recognized on an 
individual basis and that their needs be assessed individually. I 
notice you said that the school board would have the 
determination as to what education program would be allowed for 
that child. Will a parent have any input into that decision, or will 
they have any opportunity to discuss with the board where their 
child will go to school or what kind of school subjects that child 
will be taking? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the provision with 
regard to consulting with the pupil’s parents is not changed with 
any of the amendments that is included in the Act at this point in 
time. And with regard to disabled children, there must be that 
consultation that occurs with the student’s parents. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you. 
Section 295 deals with the tax loss compensation fund, and it is 
our understanding that the MOU (memorandum of understanding) 
has been signed. It’ll see municipalities and school boards 
receiving a total of $1.2 million when land is converted to reserve 
status. Of that $1.2 million, do you know approximately how 
much of it is going to be going to school divisions for their tax loss 
compensation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, with regard to the 
specific $1.2 million referenced by the member opposite, that 
will be going entirely to school divisions. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, school divisions have often 
indicated that a call for proposal might simplify the process 
when it comes to this tendering issue that we’re discussing. 
Tendering does not allow for a lot of leeway and projects can 
sometimes take a long time before they are actually completed. 
Have you had discussions with school boards about allowing 
. . . being allowed to use local labour base and offer a call for 
proposal for various projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the SSTA 
specifically asked us to look at increasing the amounts in terms 
of tendering that would not require to be tendered. With regard 
to specific different arrangements other than the tendering or 
calls for proposal, they haven’t brought that forward to us and 
isn’t included in the amendments in the Act at this point in time. 
But we’re certainly willing to look at that if the SSTA were to 
bring it forward. 
 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2027 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, I just have 
one further question. 
 
There’s a lot of school divisions right now or a number of 
school divisions that are having to pay for their capital projects 
themselves mostly because they just can’t wait any longer or 
don’t want to wait any longer. 
 
If they are paying for the projects themselves, are they going to 
be under the same guidelines as those . . . or the same rules 
regarding tendering as the other school divisions that the 
government has some input into? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the answer is yes 
that the requirements for tendering apply equally whether or not 
they’re funding a capital project 100 per cent from the school 
division. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Just one further question. Is there any way or 
any room for leeway if the school board has to raise all the 
money themselves; will the government allow any leeway if 
they would like to do some tendering either in a different 
manner, or call for proposal, or in some way utilize more of 
their local labour justifying it on the basis that they’re spending 
their own money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Currently, Mr. Deputy Chair, we 
haven’t received a proposal along those lines from the SSTA, 
and certainly we would be willing to look at that. But at this 
point in time, tendering requirements, the increases that are 
allowed for by the amendments to the Act today would apply 
equally to school divisions no matter what the proportion of the 
cost of the capital project would be at this point in time. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 19 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and I 
will propose a House amendment to Clause 19 of the printed 
Bill, and: 
 

Amend Clause 19 of the printed Bill by striking out “The 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training Act” wherever it appears and in each case 
substituting “The Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training Act, 2000”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 19 as amended agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Fuel Tax Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, this is item no. 27, Bill No. 
45, and I move that this Bill be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Insurance Premiums Tax 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 71 — The Health Districts Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(2300) 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Department of Health 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly 
I move that Bill No. 10 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, and by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Regulatory Reform) Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I move that this Bill should now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 77 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 



2028 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

Bill No. 15 — The Department of Justice 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Public Libraries 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 69 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that Bill No. 69 be now read the third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 68 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the 
amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that Bill No. 68 be now read the third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 67 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that Bill No. 67 be now read the third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Education Amendment Act, 2000/ 
Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that Bill No. 13 be now read the third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Education 

Vote 5 
 
The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote, I invite the Hon. 
Minister of Education to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. 
Immediately to my right is Craig Dotson, deputy minister. 
Directly behind me is Ken Horsman, associate deputy minister; 
immediately to my left is Michael Littlewood, executive 
director; a little bit further to my right is Larry Allen, executive 
director; and directly behind him is Cal Kirby, director of 
facilities planning. And just behind me to the right is Sheila 
Engele, policy analyst, finance and operations; and at the back 
of the room is John McLaughlin, executive director, Teachers’ 
Superannuation Commission. 
 
Subvote (ED01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. 
Welcome again, Mr. Minister, and welcome especially to your 
officials. You’ve been waiting probably quite a long time, with 
anticipation no doubt, and patiently. So thank you. 
 
Mr. Minister, probably one of the main things on your mind and 
my mind and your officials behind you in the last week has 
been the teacher negotiations. And the fact that the teachers 
agreed on Friday afternoon to not walk out this school year, and 
that they were willing to go back to the negotiating table, I 
believe it’s tomorrow, was probably pleasant news to your ears. 
 
Mr. Minister, I had a teacher phone me today and said if I could 
ask the minister this one question: in his news release he came 
out and said that he wanted to reassure the teachers that they 
were heard. And his question to you was, Mr. Minister, what 
did you hear? What are you saying to the teachers and what is 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2029 

your plans for future negotiations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and member 
opposite. Certainly we were very, very pleased to hear that the 
teachers would not be taking any job action or sanctions at this 
point in time. 
 
We have heard also that, with the resounding majority for a 
sanctions vote that there is solidarity of the Teachers’ 
Federation and the teachers in the province of Saskatchewan, 
and that they do have a strong mandate to return to the 
bargaining table, and we’re very thankful that they are coming 
back to the bargaining table. Certainly we believe that we can 
have a positive collective agreement bargained at the table and 
bargaining will be resumed tomorrow. And we certainly know 
that there are a host of issues that the teachers have brought 
forward to the bargaining table this round, and we also 
recognize that they have some concerns that haven’t been 
addressed by the interim collective agreement. And we’re more 
than willing; we have closed no doors. And I’m willing to 
obviously let the bargaining team work and to see what the 
proposals are that come forward. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, to the Minister, thank you. Mr. 
Minister, I believe that on the other side of the fence we have 
the SSTA that are watching and wondering. The big question is 
where’s the money going to come from. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the budget we heard many times the words that 
$18.5 million was put into the operating grants this budget. Out 
of that, $14 million is going to go to special education. There 
was a 25 per cent increase for curriculum activization. There is 
additional money for pre-kindergarten, additional money for 
community schools, additional money for community school 
co-ordination, increased funding, $262 for the basic pupil rate. 
But at the same time, Mr. Minister, the teachers’ contract is at 
least 2.6 per cent. Every percentage is about $6 million, so 
we’re looking at at least $15.6 million for this issue. Obviously, 
Mr. Minister, this doesn’t all add up. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are 44 school divisions, at least, that are 
going to get less money this year than they did last year from 
the government when we changed the equalization factor from 
15 to 16. And so that means right now there are school divisions 
wondering how they are going to pay for this. Mr. Minister, 
mill rates have been set and basically there is no room for the 
SSTA to move. If there is any additional money going to be 
negotiated for wages or benefits it must come from the 
provincial government. Can the government guarantee that 
school boards won’t have to pay out any more money to cover 
these costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and member 
opposite. Certainly the numbers that she relates with regard to the 
18.5 million on the foundation operating grant is correct. Certainly 
we anticipate that an amount of that would go to a new 
collective agreement for teachers. But we have said — and I 
reiterate to the member opposite — that with a negotiated 
settlement and we have a ratified agreement, that the provincial 
government will provide that sum of money at least — if not 
more — to cover the costs. And it will provided on a global 
basis to the foundation operating grant. 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair of Committees, Mr. Minister, 
besides the teachers’ wages which of course I know the global 
. . . the budget means that there will be that much money put 
into it. There’ll be at least 44 school divisions that won’t get 
enough money. But besides the teachers’ wages, they also have 
the wages of the support workers that also have to be taken into 
consideration. So again we’re going to have school boards 
saying, I can’t do this, Mr. Minister. There isn’t enough money 
in the education budget. 
 
Mr. Minister, how are you addressing the SSTA? How can they 
possibly know that they are providing the very best education 
they can for the students of our province when they don’t get 
enough money? Mr. Minister, it’s not too late; there is an 
opportunity for you to say that we will do something for these 
school boards to make sure that they can continue to educate 
our students. Have you got a commitment for the SSTA that 
means that each one of them are going to be able to say to every 
student in this province, I’m going to give you the best 
education I can with provincial dollars? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly education in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair, is a shared responsibility, and we 
believe that the department, the government, school trustees, 
and teachers recognize that it is the responsibility of all of the 
stakeholders and partners in education to provide a top quality 
education to the students in this province, and we all agree with 
that philosophy. 
 
We also recognize that locally elected boards do have the 
autonomy and the authority to make decisions on service 
delivery, and they have done a commendable job over the 
many, many years that they’ve had this responsibility in 
providing a quality education for the students in this province. 
And I’m confident that that will continue, that we will have a 
quality education system, and I think all stakeholders are proud 
of the system that we have in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So to answer the member opposite, certainly we believe that 
that philosophy won’t change; that the objective of all of the 
stakeholders in education is to provide that quality education 
and that we have the shared responsibility, and that locally 
elected boards do have the tools to provide that service and also 
to access the local property tax base in addition to what the 
provincial government provides on an equalization basis, to 
provide that top quality education. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, definitely we should 
be confident that the teachers . . . that the students will still be 
receiving their education. But as far as the philosophy, we have 
to have a philosophy of recognition that the government has to 
take more responsibility. 
 
Right now Saskatchewan has the second highest tax burden on 
ratepayers in all of Canada. We’re at . . . only 39.2 per cent of 
the actual funding comes from the province. Only Ontario is 
lower, at 37.3 per cent, Mr. Minister. The teachers and the 
school boards are working very diligently to make sure that 
they can do their very best, but they can’t continue it any 
longer. They’ve had 10 years of underfunding, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s issues that we haven’t discussed. One of 
them that we’ll talk about is rural transportation. 



2030 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

In 1995 the grant per student was 133 and the grant per 
kilometre was 149. This year the grant per student is 143 and 
the grant per kilometre is 152. At the same time, Mr. Minister, 
fuel prices have absolutely skyrocketed. I’m sure you’re well 
aware of that. And the price of buying a school bus has nearly 
doubled in this time frame. These are very real and very 
significant costs for schools. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is your department doing to address this 
concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly the department 
strives to provide each year, on a global basis, 100 per cent in 
terms of the cost of transportation across the province. And 
certainly it’s a little bit of give and take, but that is a philosophy 
each year, when we’re looking at the recognized expenditures, 
that the department does try to provide 100 per cent of the costs 
of transportation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, obviously, 
though, you’re not. You’re not providing 100 per cent of the 
cost of transportation when you look at the cost of fuel and the 
cost of the vehicles that the school boards are faced to purchase. 
There is no recognition that they are leaning on taxpayers 
harder every year in order to make sure that the children again 
have the transportation they need. 
 
Mr. Minister, school boards are also faced with an increased 
cost in maintenance due to the insufficient capital funding. The 
capital funding shortfall has been around long enough that 
everyone is forgetting that who they can blame it on any more. 
Mr. Minister, do you really have a plan to address the shortage 
of capital that we have. Can you tell me how many school . . . 
what the dollar figure is that school boards are . . . been looking 
for, for capital improvements or new buildings in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, to be very specific with 
regard to the question asked by the member opposite, I’m told 
that the cumulative amount of all capital requests this year is 
$235 million. We did increase the capital budget for this fiscal 
year by 5 million to 29 million. We also recognize that the 
Centenary Capital Fund will also provide an additional $5 
million for each of the next three years. And certainly it is our 
intention to look very carefully next year with regard to the 
capital budget as well. But the increase in capital this year does 
amount to 20.7 per cent which is a substantial increase from last 
year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I have a question on the French 
schools and I’m sure just a clarification. The French schools are 
fully funded, and I believe that is from the federal government. 
Am I correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, with regard to the question 
with regard to the francophone school division, there is federal 
money provided to the francophone school division. There is 
provincial money that is provided directly from the Department 
of Education, and there’s is also access to the property tax base 
because francophone ratepayers are also paying property taxes. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me how much the 
federal government pays towards the francophone schools per 
student. 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the francophone school 
division receives about $2 million from the federal government 
each year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, will you also clarify what you 
mean by francophone parents or ratepayers having access to the 
property taxes. 
 
(2330) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The location for a francophone 
ratepayer or a person who has a child going to the francophone 
school division would pay their education property taxes to the 
school division that they actually have their residence. But that 
does not go to the francophone school division. The Department 
of Education provides a direct grant to the francophone school 
division. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So thank you, Mr. Minister, then the 
francophone schools do not receive any funding from property 
taxes then. You said $2 million comes from the federal 
government. Can you tell me how many students are enrolled in 
the francophone schools in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, I’m told that the actual 
enrolment last year was 940 students. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, is that number 
increasing or decreasing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, it has been relatively 
stable in the past few years, but I understand there was a small 
increase this year in the neighbourhood of 20 to 30 students. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I understand, I 
believe there’s about 187,000 children in our schools here in 
Saskatchewan. And also in band schools, I believe the number 
is about 14 to 15,000. The number of students that are actually 
moving between the band schools and our systems, our public 
and separate systems in Saskatchewan, I understand it fluctuates 
quite considerably during the year. There will be students that 
will be enrolled in one of our schools and then move to the 
reserve and then back again. 
 
It’s one of the issues that the auditor brought up, and he is 
concerned that there is up to 1,600 students in the city of 
Saskatoon alone who may not be attending school — they’re of 
school age — because of registering in one area and then 
moving to another. This is one area that I’m sure your 
department is very concerned with because of course when we 
have children who are not being educated, then we have a 
concern as they grow older and come into the workforce. 
 
Mr. Minister, how are you addressing this concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Chair, the department 
worked with the Provincial Auditor in identifying this particular 
area and it is a concern for the department. Certainly we are 
looking at a fairly mobile population, and the mobility of 
families. I actually had an opportunity to visit Scott Collegiate 
here in Regina just in the past day or so, and what I’m told is 
that some of the students enrolling in their high school will 
indicate that they’ve attended previously 10 to 12 schools, and 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2031 

that seems to be a common theme. 
 
So it is a difficult area to address. We do have a highly mobile 
population, and some of the suggestions that we’ve seen is that 
there is a concerted effort to try and identify the previous level 
of achievement at the schools where they are enrolling that they 
do make contact with the previous schools that they can 
identify. And if they are unable to identify, what they will do is 
they will place these children in age appropriate classrooms and 
allow for the interaction. But certainly they are welcomed into 
the school system wherever they enrol, and it is a difficult issue 
and we are trying to sort out how the best application in terms 
of a program would apply to this group. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, we understand and 
we appreciate that this is a very big concern. And I know that 
some provinces have a system set up where they can monitor if 
a child is in a school on the reserve and if they move out they 
can track that child so that we don’t have to wait for them to 
come to the school system, we know when they’re not there. Is 
there is any work being undertaken at this time to work with the 
FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) or with any 
of the band councils to find out where these students are so we 
know when they leave the school system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, it’s my understanding that 
there is interaction between band councils and local school 
divisions in terms of trying to identify the movement of students 
within their jurisdiction. But as far as I know there is no sort of 
standardized monitoring procedure available throughout the 
province with regard to this. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I would imagine that’s one of the 
areas that your department is working on. 
 
Mr. Minister, the age-historical schools in the province have 
received different funding amounts from the government, and it 
seems that the only way a historical school can receive a full grant 
is if they become an associate school. Is this a practice that you are 
planning to maintain? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, there are eight historical 
schools. One of course, College Mathieu, is part of the 
francophone division and is funded by the federal government. 
The seven historic schools that the member references, there has 
been an identified inequity and the department is undertaking a 
review of the funding for these historic schools. And we’ll be 
moving on this in the very near future. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I’m 
wondering, the previous Minister of Education appeared to be 
committed to the concept of stand-alone schools. Yet we have 
been told that this minister has actually reversed the 
government’s policy regarding the construction of K to 8 
schools. As a result we are seeing more new joint schools 
instead of stand-alone schools. Can you explain the change in 
policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, about three years ago the 
separate category for joint-use facilities was eliminated. The 
current prioritization with regard to capital projects does 
provide roughly a 10 per cent premium for joint-use projects. 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, can you explain what 
the difference is between a joint school as compared to a 
stand-alone school? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, a stand-alone school 
would be a school that was part . . . an individualized school 
that belonged directly to a public school division or a separate 
school division and that was the sole purpose of that school. 
 
When we talk about joint-use facilities there’s a whole host of 
partners that could be involved in these joint-use projects. It 
might be a K to 12 school and say a regional college. It might 
be a K to 12 school in the separate system with a K to 12 school 
in the public system where they share common area and 
common resources. It might be a K to 12 school, a regional 
college, and a municipality or a town. So there’s all kinds of 
models out there. And certainly it depends on the interaction 
between the division and the other partners and working on a 
particular agreement and how that would work as a joint-use 
facility. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the correspondence schools, I 
understand from information that I received from your 
department that the total cost of providing services this year is 
estimated at $2.279 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, is the number of students who are using the 
correspondence classes or the number of correspondence 
classes being used . . . I guess it wouldn’t matter how many 
students are taking . . . is that number increasing every year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — We’re at a slight decrease over the 
past few years which almost mirrors the decline in enrolment 
that we’ve seen across the province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have just a couple 
of questions left, and I guess they’re again surrounding money. 
And when I went through the Estimates and Public Accounts 
for the last number of years, I noticed that in 1996-97 the 
Estimates showed that there is a difference of $1.391 million 
not spent on education that had been estimated. In ’97-98 there 
was over 6 million. And in ’98-99 there was 7.6 million. 
 
So at that time, there was $15 million that had been estimated 
for education that wasn’t spent on it. 
 
Mr. Minister, if any department would need to spend money on 
education, and if every penny that had been estimated for it, I 
would think it would be the Department of Education. 
 
Looking through orders in councils and going back into Public 
Accounts, I believe that your Department of Education is one of 
the few departments that’s never gone to the government for 
money from orders in council so that you can help fund some 
expense that was not looked at, at the beginning of the year. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’re talking about Education, one of the most 
important departments in the government, and yet we’ve seen 
not only have they not gone for extra money, they’ve not even 
been able to spend what was estimated. Fifteen million dollars 
right now would make a huge difference to the SSTA. It would 
make a huge difference to taxpayers and to the teachers also 
that are looking for wage contracts. 



2032 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

Can you tell me how a department like Education wouldn’t 
spend all the money that’s in their estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With regard to 
the question from the member opposite, every penny of the 
budgeted amount for the foundation operating grant has been 
spent. Every penny budgeted for the capital projects have been 
spent. And where the discrepancy comes from is with regard to 
the statutory requirement for pensions. And that really is based 
on the number of teachers that will retire or won’t retire in a 
given year. And it doesn’t matter what that amount is, the 
statutory requirement is to cover that exactly, what that amount 
is. 
 
So I think the Department of Education is I think indeed proud 
of the fact that they haven’t been required to look at special 
warrants in terms of funding and it goes to show really that the 
foundation operating grant and how capital projects are 
prioritized is very good and working very well within the 
government. 
 
(2345) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I don’t think that we 
can say that everything is working very well in the government; 
what it means is the taxpayers are paying a heck of a lot of 
money for taxes that the government normally would have paid 
back a few years ago. It also means that there are school boards 
that are seeing schools crumble around their heads and teachers 
that are complaining because they aren’t being paid. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the statement of operating expenditures this 
year, we talked about . . . look at teachers’ benefits . . . pensions 
and benefits, the forecast for ’99-2000 was 118,725 and the 
estimate was 108,060. Can you tell me why there is that $10 
million discrepancy there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The simple answer to the member 
opposite is that when the estimates were prepared last year and 
there was a number placed on the expected number of teacher 
retirements, we in fact had less teachers retire last year than 
what was expected. And that’s why there was an increase in the 
amount required for last year’s estimate. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I just have one other question for 
you. I’m wondering what your department, now that you are 
head of the Department of Education, what your feeling is on 
the rural schools and the issue that we have out in rural 
Saskatchewan with school closures and the need that of course 
school boards have to ensure that the children receive the 
classes they need. And at the same time, the worry that many of 
them have that their children are going to be on the buses for a 
long time. And the fact that the schools are the centre of a 
community. And the fact that it takes more than just four walls 
to educate a child. There’s a lot of people that know and believe 
that students that are educated in rural Saskatchewan come into 
the workplace or into the universities with much more than just 
a learning experience you can get from a book, that they are 
raised by a community and that there are a lot of benefits to it. 
 
But right now we’re finding that with the squeezes on education 
that our school divisions are having very little choice but to 
close schools. I know that a lot of it is philosophy of a 

government and their belief in what they should be doing when 
it comes to educating children. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m asking you on behalf of a lot of the rural 
school divisions what you will be doing to ensure that rural 
schools do remain viable. I know that you’re going to be talking 
about small schools and sparsity grants, but please do that in a 
way that will allow them to see what the future is, if there’s a 
future for them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly the philosophy of 
the Department of Education in this government is that we 
would like to provide an equitable learning opportunity no 
matter where you live in the province of Saskatchewan. And 
subsequently, we do provide for increased funds to rural 
populations such as the small school factor, such as the sparsity 
factor, such as the 100 per cent coverage in terms of rural 
transportation. But we also recognize that last year we had a 
decrease in enrolment province-wide of 2,300; and 1,700 of 
those students, the decrease in enrolment, were within rural 
school divisions. 
 
So our philosophy is and will continue to be to support 
education in rural Saskatchewan so that they can have an 
equitable learning experience. And school divisions must, you 
know, they make difficult decisions in rural Saskatchewan 
when they see declines in enrolment. We have increased the 
funding for distance education and enhanced learning 
technology. 
 
And we certainly do support education in rural Saskatchewan, 
but we do recognize where enrolment is decreasing that school 
divisions are often faced with difficult decisions and the 
department will try and support the equitable nature of 
opportunity as much as we can in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, I do like to thank the minister and 
I’d like to thank his officials for coming out and for staying late. 
And I just want to remark to the minister that I know that there 
— in some cases — there is a decline in rural enrolment, but at 
the same time it’s a vicious circle. 
 
It’s part of what’s happening in this province when it comes to 
the economy, when it comes to the roads, closing hospitals, and 
the impact that government philosophy has on rural 
Saskatchewan. There is young families now that are looking at 
locating in rural Saskatchewan and saying, should I? Is there 
going to be a school there? Is there going to be a hospital? Is 
there going to be a road? And that all has an impact and it 
means there can be declines in the enrolment in our small 
towns. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m hoping that as we in the next few months 
go forward and you have to deal the funding in education, I’m 
hoping that the school boards are going to be able to say the 
minister did come across, that he did pay for the wages for the 
teachers across the board — not just for teachers but for the 
support staff. And that maybe we will see a real priority and a 
change in this, in the way that education is looked at in this 
province. 
 
Subvote (ED01) agreed to. 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2033 

Subvote (ED02), (ED03), (ED04) agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1999-2000 
General Revenue Fund 

Education 
Vote 5 

 
Subvote (ED04) agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — I thank the minister and officials. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:56 p.m. 
 


