





























































Hansard: May 02, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 941 
 May 2, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, presenting 
a petition regarding fuel prices. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals 
from the communities of Swift Current and Maple Creek. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have residents of 
my area that are concerned about the high price of fuel, and the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the petition is signed by people from Regina, Cut Knife, 
Unity, and Kerrobert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned about 
forced municipal amalgamation, and the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks from Yellow Creek, and Birch Hills, 
Melfort. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of people in Swift Current and area concerned about their 
hospital. Mr. Speaker, the prayer can be summarized in the 
following way: 
 

The petitioners are humbly praying that this Hon. 
Assembly would cause the provincial government to assist 

with capital funding for the Swift Current Regional 
Hospital, thereby allowing the Swift Current District 
Health Board the opportunity to provide improved health 
care services. 
 

And this petition is signed by residents of Swift Current, 
McMahon, Wymark and Hodgeville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition for citizens who are opposed to forced municipal 
amalgamation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this is signed by citizens from Melfort and St. Brieux. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to read a 
petition opposed to enforced municipal amalgamation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good people of Unity and Wilkie. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition here to 
reduce fuel tax: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Petitioners have signed from Davidson and Bladworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from citizens 
who are concerned about the price of fuel. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever humbly 



942 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2000 

pray. 
 
The petitioners are from Bruno, Muenster, and Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today from people who are opposed to enforced amalgamation. 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people from 
Henribourg and Christopher Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present on behalf of the citizens concerned about the high tax on 
fuel, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and provincial 
governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes by 10 cents a 
litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 
 

And this petition is signed by citizens of Cupar, Dysart, and 
Southey. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present petitions to reduce the fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and provincial 
governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes by 10 cents a 
litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 
 

The petition is signed by the good citizens of Carrot River, 
Arborfield, and Nipawin. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province petitioning the 
Assembly on the following matters: 
 

To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To reduce fuel taxes; 

To abandon plans to confiscate municipal reserve accounts; 
and 
 
To provide a $3,000 exemption of the PST (Provincial Sales 
Tax) for vehicle dealers. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 37 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan): what lawsuits are currently pending 
against CIC and/or its subsidiaries, and for each lawsuit 
who was the plaintiff and what is the nature of the action 
and what damages are being sought. 
 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to give another 
question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 37 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

Again to the Minister of CIC: how much has SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and/or CIC spent to 
date on the review of the no-fault insurance program. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I too have a notice of a written question. I shall 
give notice that I shall on day no. 37 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: how much is SaskPower planning 
to spend for computers to be installed in company vehicles 
in the year 2000. 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 37 ask the government the following question: 
 

What was the total cost of producing the SaskPower 1999 
annual report, Priorities, and what was the total number of 
copies made of this report. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and to all members of the legislature 
the grade 8 class from Davin School which is in your west 
gallery. They’re standing for us. They’re accompanied by their 
teachers Ms. Wynne Edwards and Mr. Glenn Yu. 
 
And I would ask all members to welcome them here to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, I would like to have leave to 
also introduce a gentleman seated in the Speaker’s gallery. He’s 
the former director of Hansard who retired 10 years ago 
yesterday, and I’m told that he was with Hansard from the quill 
to the typewriter and then to the word processor. Please 
welcome Mr. Joe Melia. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 943 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Kenaston Youth Receives Bravery Award 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
honour to rise today to inform you of a brave and courageous 
young boy in my constituency. Yesterday I had the honour to be 
in the city of Saskatoon, where Justin Wipf of Kenaston was 
awarded the Governor General’s Medal of Bravery. 
 
This story goes back to June 30, 1998 when Justin was 12 years 
old. He’d been swimming with his friends and returned to shore 
when he noticed one of his friends had disappeared under the 
surface. Although he was exhausted from swimming, Justin 
dove back into the water in search of his friend. He surfaced 
several times for air and after the third time, with all the 
strength he could muster, Justin pulled the older and heavier 
boy to the surface. He then dragged him to the shore where the 
boy’s uncle was able to revive him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the courageous act shown by this young man 
represents the highest form of bravery recognized by our 
society today. There could be no greater act than to risk one’s 
own life to save another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as in most cases of bravery, the courageous 
individual usually responds modestly to those who thank him. 
They say that they did what they had to do, or it was the right 
thing, or they just didn’t think about it at the time. But in 
Justin’s case, as in most cases, the individuals acted swiftly and 
courageously to save someone in a desperate situation. 
 
For this bravery, our province and our country have honoured 
Justin with this outstanding achievement. And I am sure, Mr. 
Speaker, that the members of this Assembly will join me also in 
honouring the courageous act of Justin Wipf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Emergency Preparedness Week 

 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
week we are celebrating Emergency Preparedness Week. 
 
Emergency Preparedness Week is recognized by all provinces 
and territories across Canada the first week in May. “Together 
We Prepare . . . The Family, The Community, The Country” is 
this year’s theme. This theme addresses the fact that everyone 
has a responsibility in emergency preparedness. We can reduce 
the risk of occurrence or the degree of impact from natural or 
human-made disasters if we are all better prepared and work 
together. 
 
Everyone, no matter where they live, may be threatened by a 
natural or human-made disaster. In the past few years, 
Saskatchewan communities have dealt with floods, forest, and 
grass fires, train derailments, and severe storms. 
 
Over 500 emergency measures coordinators work in their local 
communities and mutual aid areas to ensure that an emergency 
plan is in place and coordinated with service providers and 
neighbouring communities. 
 

Today we want to recognize the valuable contribution that these 
coordinators make to Saskatchewan communities. Each of us 
can support emergency preparedness by knowing the risks, 
having a family emergency plan, and keeping needed supplies 
on hand. 
 
I urge all members of this Assembly, and indeed all citizens of 
Saskatchewan and their communities, to take time to plan ahead 
and be prepared for emergencies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Governor General’s Caring Canadian Award 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Roy Tollefson 
and his wife Fern are residents of the community of Mossbank. 
They raised four children, Terry Tollefson, Dr. Laurie 
Tollefson, Katherine, and their son Tim, who actively farms 
now. 
 
Mr. Tollefson has been an executive church member for 50 
years. He served on the local hospital and wheat pool boards 
and is a member of the Mossbank Legion Branch No. 11. Mr. 
Tollefson has served two terms as a governor on the board of 
the University of Regina and he has been involved with the 
Mossbank community youth by coaching and managing hockey 
teams and volunteering with Boy Scouts. Mr. Tollefson was 
instrumental in starting the museum at Mossbank and since 
1985 has been the president of the museum association. 
 
Mr. Tollefson’s public record of leadership and community 
service will make him today a most deserving recipient of the 
Governor General’s Caring Canadian Award — an award 
presented to individuals who have made significant voluntary 
contributions to help or care for people in their community. 
 
I hope all members of this Hon. Assembly will join in showing 
our appreciation for the work of Mr. Roy Tollefson in his 
community and the greater community of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wild Rice Industry Prospers 
 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good 
and great news from northern Saskatchewan. The story for wild 
rice production was so good last week that I want to say more 
and I forgot to mention a few facts. 
 
Number one, Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan wild rice 
growers have produced 75 to 80 per cent of all Canadian 
production in the past two years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I’m also proud to report, Mr. Speaker, 
that two of my constituents from Athabasca received the 
Northern Saskatchewan Award of Excellence in Wild Rice 
presented by the Minister of Northern Affairs. 
 
The proud recipients are Ralph and Marie Laliberte from 
Beauval. In addition, this year’s Northern Saskatchewan Award 
of Excellent in Fishing went to Oscar Beatty from 



944 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2000 

Deschambault Lake, and for trapping went to Martin Smith of 
Pinehouse. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, more great news. The Deputy Premier sent a 
powerful signal to the people in the wild rice industry. He 
attended and presented the award to Kaz Parada of La Ronge, 
and Dennis and June Christianson of Denare Beach at his 
attendance at La Ronge supper. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan wild rice 
producers are the leaders and models of excellence in Canadian 
wild rice production. And I think all of Saskatchewan should be 
proud of the wild rice industry. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Partners In Motion Documentary 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have the distinct 
pleasure of rising today to inform all members of the Assembly 
about a television documentary with Saskatchewan connections. 
 
Regina’s own Partners in Motion, in conjunction with Single 
Spark Pictures from California has co-produced a documentary 
called, 13 Seconds: The Kent State Shootings. This 
documentary chronicles the events that led up to the Ohio 
National Guard firing on a group of unarmed student protesters 
at Kent State University on May 4, 1970. 
 
The shootings left four students dead, nine wounded, and a 
nation changed forever. The wounds from the Kent State 
shootings still run deep. Thirty years later it’s still a complex 
story and the documentary attempts to examine the tragedy 
from both sides, that of the guardsmen and the students. 
 
13 Seconds: The Kent State Shootings aired last night on 
History Television and will air at 8 p.m. local time on The 
Learning Channel this Friday, May 5. Within the Saskatchewan 
production industry this documentary represents a major 
milestone for Partners in Motion. They are the only 
Saskatchewan production company that have programs aired on 
these two national channels. 
 
The Partners in Motion, a well-known Regina based film and 
video production company really expanded its presence into 
eastern Canada and has won many national awards and 
international awards including Grammys. 
 
Please congratulate them all. 
 

Holocaust Memorial Week 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is Yom 
Hashoah, and while the member from Regina South will be at 
the Holocaust memorial this evening, on Sunday I had the 
honour and privilege to speak at the synagogue in Saskatoon on 
behalf of the Premier and the Government of Saskatchewan to 
mark Holocaust Memorial Week. 
 
This week serves to help us all remember one of the darkest 
chapters in the history of humanity and to rededicate ourselves 
to challenge the forces of darkness in our community and 

around the world. 
 
The theme for Sunday’s commemoration was “The 21st 
Century Remembers.” This is a fitting theme because as time 
passes, the voices who wish to deny the existence of the 
Holocaust grow louder. 
 
We must remember this chapter of history and keep its memory 
alive so all members of this global community can learn from it. 
We must also, as a member of society, remain vigilant and ever 
watchful. 
 
Out of the Holocaust was born the nation of Israel and a 
renewed solidarity and strength among Jewish people the world 
over. What was also born was a commitment to decent people 
everywhere, a commitment that all members of society must 
ensure that an atrocity like the Holocaust is never permitted to 
occur again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us all reflect upon and remember the Holocaust 
today in the hopes that the world will never bear witness to a 
horror of this magnitude again. 
 
Thank you and shalom. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Budget Benefits for Seniors 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This year’s 
provincial budget contained good news for the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. Record tax breaks and increased spending will 
aid all of us as our province moves into the new millennium. 
 
These tax breaks and increased spending will benefit all groups 
in our province, including seniors. This year’s provincial budget 
will provide approximately $444.5 million in direct financial 
support and proposed tax reductions for seniors this year. 
 
As a result of this budget, seniors will pay less income tax in 
2000 and even less in 2003. As well as a slight increase in the 
Saskatchewan Income Plan, Guaranteed Income Supplement, 
and old age security, these will continue to provide additional 
income to seniors. 
 
Increased spending on health in this year’s budget will mean 
more money for the prescription drug plan, home care and 
long-term care services. 
 
Also the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation is expected to 
spend $16 million for 13,600 subsidized housing units for 
seniors. This year this will save seniors thousands of dollars in 
rent and in every subsequent year. 
 
The home adaptation for seniors’ independence program will 
provide nearly half a million dollars to seniors to make home 
improvements that will enable them to remain independent. 
 
I want to commend the government for taking these necessary 
steps to improve the lives of seniors. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 945 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskEnergy Transmission Capacity 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister responsible for SaskEnergy. Mr. Minister, way 
back in 1995 SaskEnergy undertook the biggest single pipeline 
expansion in its history — 325 kilometres from Goodsoil to 
Rosetown at a cost of $114 million. Mr. Minister, that’s a huge 
investment. Why don’t you tell us, how is this project working 
out and are you happy with it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the question is obviously 
about some of the network that SaskEnergy has built in this 
province to provide very good coverage throughout the 
province of natural gas. As we know we have the highest 
penetration of the natural gas service to all of our people 
throughout the whole province and this is an important part of 
SaskEnergy’s marketing. 
 
Now practically, they end up with a number of different 
projects over the years and always the goal is to serve the 
people of Saskatchewan better at a cost that’s efficient and a 
cost that allows us to build our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it was nice to 
hear that little chat on efficiencies and good use of money so 
we’ll continue. Mr. Minister, 1995 SaskEnergy annual report 
talks quite a bit about that particular stretch of pipeline. The 
minister brags about it; SaskEnergy brags about it; and yet 
when we look at ’96, ’97, ’98, ’99 annual reports there is not a 
word mentioned about that big project. 
 
It’s almost like, Mr. Minister, you’d rather not talk about it. Mr. 
Minister, why is there no mention of this $114 million project 
in the last four annual reports? Is there some sort of problem 
with this project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the project that the member 
is talking about was obviously dealt with a number of years ago 
before I took this portfolio. I will endeavour to answer that 
question and get the information for him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well there’s quite a 
large number of questions that we have on that so we’ll be 
looking forward to the answers. That particular pipeline resulted 
in a massive expansion of SaskEnergy’s capacity. That single 
project increased SaskEnergy’s transmission capacity 18 per 
cent — 18 per cent, Mr. Minister — in one year. 
 
I guess that means you should be expecting about an 18 per cent 
increase in transmission volume in the years ahead. How much 
has your overall transmission volume increased as a result of 
that $114 million you spent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, when SaskEnergy provides 
service for the province it makes a careful study of what some 
of the needs are. What we do know is that the whole system that 
we have in Saskatchewan, plus the one-year buying system that 

we use, provides our customers with a stable price throughout 
the years. And it provides the lowest price; it’s worked out that 
well in over quite a number of years. We’re able to deal with 
many of the ups and downs that come to our neighbour to the 
West by saying no, we have an annual price. 
 
What we want to do with our energy company is provide a very 
good service that goes to as many people as possible, and we’re 
doing that in an efficient . . . in as efficient and cost effective 
way as we can. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 
I’m sure some of these questions will be enlightening to you. 
You obviously thought that other gas companies that used your 
pipeline transmission system were going to be using it to 
increase the amount of gas that they were delivering. 
 
In fact Ron Clark’s message in the 1995 annual report says, and 
I quote correctly, “the result of the long-term commitments 
from natural gas shippers queuing up for TransGas services.” 

 
Mr. Minister, you said at that point you had commitments from 
gas shippers to increase the volume of gas they were delivering. 
So I repeat the question: how much has your overall 
transmission delivery volume increased as a result of the $114 
million on that project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the specific answer to that 
question I don’t have with me, and I will get that for him, and 
we’ll provide that. 
 
But I will say is that with the system that we do have, TransGas 
and SaskEnergy, we’re able to provide gas to all the people of 
Saskatchewan. We’re also able to provide service to Alberta gas 
companies that want to ship gas down the west side of the 
province and some of that is happening. And we will continue 
to provide the best service for the people of Saskatchewan and 
we will also continue to provide a service for other people in 
Western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 
I’ll give you some of the information you apparently didn’t 
know. 
 
It turns out your transmission volume hasn’t increased by 18 
per cent. In fact, it hasn’t increased at all. In 1994, before you 
started this project, total transmission volume was 9,593 million 
cubic metres. In 1996 it was 900 . . . 9,523 million cubic metres. 
And every year since then, it has been under 9,000 million 
cubic metres. That includes your projection for this current 
year. 
 
In other words, you’re actually transmitting less gas now than 
you did in ’94, before you put a single foot of that pipeline into 
the ground. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you explain that? Why did you blow $114 



946 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2000 

million on a new pipeline when all the pipeline you had in the 
ground in 1994 would have served all of those needs and 
today’s needs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as with any corporation, you 
continue to look at and try to anticipate what the markets are 
and deal with those things. 
 
What we know is that this company has done a very good job 
providing us with the lowest natural gas prices in Canada on a 
consistent basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We also know that they have been 
working together with the producers to make sure that they 
have pipelines in places where they can be used. 
 
And what we do know also is that they will continue to 
anticipate and work with the industry to make sure that we 
continue to provide the best service possible for all the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we’ll give the 
minister some more information to underline what he’s trying to 
say. 
 
The people of SaskEnergy and the people of the province both 
know this was clearly a mistake. You spent $114 million on a 
pipeline there was no need of. 
 
Mr. Minister, this was a massive project: 325 kilometres of 
20-inch pipe — the only 20-inch pipe in the province — $114 
million. You expanded your capacity by 18 per cent and yet 
your transmission volumes and your transmission revenue, Mr. 
Minister, has fallen since this particular pipeline was built. 
Volume is down 13 per cent; revenue is down 16 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, these figures clearly show SaskEnergy 
overestimated the need for the new pipeline. The demand 
simply wasn’t there. You spent $114 million on a pipe . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, I would ask the hon. 
member to kindly go directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, will 
you admit this project was a mistake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as all of the people of 
Saskatchewan know, over the last two winters we have had 
some of the warmest winters on record. And one of the net 
effects of that is that the use of natural gas goes down and 
therefore the flow that goes through the various pipelines is 
down. 
 
So what we also have to recognize is that . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. members on both sides of 
the House, kindly allow the minister to answer so that he may 
be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy has done a very 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy has done a good 
job for the people of Saskatchewan. They will continue to do a 
good job for the people of Saskatchewan. They will continue to 
go ahead with capital projects in the appropriate places so that 
we are ready for all of the markets as they come down the 
course, and we will continue to provide the lowest prices for 
natural gas in Western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the minister 
and members over there should know that two good winters do 
not half a decade make so you’ll have to do some more math on 
that. 
 
In 1994 your transmission revenue was $94 million. Last year it 
was 76 million. That’s an $18 million drop in revenues. Mr. 
Minister, you’re overbuilt and you’re driving down your own 
prices by doing that. 
 
When transmission capacity is limited, Mr. Minister, gas 
companies compete with each other to have the product 
delivered. That drives the price up. But since you built this 
pipeline, Mr. Minister, you have too much capacity. As a result 
you’ve depressed your own price. You’re overbuilt, the demand 
is not there, you wasted $114 million on a pipeline you didn’t 
need. Isn’t that right Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker. I invite the member to ask 
further questions along this line of the officials when they come 
to the Crown Corporations Committee. What I would say 
though is that the SaskEnergy has done a very good job of 
building out a network that provides our people with very good 
natural gas service. The coverage is better than in any other part 
of North America and I think we all should be very, very proud 
of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Funding of Film Festival 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are 
also for the minister responsible for CIC, more specifically the 
minister responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Minister, SaskTel has long been a good corporate sponsor 
here in Saskatchewan, a proud sponsor of many worthwhile 
community events. However, their choice to fund the Queer 
City Film Festival is questionable due to the fact that one 
segment of this festival will feature pornography. 
 
There is no other term for it. The organizers of this festival are 



May 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 947 

calling it pornography. They’re bringing in activists, film 
producers, and porn stars to promote it. This will not be a 
discussion on how to stop pornography or even its effect on 
society. It is a promotional session. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you explain a publicly owned corporation 
under your jurisdiction providing sponsorship for this festival? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very clear from 
my previous role as minister of Justice and my role now, that 
there is absolutely no quarter— we do not condone in any way 
pornography. And I think that should be absolutely clear. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — But we also know that it’s very, very 
difficult in our modern society to deal with the question of 
pornography and its definition and how the courts will define 
that. We know that there are cases in the Supreme Court now 
that deal with that. 
 
SaskTel is an organization that obviously supports the 
community in many different ways. They supported the film 
festival that is called . . . the film festival that’s involved here. 
They’ve done that on the basis that it’s a community 
organization that’s been involved with this, but they’re clearly 
not supporting pornography. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister. If you don’t 
support pornography then pull the funding. That’s what we’re 
asking for. Pull the funding. 
 
The sponsorship of this pornography is not sitting well with 
taxpayers in this province, especially in light of the special rate 
increases you’ve seen now at SaskTel. Government members 
yesterday talked about American Beauty and Eyes Wide . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order please. I would again 
appeal to all hon. members to kindly allow the hon. member on 
her feet to be heard. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government 
members yesterday used the films American Beauty and Eyes 
Wide Shut as an analogy, but, Mr. Speaker, this is totally 
different. Those films were not funded by Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. And they were not deemed as pornographic material 
either. 
 
Their argument is absolutely absurd, Mr. Speaker. But that’s 
typical of this government who doesn’t want to admit that they 
are actually funding dollars — giving dollars to fund the 
promotion of pornography here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much funding did SaskTel contribute to this 
festival? And do you support SaskTel’s sponsorship of a film 
festival that will be promoting pornography in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I very much appreciate the 
question of how much money. The amount of money that 
SaskTel contributes is $500. And the $500 is given to this film 
festival because the requests that come in for sponsorships to 
SaskTel are treated fairly and equally as is set out in the laws of 
this province and in this country. 
 
They do not want to discriminate against different 
organizations, and so they for . . . give the money to these 
organizations. The sum of money is $500. It’s the kind of 
money that they would give to other film festivals, arts 
festivals, that are in the province. Other funders of this 
organization include the Canada Council for the Arts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — The members opposite make light of saying 
it’s only $500. Well to a lot of people in Saskatchewan $500 is 
a lot of money — plus how much is it when we talk about the 
logo of SaskPower and all your sponsorship. 
 
An Hon. Member: — SaskTel. 
 
Ms. Draude: — And SaskTel. The bottom line here is that 
SaskTel and other government agencies funded by the 
provincial government are contributing taxpayers’ dollars to a 
seminar to promote pornography. 
 
That’s wrong. The taxpayers know it’s wrong. And you should 
know it’s wrong as well, Mr. Minister. The provincial 
government has asked the Arts Board to reverse funding 
decisions before, and I’m sure SaskTel would reconsider if 
you’d ask them to. 
 
In fact, there seems to be some questions from some of the 
sponsors as to whether the original grant application from the 
festival even indicated that a session on pornography was going 
to take place. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you take responsibility for how taxpayers’ 
dollars are being spent? If you don’t support the funding . . . 
support funding of pornography, will you step in and withdraw 
all taxpayers’ funding for the support of this event? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite because I’ve now received the full briefing on this 
event. I want to say to the member opposite — and she should 
pay attention — that what’s happened here is that this is a 
cross-section of six North American artists, filmmakers, and 
curators of which they have come together to talk about a public 
and community services in the fields of race relations, 
Aboriginal art, and AIDS (acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome) research. 
 
They say this, Mr. Speaker, this is not a pornographic film 
festival. What this is, is this is a film festival, in fact, that was 
provided . . . that deals forthrightly with the prevalence of 
erotica in gay and lesbian films which, in fact, divides the 
community. 
 
During this workshop, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to be talking 



948 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2000 

about whether or not there should be any further erotica 
filmmaking in that community. That's the discussion that 
they’re having. 
 
And what we may see in the future — a decision by this group 
of men and women no longer to have this kind of filmmaking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Amalgamation 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Municipal Government keeps telling us he really 
has nothing to do with the Arts Board. Well apparently he has 
nothing to do with municipalities anymore either. 
 
Mr. Minister, we heard that you are to have nothing to do with 
amalgamation talks between SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) and the government. You 
weren’t even allowed in the room when the Premier met with 
SUMA and SARM. And now they don’t want you within 100 
miles of the negotiations. 
 
Apparently you were a no-show at a recent SAMA 
(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) convention 
as well. And now rumours have it, you aren’t going to attend 
the RMAA (Rural Municipal Administrators’ Association of 
Saskatchewan) convention as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, is it true that you’ve screwed-up this issue so 
badly that the Premier, that the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. I would just 
caution members on their choice of words. And just to remind 
members to direct their comments through the Chair. Hon. 
member, go directly to your question. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, is it 
true that you’ve caused so much untrust within municipalities 
out there that the Premier is not allowing you anywhere near the 
negotiations or to any other municipal functions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I am going to answer this 
question because it’s directed to the government and to myself. 
 
I want to tell the hon. member opposite and the members of this 
Assembly that at all relevant times from beginning to end of the 
meetings involving SUMA and SARM and myself, present was 
the Minister of Municipal Affairs and the coalition partner, Dr. 
Jim Melenchuk, the Liberal leader — present at all stages of the 
negotiations including culminating in the signed agreement to 
refer this to the municipal round table. 
 
The municipal round table is now . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Just to remind the Premier that the use of 
members’ names in the House is not permitted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry I mentioned the 
name of the Liberal leader. 

I repeat again, the Minister of Municipal Affairs was present with 
me throughout at every meeting and at that signed agreement 
where the question of efficiency or renewal — call it what you 
will — with municipal government has been referred to the 
municipal round table of which the Chair is the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Premier, it’s pretty sad. We have a Minister of Municipal 
Government who really is not allowed to do anything with 
municipal government. Instead, he’s reduced to being a 
government’s porn czar. 
 
Mr. Minister, you weren’t allowed in the room when the Premier 
met with SUMA and SARM. Apparently the person who brokered 
the whole deal was the Minister of Education — or at least that’s 
what he’s saying. 
 
My question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, now that you’ve 
taken away most of the minister’s responsibilities maybe it’s time 
to do some amalgamating of your own. Will you get rid of the 
Minister of Municipal Government and replace him with someone 
that the municipalities trust? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how more 
clearly I can answer. Mr. Speaker, I . . . Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 
I do not know how more clearly I can answer the member and 
the House and the people of Saskatchewan than I did earlier. 
 
In that room was counsel, a lawyer for the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities. The Minister of Municipal 
Affairs was present throughout the piece at every meeting that I 
was there. I told him that in the answer to the last question. And 
in defiance of that answer, the second question just simply 
ignores it and continues to predicate the questions that they 
have pre-written. 
 
There’s not a question of resigning for this minister. Who 
should be resigning are those people who are drafting those 
questions for you who have absolutely no fidelity to the truth, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier may want to answer the question, is where has that 
minister been then out in rural Saskatchewan? He’s been at 
none of these functions at conventions. He hasn’t been to any 
task force meetings. He’s not showing his face out in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
That minister, Mr. Premier, needs to be replaced — replaced 
with somebody that’s capable of being Minister of Municipal 
Government, someone that these RMs (rural municipality), the 
towns, and the cities can trust. Someone that these people out 
there would be willing to sit with and negotiate. Forced 
amalgamation, amalgamation, whatever the subject, they need 
someone they can trust, Mr. Premier. That member is not that 
person. Please replace him. 



May 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 949 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know, sir, if you 
were able to detect the question in that speech, or call it what 
you will. But if one was to stretch the monologue of the 
member into a question, my answer to him will be as I have 
given in the three previous answers. 
 
This Minister of Municipal Affairs not only has been an active 
participant in voluntary amalgamation and making governments 
at the local level and provincial level, at all levels, as efficient 
and as responsive as they can be. He’s been that way in the past, 
he does his job in rural Saskatchewan. He will continue to do 
his job with the full confidence of this Premier and this 
coalition government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Premier, if you won’t replace that minister then we’ll go one 
step further. Will you insist that this minister attends functions 
that normal ministers of Municipal Government have been 
attending all over this province. 
 
He owes it to the people all over Saskatchewan whether it’s 
rural, urban. Will he be attending the rural administrators 
association convention. Will he go to functions like this and do 
the job that he’s being paid to do? Will you insist that he do 
this, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, you can say whatever 
you wish about any of the politicians in this Assembly. I 
suppose I could be entitled to flip the coin and make my 
observations about your attendance or lack of attendance in 
rural Saskatchewan and what your leader is doing to discipline 
you and your activities, but I’m not going to do that because the 
record of this Minister of Municipal Affairs has been in every 
portfolio that he’s held in this government — whether it’s been 
the Minister of Health or the Minister of Municipal Government 
— to be at every function taking place in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a government that listens to people. It’s a government 
that attends to meetings. We can’t attend to all of the meetings. 
We do the best that we can to provide a pretty good form of 
government. And I’ll tell you one thing, nine years into 
government we have done an excellent job in government — 
1,000 times better than those people who sit opposite and who 
will continue to sit in the opposition benches. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 224 — The Regulatory Reform Act 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce the 
first reading of Bill No. 224, The Regulatory Reform Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Police Amendment Act, 2000 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill 31, The Police Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, hon. members, I 
have here to table reports from the Ombudsman, the annual 
report, and also from the Children’s Advocate. 
 
I so table. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder by leave, if I 
could have leave to change one of the members of the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Member on the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld: 
 

That the name of Ms. Pat Lorje be substituted for that of 
Myron Kowalsky on the list of members composing the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Oil and Gas Development in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker it’s 
my pleasure to rise today during the seventy-five minute debate 
to talk a little bit about natural resource development in the oil 
and gas sector here and what has been happening in that area, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a very exciting area in our province’s economy and one 
that’s growing very rapidly, and, Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion 
of this, I’ll be introducing a motion for consideration and other 
comments by some of my colleagues on this side and by 
members on the other side of the House as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to encourage members of this 
Assembly to recognize the favourable working atmosphere that 
exists in Saskatchewan for all sectors of the natural resource 
area, but especially the oil and gas sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we always have heard, or have been hearing lots 
lately, members opposite tell us about . . . that Alberta is better 
than us, than Saskatchewan. We have heard members from the 



950 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2000 

opposite side tell us that the United States is better than 
Saskatchewan. We have heard members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 
tell us about anywhere in the world is better than Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I, and I think many of my colleagues, find this 
constant negativity of the Saskatchewan Party is coming to be a 
little bit tiresome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite are really quite willing to 
criticize and tear things down. But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 
that they would scarcely know how to build something or to 
build something very effectively and make it productive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know, the United Nations has 
consistently rated Canada as the best country in the world to 
live in the last few years, for a number of years now. And, Mr. 
Speaker, by measuring the same criteria and applying these to 
the provinces here in Canada, Saskatchewan has consistently 
rated as the best province in Canada where to live and raise a 
family. 
 
So I ask, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite might take some 
pride in how this province is developing and where we stand in 
the world today. 
 
The motion that I’m going to be talking about at this time, Mr. 
Speaker, recognizes the effectiveness of the policies that this 
government has put into place regarding the natural resource 
and oil and gas sector in our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 1999 saw a new record year for natural gas 
drilling here in Saskatchewan. A total of 1,021 new natural gas 
wells were drilled, Mr. Speaker. So far in the year 2000, the 
new number of . . . the number of new oil and gas wells drilled 
is more than double at this time of the year compared to what it 
was a year ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the industry will invest over $1.2 billion in 
Saskatchewan this year, and it will employ 18,000 people — 
most of them, Mr. Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear members opposite say a lot that we are 
driving business out of this province. Mr. Speaker, I think that 
this is just plain bunk. Nothing could be farther from the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, oil companies are coming into this province and 
investing record amounts of money. Mr. Speaker, would the oil 
industry, never an industry that’s been known for its socialist 
tendencies, be drilling a record number of wells if they didn’t 
have confidence in our economy? 
 
Would they have drilled double the number of wells this year at 
this time than they did a year ago, which was a record year in 
this province, if they did not have any confidence in our 
policies and in our economy? 
 
Would a wide range of companies, Mr. Speaker, from very 
large to very small, be investing $1.2 billion into Saskatchewan 
if they were not confident? Mr. Speaker, that sounds to me like 
1.2 billion votes of confidence in our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated as well, the oil and gas sector 
employs about 18,000 people in the province — most of them 

in rural Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard many of 
our members opposite point out, ad nauseam if I might say, the 
fact that they are a party of rural Saskatchewan and are the only 
ones that understand rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think nothing could be further from the 
truth. Most people on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, even 
if they live in larger centres, have relatives and friends, or 
indeed, come from rural Saskatchewan. Our roots are there and 
we on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, take seriously our 
role of government in providing good government to all of 
Saskatchewan, both urban and rural. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan care about each other 
and with each other’s support we will carry on and survive 
problems that we have today like the international grain subsidy 
wars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only thing that could scare business away from 
this province I think would be a Saskatchewan Party 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — A Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. 
Speaker, with it’s shrill negative message, especially if industry 
pays attention to it — Mr. Speaker, the only thing that would 
scare business away faster is a prospect of a Saskatchewan 
Party government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has reached a mutually 
satisfactory arrangement on taxation and royalties with 
PanCanadian Petroleum which will see that company 
commence a $1.1 billion enhanced-oil recovery project near 
Weyburn later on this year, Mr. Speaker. The Government of 
Saskatchewan has received another $600 million in revenue in 
royalties and taxation from the oil and gas sector in the last 
fiscal year. 
 
In 1998, Mr. Speaker, the provincial government announced 
changes to the oil and gas royalty regime. These changes, Mr. 
Speaker, are expected to generate 12,000 person-years of 
employment and 2.9 billion in private sector development over 
the next 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, deep rights reversion was introduced on April 1, 
1998 by our government. This has been very positively received 
by the industry. Deep rights sold during the last three sales of 
oil and gas rights have accounted for nearly 25 per cent of total 
land sale revenues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan introduced also 
a petroleum research tax credit incentive to encourage oil and 
gas companies to invest in developing new oil and gas 
properties here in Saskatchewan. This program provides 17.5 
million in funding over five years. This initiative, Mr. Speaker, 
is expected to stimulate up to 120 million in private sector 
investment and create 1,300 high-paying jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also in September of 1998, the Government of Saskatchewan 
announced the development of the Petroleum Research 
Technology Centre. The ground was broken for the centre in 
April of last year, Mr. Speaker, and this centre, located at the 



May 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 951 

campus at the University of Regina will create several new 
high-technology jobs, develop oil and gas technology here in 
Saskatchewan, and enhance the production of Saskatchewan’s 
oil reserves. Mr. Speaker, the oil and gas sector is doing very 
well, and doing very well under our government here in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d maybe like to turn for a couple of minutes to 
other areas of our natural resource . . . of the natural resource 
sector of our economy and talk a little bit about mining in the 
time permitting that I have here this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mining industry provides direct employment 
for just under 7,000 people in our province and direct and 
indirect employment for 20,000 people. The mining industry 
contributes in excess of $2 billion in wages, goods and services, 
here in our province. Mining, Mr. Speaker, is Saskatchewan’s 
third largest industry. 
 
The mining industry, supported by the strong performance of 
the potash sector, continues to achieve record values of total 
mineral sales. — $2.4 million. That’s up from 2.3 . . . sorry, 
$2.4 billion, up from 2.3 billion a year ago. And a year when 
the Saskatchewan Party says that the government is doing 
everything wrong, record sales — that is 100 million more in 
sales — has taken place here in the province of Saskatchewan 
in the potash sector. 
 
(1430) 
 
With 1 million people, that is one-thirtieth of the population of 
Canada, Saskatchewan continues to rank fourth in the country 
in terms of the value of its mineral production. I consider, Mr. 
Speaker, that to be an impressive achievement for our province. 
Saskatchewan provides approximately one-third of the world’s 
potash and uranium — 1 million people in a 6 billion person 
world, Mr. Speaker, and we provide one-third of the world’s 
potash and uranium. That’s very impressive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While I’m speaking on the topic of mining, Mr. Speaker, I 
would also like to take a moment to congratulate the McArthur 
River, Key Lake workers in northern Saskatchewan on their 
recently received national J.T. Ryan safety trophy for metal 
miners, with an accident record, Mr. Speaker, of zero accidents. 
That’s zero accidents — at the Key Lake, McArthur River 
mine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a safety record worthy of 
congratulations from all of us here in this Assembly and from 
all our Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Saskatchewan mining represents one of the safest industries in 
the province, Mr. Speaker, averaging less than one lost-time 
accident for every 200,000 hours of work. That is per 100 years 
of time work, Mr. Speaker, 200,000 hours. 
 
I don’t think any of us will rest until the accident rate is zero in 
all sectors, but certainly the workers at the Key Lake, McArthur 
River mines deserve our hearty congratulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have more interesting information for the 
Assembly about the national resource industry. The average 
wage benefit value in Saskatchewan is $55,000 per year for a 

worker. That’s the average, Mr. Speaker. That’s good money in 
anyone’s books. 
 
Did you also know, Mr. Speaker, that even though it produces 
. . . did you know that even though it produces all this value to 
the province, the mining industry uses only 1 per cent of the 
available land resources of our province. That’s less than the 
entire area of the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government continues to provide excellent support for the 
natural resource sector in Saskatchewan and will continue to do 
so in the coming fiscal year. 
 
Effective January 1, 1999 changes were made in the base metal 
royalty system, that greatly increased the attractiveness of doing 
base metal exploration in northern Saskatchewan. More 
exploration jobs mean more jobs all around in our economy and 
we are very proud of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Luscar Bienfait coal mine secured a new three-year contract 
with Ontario Hydro that was secured with the tax assistance of 
the provincial government. And in 1999, sales from the Bienfait 
mine generated roughly $4 million in tax revenues to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The potash royalty system, Mr. Speaker, has also been 
revamped to meet current world conditions. These changes will 
result in $500 million in new investment in Saskatchewan 
potash mines, Mr. Speaker. I think this is a record that is one of 
pride for our government and for all who work in this area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d maybe like to take what remaining time I have 
to just summarize a couple of points that I have raised about the 
oil and gas sector and our natural resource sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to remind yourself and 
colleagues that in 1998 the provincial government announced 
changes to the oil and gas royalty program that are expected to 
generate 12,000 person-years of employment and 2.9 billion in 
private sector investment here in Saskatchewan over the next 10 
years. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan also introduced a petroleum 
research tax credit incentive for all oil and gas companies to 
invest in developing new oil and gas properties. This program 
will provide 17.5 million in funding over five years. 
 
This initiative, Mr. Speaker, as I said, will stimulate up to 120 
million in private sector investment and create 1,300 
high-paying jobs here in Saskatchewan. 
 
In September, 1998, Mr. Speaker, we also announced the 
development of the Petroleum Technology Research Centre at 
the University of Regina. The ground has been broken for the 
centre and it will be opening later on this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this centre located on the campus of our university 
will create several high-paying jobs, encourage research and 
development in our oil sector, and enhance the production of 
our oil and gas reserves. 
 
In 1999, Mr. Speaker, a new record was set for natural gas 
drilling here in Saskatchewan — a little over 1,000 new wells 



952 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2000 

being drilled. Mr. Speaker, in this year 2000, we are even ahead 
of last year’s record pace. In 2000, the new number of drilled 
wells is double from what it was a year ago. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan has also received another 
600 million in oil and gas royalties which will have impact on 
our budget this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with those remarks and introductory remarks, my 
time is drawing to its close. So I would like to, Mr. Speaker, 
move this motion: 
 

That the Assembly commends the government for creating 
favourable working atmosphere for all sectors of the 
natural resource industry in Saskatchewan, in particular the 
oil and gas industry. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to join the 
debate to follow up on the good words that the member from 
Regina Sherwood started with, and that is to creating a 
favourable working relationship in Saskatchewan for all sectors 
of the natural resource industry, in particular oil and gas 
industry. And we’re very pleased to be able to talk about that 
today. 
 
One of the concerns I do have before I get into the comments is 
the opposition and what they’ve been talking about on some 
issues. It seems that to make sure that we have a good 
atmosphere and a good place for development to happen, we 
need to have everybody pulling together. And the gloom and 
doom, and the opposition, the undercutting of . . . and the 
undermining of the success and the antidevelopment sentiment 
I’m hearing today and the past few months is really 
disheartening with what’s been going on in Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The sky is falling, Mr. Speaker, 
according to some of the people on the other side. 
 
Saskatchewan oil and gas sector, there’s many positive 
developments that have occurred in the last 9 or 10 years since 
we’ve taken office, Mr. Speaker, and the good news just 
continues. 
 
In 1998 the provincial government announced changes to the oil 
and gas royalty regime. These changes are expected to generate 
12,000 person-years of employment, and $2.9 billion in private 
sector development over the next 10 years. Deep rights 
reversion was introduced on April 1, ’98 — a very progressive 
move. And this has been positively received within the industry. 
 
Deeper rights sold during the last three sales of oil and gas 
rights have accounted for nearly 25 per cent of the total land 
sale revenues — very impressive and very helpful for 
developing here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan also introduced a petroleum 
research tax credit incentive to encourage oil and gas companies 
to invest in developing new oil and gas production technologies 
in Saskatchewan. This program provides $17.5 million in 
funding for five years. This initiative expected to stimulate up 

to $120 million in private sector investment and create 13 
high-paying jobs 
 
As well Saskatchewan’s oil patch . . . The Petroleum 
Technology Research Centre, which is finding solutions for 
Saskatchewan’s oil industry, is a partnership between the 
University of Regina petroleum engineering program and the 
federal and provincial governments and other organizations in 
the petroleum industry to create the Petroleum Technology 
Research Centre, here in Regina — the PTRC. 
 
A quote by Ernie Pappas that we’re putting together for the 
most part all of Saskatchewan’s efforts into petroleum research 
in one location, which is a unique partnership, unlike anywhere 
else in North America. That’s more good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In September ’98, the Government of Saskatchewan announced 
the development of the Petroleum Research Centre, which I’ve 
already spoken about. In 1999 saw a new record set for natural 
gas well drilling in Saskatchewan — a total of 1,021 new wells 
were drilled. 
 
In 2000 the number of new oil and gas wells drilled is more 
than double — more than double — compared to the same 
period last year. It just continues to go on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
As well, thanks to the mutually satisfactory arrangement on 
taxation and royalties, and Canadian Petroleum will commence 
a $1.1 billion enhanced oil recovery project in Weyburn later 
this year. 
 
We haven’t heard that good news from the member around 
Weyburn. Why is that? Is she too busy ripping off phone 
books? Interesting question. It’s more good news so we don’t 
want to hear about it, undermining the success of this industry. 
It seems to be an antidevelopment attitude across the way, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan received just under $600 
million in revenue in royalties and taxation from the oil and gas 
sector in the last fiscal year. As this gets going, it will almost 
cover the interest on the Tory debt that was left for us in the 
’80s. Almost. Just about. 
 
And as important as agriculture is to Saskatchewan, grain 
brings in $3.2 billion, 3.2; petroleum accounts for 1.7 billion; 
manufactured goods 1.6; and potash $1.6 billion. That’s how 
important this industry is to Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Oil and gas industry is expanding traditional boundaries to 
explore in the Fort Qu’Appelle area and east central 
Saskatchewan. It’s very important to note that there are certain 
areas in the province that we can talk about where oil is located 
and there’s different maps that have been produced. But we’re 
also expanding and the oil and gas area is expanding into 
non-traditional areas. 
 
Unfortunately we don’t have the oil and the natural gas that 
Alberta does, based on an accident in geography, but we are 
expanding that industry and looking in areas that we haven’t 
looked at in the past, and it seems to be paying off in dividends. 
 
The industry will invest well over $1.2 billion into 



May 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 953 

Saskatchewan’s economy this year, 1.2 billion — 1.2 billion. 
That’s a lot of money in Saskatchewan’s economy this year and 
it’s only going to get better with the continued leadership of the 
Minister of Energy and Mines. The industry will employ over 
18,000 people, mostly in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I mean as an urban MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) why should I have to be one that stands up and 
speaks about the development that’s going on in rural 
Saskatchewan with the oil and gas industry? The other side 
refuses to talk about the good news of positive areas within 
Saskatchewan. More good news, less gloom and doom, but 
unfortunately the antidevelopment supports. 
 
Well the optimism that’s shown on this side . . . and that’s part 
of business, Mr. Speaker, as all people on this side of the House 
know, is the sense of optimism, the feeling of optimism that 
business has. The political stability and the level of 
intellectuality on this side of the House versus the gloom and 
doom and negativity, the opposition that’s occurring over there. 
I think they take the opposition a little too far, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Too far right, anyway. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Too far right. Radical right. 
 
Now just to look at some of the disadvantages that we have 
compared to Alberta is the oil in the ground. I mean the 
members opposite talk about how much . . . they just don’t 
understand why we have this concern. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about the debt? 
 
Mr. Addley: — Well the debt is one of those things, and I’ll be 
finishing with that. But I appreciate that clue. 
 
The total revenue that’s brought in and the amount of oil that’s 
in Alberta versus Saskatchewan, the cubic feet of natural gas in 
Saskatchewan is under 300. Natural gas in Alberta is over 5 
billion. It’s not comparable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But of course if we keep working together and keep bringing in 
the finances and work together with the oil patch, we will be 
able to basically pay the interest on the debt that was left over 
from the Tories. And we do appreciate that. Just the interest of 
$677 million. 
 
If I could talk a little bit about the mining sector; some of the 
coal mines secured in the three-contract with Ontario Hydro, 
with tax assistance from the provincial government; 1999 sales 
from the Bienfait mine generated roughly $4 million in tax 
revenues. And this contract means the Bienfait mine will 
continue operation, employing 72 people. Employing 72 
people. But they wouldn’t mention the good news that’s in rural 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
The potash royalty system was revamped in 1998. And I know 
the members opposite are very sad to hear that I only have two 
minutes left and they would like me to go on and on, but we 
could probably arrange another time when I’d be willing to go 
on a little bit further, if the members opposite . . . The member 
from Kindersley, we really did miss you on this side of the 
House, but not as much as the members on the other side 

missed you. 
 
But the potash royalty system was revamped in ’98. These 
changes will result in $500 million in new investment in 
Saskatchewan’s potash mines — half a billion dollars in 
Saskatchewan’s potash mines, creating over 5,000 person-years 
of employment and many economic benefits for Saskatchewan. 
 
The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation has been also 
helping with investing money into Saskatchewan businesses 
and ensuring that jobs are created and economic growth 
continues. 
 
Bellator Exploration Inc. out of Calgary — the exploration and 
development of oil and gas in an area of Saskatchewan east of 
Lloydminster. We don’t hear about that in the House, Mr. 
Speaker, from the opposition. Why is that? More gloom and 
doom. There’s two pages of discussions here. 
 
Well in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, as my time draws near, 
natural gas is steadily fuelling record set . . . (inaudible) . . . not 
boom and bust as in the oil. Most producers are expecting their 
activity to increase this year, not decrease — 1,021 wells drilled 
in Saskatchewan in ’99, producing 229 trillion cubic feet. 
 
There’s an expectation that total production this year will 
increase by a further 3 per cent, and most of the activity in 
Swift Current area. But there’s no mention of it by the member 
opposite because he can’t stand the good news. 
 
We expect the number of wells this year to at least match ’99. 
And finally, there’s more than two-thirds of . . . (inaudible) . . . 
So I’m very happy to second the motion put forward by the 
member from Regina Sherwood to commend the government 
for creating . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
apparently this government has decided that it needs a little pat 
on the back today. They couldn’t find anyone willing to do it of 
course outside of their own caucus, so it fell on the member 
from Regina Sherwood. 
 
Imagine if you will, Mr. Speaker, the look of shock and 
disbelief on the face of the member when he was told that he 
was going to be patting this government on the back for 
creating a favourable working atmosphere for all sectors of the 
natural resource industry, in particular the oil and gas industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can be certain that my friend the member from 
Regina Sherwood would rather have patted this government on 
the back for any number of other initiatives. Initiatives, Mr. 
Speaker, that they might actually deserve a pat on the back for. 
Although I can’t think of any right at this time, I’m sure there 
must be something that this government has done right. 
 
At the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving an 
amendment to the motion introduced by the member from 
Regina Sherwood, to be seconded by my colleague the member 
from Kindersley. 



954 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2000 

And by the end of this 75-minute debate, Mr. Speaker, no one 
in this Assembly will honestly believe that this government 
deserves to be commended for creating a favourable working 
atmosphere for all sectors of the natural resources industry in 
Saskatchewan, in particular the oil and gas industry. 
 
But anyone who listens to the arguments advanced today by our 
side and realizes that we get our information from the industries 
themselves will believe that the members opposite, and 
particularly the NDP members opposite, have certainly created 
a favourable atmosphere for all sectors of the natural resource 
industry in Saskatchewan, and in particular the oil and gas 
industry, to move to Alberta. 
 
To go to Alberta, Mr. Speaker, and to invest there and to take 
thousands of jobs with them, investment and jobs that could be 
here and available to our own children if this government didn’t 
take such a dog in the manger attitude toward taxes, and 
royalties, and approval procedures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are no longer the days of the Texas and 
Oklahoma oil booms; not the good old days, Mr. Speaker, when 
everyone associated with the oil and gas industry was awash in 
money. Margins in this industry are tight — very tight — and 
all too often negative. The life and death struggle to make a 
profit has never been as desperate as it has been in the 1990s. 
 
Now beyond the ’90s, Mr. Speaker, the industry looks at one 
thing when deciding where to invest. There are lots of places in 
the world with plenty of undeveloped oil and gas, Mr. Speaker. 
The industry simply looks at the cost of production in each of 
the jurisdictions with oil and gas potential and picks one of the 
lowest. 
 
You may ask, Mr. Speaker, if they do this because they are 
mean-spirited, money-grubbing greedy capitalists. The answer 
is no. Mr. Speaker, they do it because they have to; because 
ordinary investors in the stock market, no different from you or 
me, look on only at the bottom line and will only invest in 
companies that do business in jurisdictions where it is cheap 
and profitable to do so. 
 
How does Saskatchewan stack up with regard to the cost of 
doing business in this country, Mr. Speaker? We’re not only the 
highest cost jurisdiction for energy and mines industries to do 
business in Canada, but one of the very highest in the world. Is 
it any wonder that even in times of booming oil and gas prices 
we only see modest and temporary expansion of our oil and gas 
industries. 
 
I freely admit that Saskatchewan enjoyed a little flurry of oil 
and gas activity in 1999. To the uninitiated it may appear that 
the jinx is over and suddenly investment will flow in to the 
province just like the government said it would. Mr. Speaker, 
the one and only reason for this modest increase in investment 
in 1999 was a near tripling of world oil prices caused by the 
nations of OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting 
Countries) slowing down production in order to drive up the 
price. 
 
But even oil rich sheikhdoms that are the OPEC nations need 
cash. So now they’re beginning to produce more oil again, and 
the world price of oil is dropping and the little mini-boom in 

Saskatchewan is nearly over. The oil fields of British Columbia 
are tiny in comparison to what we have here in Saskatchewan 
and so is their potential if you listen to geologists and oilmen as 
I do. 
 
In contrast, Mr. Speaker, to what we see in this coalition 
government doing in Saskatchewan, the Government of British 
Columbia has lowered tax, removed the tax on compressor fuel, 
and made their oil and gas royalties structure competitive with 
that of Alberta. Now, Mr. Speaker, the relatively tiny oil fields 
of British Columbia are seeing more drilling activity than we 
are here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have in front of me a photocopy of Oilweek 
publication dated March 27, and here’s an interesting little 
chart, Mr. Speaker, entitled Canadian Rig Activity week ended 
March 20, 2000. It shows that there are 326 active rigs in 
Alberta, 45 in British Columbia, and only 37 in Saskatchewan. 
 
And here’s another interesting row of figures, Mr. Speaker. 
More than a year ago, before our oil prices started on their little 
boom, dated March . . . the week ending March 22, 1999, 
Alberta had 180 active rigs, British Columbia had 30, and 
Saskatchewan had four. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government should not get used to drilling 
activity being at the dizzying heights of 37 active rigs in 
Saskatchewan. As the price of oil drops back to more normal 
levels, I think that the level of four active drilling rigs in this 
province might be more typical. Unless this government does 
something to address the problems that cause this to be one of 
the most expensive jurisdictions not only in Canada, but in the 
world, for the oil and gas industries to do business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re losing out to our neighbours in the 
competition for oil and gas and mining investment. Mr. 
Speaker, to work in Saskatchewan, the oil and gas and mining 
industries are subject to higher royalties, higher income tax, 
higher corporate tax . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Higher income tax, 
higher corporate tax, higher property taxes than our neighbours 
to the west, and a 6 per cent PST that is not charged at all in 
Alberta. 
 
Combined with extremely high power rates, high natural gas 
rates, complicated, time consuming, and expensive approval 
processes involving two or more government departments, we 
can’t compete with Alberta or anyone else under these 
conditions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I wish to move an amendment to the notice of motion 
introduced by the member from Regina Sherwood. And the 
amendment, Mr. Speaker: 
 

All words after “Assembly” be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 
 
will commend the government for creating a favourable 
atmosphere in the natural resource sector, once it 
eliminates the provincial sales tax from the many expenses 



May 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 955 

incurred in the natural resource industry such as oil and gas 
and mining, and once it adopts an oil and gas royalty 
structure that is competitive with other jurisdictions. 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to enter the debate this 
afternoon about the oil and gas industry. And it comes as some 
degree of shock that the members opposite actually think that 
the oil and gas industry are supportive of their administration. 
 
The fact of the matter is the oil and gas industry has never been 
supportive of NDP (New Democratic Party) socialist 
governments. They simply do not trust them, and for very good 
reasons, they don’t trust them. 
 
Over the years, they have done everything they possibly can to 
discourage employment, discourage investment, and discourage 
opportunity here in Saskatchewan in the industry. And all you 
have to do, Mr. Speaker, is look back at . . . look back at some 
of the speeches that some of the members opposite have given 
over the years about the oil and gas industry. 
 
I might remind some of the members that are more recent to 
take a look at some of the comments that your members have 
made in Hansard over the years when you were in opposition 
— particularly, when you were in opposition — about the oil 
and gas industry. Talking about them being robber barons, and 
all of those kinds of things that were very derogatory towards 
the industry. 
 
Members saying that they don’t care, they don’t care about oil 
and gas losses of employment here in Saskatchewan. They 
don’t care about loss of investment. They don’t care about loss 
of opportunity here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Those are the . . . that’s the legacy that you people have with 
regard to the oil and gas industry in this province. That’s the 
kind of friendship that you have developed between the oil and 
gas industry and the NDP in this province. And now you want 
to stand and take credit for oil activity in this province. Well, I 
suspect the oil and gas industry are standing in disbelief at the 
kind of motion that you’ve put forward. 
 
And there’s little . . . it’s little surprise to me that in the oil and 
gas producing areas of this province, they are overwhelmingly 
in support of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — There isn’t . . . I dare say there isn’t a 
constituency that you people represent where there’s more than 
five wells. I doubt there are more than five wells in any one of 
your constituencies. Not a single constituency that you people 
represent would have oil and gas development on it. And now 
you stand up, and now you stand up and suggest that there’s all 
kinds of support for you in the industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it might interest you to know that very 
discouraging developments in many areas of the province with 
respect to the oil and gas industry. We are seeing the loss of 
employment, the loss of opportunity, and the loss of investment 
to our province to the west of us — Alberta. 
 
In my constituency I know of two oil and gas development 

companies that have left in the last few months, Mr. Speaker. 
One of them was Fraser Oil. Kelly Fraser and his company 
employed a number of people in Kindersley. Pirate Drilling, 
and the minister would know of this company, that has left in 
the last few months to Calgary. Between the two of them, I 
would suggest they’d have a payroll of about $20 million in the 
Kindersley area. 
 
I know that Pirate Drilling alone contributed about a hundred 
thousand dollars on a yearly basis to recreation and cultural 
programs in Kindersley. That’s a huge loss, right there alone in 
my constituency, Mr. Speaker. And they have moved to Alberta 
because they simply do not want to put up with the kind of 
bureaucracy, red tape, and taxation policies of this provincial 
government. 
 
And I just heard . . . had a conversation yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 
with my former constituency assistant, who, her husband and 
herself, set up an oil and gas service company in Kindersley 
here about a year ago I guess it was — maybe a little longer 
than that — a year and a half ago in Kindersley. And she tells 
me that there is just nothing but total confusion in the oil and 
gas sector right now with regard to the PST changes. They 
don’t know whether they should be charging it on the 
construction of new buildings; they don’t know whether they 
should be charging it on reclamation services — they have no 
idea. 
 
So she phoned. This is a lady that has been a constituency 
assistant for some number of years; she knows how to get 
around bureaucracy, believe me, she’s done it for a number of 
years. 
 
(1500) 
 
So she got a hold of somebody — Susan Maedel is her name — 
she got a hold of somebody in the Department of Finance the 
other day to ask them some questions about the PST expansion. 
And one of the gentleman that she — I’m not going to give you 
his name because I don’t to get him into trouble — but the fact 
of the matter, she phoned and spoke to this official of the 
Department of Finance and said, what should we be charging 
the PST on and what shouldn’t we be charging it on. And he 
said, we really don’t know at this point. Charge it on everything 
for a month or so and we’ll see how it’s going to go after that. 
 
That was the response, that was the response, and I’ll get you 
— the minister is shaking his head in disbelief — I’ll get you 
the member . . . the minister . . . I’ll give you the person from 
the Finance department that gave him that reaction because you 
should have a talk with him. Don’t fire him — because he’s 
going to get you guys into any trouble. But you should have a 
little visit with him. 
 
Because that’s the kind of answers that the oil and gas people 
are getting right now. Charge it on everything, and in a month 
or so we’ll have it all sorted out and we’ll try to decide what to 
do at that point. 
 
And when we spoke with the members of CAPP (Canadian 
Association of Petroleum Producers) here a little while ago that 
were in the Legislative Building, they said the same thing. They 
have no idea how much money that this is going to cost the 



956 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2000 

industry. 
 
And any time that there is an increase in costs to the industry 
just puts us that much more in an uncompetitive position with 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the problem that we are faced 
with. 
 
There’s tremendous confusion over it. There’s a tremendous 
amount of mistrust over what this government is doing on a 
daily basis in the oil and gas industry. 
 
Another case in point, Mr. Speaker, is all you have to do is look 
at where the oil and gas industry is licensing vehicles these 
days. If you drive around Kindersley, you drive around 
Shaunavon, you drive around Estevan, you drive around Swift 
Current, you drive around Lloydminster, all of those 
communities, oil and gas industry are exclusively now 
registered in Alberta — exclusively registered in Alberta 
because they don’t want to pay the high taxes in Saskatchewan 
any longer. 
 
They’re even advising their people to live in Alberta and come 
over and work and commute to Saskatchewan to do the oil and 
gas work in Saskatchewan. That’s the kind of thing that’s 
happening. And the government brings forward a motion, the 
government brings forward a motion wanting to pat itself on the 
back for such a great job it’s doing in the industry. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, just simply isn’t the case. The oil and gas 
industry understands that. All of the members on this side of the 
House understand that because they represent constituencies 
that actually have development in them. It’s clear that the 
members opposite don’t understand that or they wouldn’t bring 
a motion of this type forward. 
 
The only good thing that you’ve done — and I give some 
degree of credit to the current minister — the only good thing 
that you’ve done — and it’s only because probably he doesn’t 
have clout at the cabinet table — the only good thing he’s done 
is not touch the royalty rates. And that has helped the industry 
to some degree. It’s the only good thing he’s done and it’s only 
because he hasn’t had any degree of stroke at the cabinet table, I 
would suggest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the members on the opposite side of the 
House I’m sure will be wanting to enter the debate on this 
because they know so much about the industry. 
 
They talk about this side of the House not wanting to be 
optimistic or to speak about doom and gloom. Well I’ll tell you, 
we are always the ones that are in favour of development. We 
are always the ones that are in favour of investment. We are 
always the ones in favour of opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — We are always the ones that are in favour of 
optimism in Saskatchewan. It’s the members opposite have 
always been the ones that have put the brakes on every kind of 
development you can imagine in this province, and we’d have a 
far greater oil and gas industry in this province if this province 
never would have been blessed with an NDP administration for 
50 years. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — If you never would have had these people in 
government, I dare say we’d be the Alberta of Canada rather 
than where we are today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — That’s the kind of difference that it would have 
made. Rather than having Tommy Douglas driving the industry 
from this province when he came into Saskatchewan in 
government in the ’40s, we’d have oil and gas development like 
you wouldn’t believe here in Saskatchewan right now compared 
to what we do have. 
 
And when you talk to oil and gas producers, all you have to do 
is drive out to Calgary and sit down and talk to some of them. 
They never will come back in large numbers until we see a 
different administration. And I dare say that that’s going to 
happen pretty darn soon. And when it does happen, we’re going 
to release the brakes on that industry and we are going to allow 
it to grow as it’s never grown before here in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That’s the kind of thing that this industry needs. That’s the kind 
of thing that they want. And when they elect a Saskatchewan 
Party government, that’s the kind of thing that they’re going to 
get. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 
pleasure to follow the member for Kindersley so we can set the 
facts straight. 
 
We may . . . Let me say this to start, Mr. Speaker. This 
government has done an excellent job in promoting all natural 
resource development in a sustainable manner — sustainable. 
This is not going to be simply a case where all the wells get 
drilled and all the profits go off to Alberta like they would want 
to see happen. What we have developed here is a homegrown 
industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — We may not have oil wells in many of our 
ridings, Mr. Speaker. But let me tell you, we’ve got an oil 
upgrader that’s dependent on the importance of the oil and gas 
sector. Let me tell you that we’ve got a technology research 
centre which will help the wells that are drilled in the rural 
ridings around this province remain prosperous for years to 
come. 
 
We’ve got, for the member for Weyburn who looks in disbelief, 
we’ve got a project to help make those wells down in Weyburn 
last longer through CO2 injection. We’ve done that because we 
believe in the oil and gas industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Now to listen to the members opposite you’d 
think nothing good ever happens in their ridings. I know I often 
think that. I’m sure on election night, I can tell you that that was 



May 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 957 

certainly the case — nothing good happened there. But that’s 
okay. 
 
I have here, Mr. Speaker, I have here a list of the total number 
of wells drilled. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the member for Kindersley will 
take great interest in this. All those Alberta companies that were 
avoiding the province, shunning us, do you know what? They 
drilled 463 oil wells this year, this quarter. Do you know how 
many they drilled in 1999, Mr. Speaker? Seventy-six. 
Seventy-six — five times the number of oil wells drilled. 
 
In Kindersley alone, in Kindersley alone, Mr. Speaker, 90 new 
oil wells this quarter, 18 new gas wells. The whole first quarter 
of ’99 they only drilled 29 oil and gas wells in Kindersley — 
29. This year 89 oil, 18 gas. But no, no, Saskatchewan’s driving 
out the oil industry, driving it out. Well I’ll tell you the only 
thing that’s being driven is the number of oils is being driven 
up. 
 
Let’s take a look at what’s happening in other ridings. The 
member for Lloydminster — 176 new oil wells, Mr. Speaker, 
this quarter; 30 new gas wells this quarter. The member for 
Estevan — take note, Madam Member — 149 new oil wells in 
the first quarter; only 32 in the first quarter of last year. But the 
province is running dry, they say. They say that this 
government is driving industry out. Not so, and the facts bear 
that out. 
 
We can take a look at other areas. We can look at Swift Current. 
Now they say that the budget had the impact. The week of April 
14; in one week 32 vertical wells licenses were issued — 32. In 
all of the first quarter of 1999 there were only 108 issued. Fully 
in one week, one-third of the licenses issued that were issued 
the previous year. The last I looked, that week was well after 
the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yet the members, the members say, oh the budget’s to 
blame. The sky is falling, the jobs are leaving — this is simply 
not true. And frankly, Mr. Speaker, I think . . . I can tell you 
that on this side we’re tired of listening to that kind of gloom 
and doom; and the people of Saskatchewan and the people of 
rural Saskatchewan deserve better — better representation and 
better representatives than they have at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this resolution speaks to more than just the oil and 
gas industry though. And I think that we need to make that 
point. We may not have the oil wells in our ridings as I’ve told 
you of, but we still support its development. We will still 
protect that industry. Why? Because we make decisions based 
on the best interests of Saskatchewan people and the 
Saskatchewan economy. Not based on the simple premise of 
who they voted for. 
 
I find it interesting the members opposite constantly bring this 
up — who voted for them? We can assume, we can assume then 
that if they ever form a government, God forbid, that if they 
ever form a government the only people they will ever look 
after are the people that they represent — their own. And that is 
exactly . . . that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what we saw leading up 

to 1991. And people know what that government did. And they 
know where the money went and they know that the investment 
flowed to Alberta and to the friends of that previous 
government. 
 
Now these guys opposite will say that wasn’t us. They’ll say it 
wasn’t us. They stand in this House and they go on and on and 
on about C.M. Fines and about Tommy Douglas driving out 
industry — if you can believe it. And then they turn around and 
say but Tommy Douglas brought in medicare that we want to 
protect. It’s just duplicitous on their part. And it’s silliness. 
Because it has nothing to do with the debate that we have today. 
And that debate is how do we grow this industry in the natural 
resource sector here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that there are a lot of people who 
have jobs today because of the good stewardship of this 
government over the natural resource sector. Whether that is in 
the renewable resource sector, like trees, and I’m sure that the 
member for Carrot River who’s writing this down would agree 
with me. 
 
I can tell you that there are people working in the potash mines 
throughout the members’ ridings. There are people working in 
the uranium mines up in the North; there are people working in 
the gold mines. And there is a sense of optimism today among 
the prospectors that this province is going to continue to 
provide prosperity. They’re not afraid of this government. What 
they’re afraid of is a regime that’ll drive this province to 
bankruptcy, that almost did it leading up to 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that this government is 
committed to good stewardship of our natural resources — be 
they renewable or non-renewable. 
 
We are committed to ensuring, as we’ve seen in the North, that 
Northerners have an opportunity to participate in those wealth 
. . . that wealth as well — not simply the people that they want. 
We’ve got an opportunity here to make sure that all 
Saskatchewan people benefit because we can add value, add 
value to those resources. 
 
The investment that we are making at Regina’s research park 
and the Petroleum Technology Research Centre will help to 
ensure the natural gas and oil sector continues to grow strong 
well after all the sweet, light crude is pulled out of the ground. 
We can tell you the billion dollar investment that was made in 
Weyburn into the CO2 (carbon dioxide) project . . . injections 
will help to keep those wells alive and keep the people working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is good government; that is good stewardship; 
that’s what this government believes in. So we can listen to the 
members opposite with their gloom and doom. We can listen to 
them say that, that people are leaving the province and industry 
is not committed — but the facts say different. The facts say 
different. 
 
In the first quarter of 1999, 227 wells drilled. In the first quarter 
of the year 2000, nearly three times that number — three times 
that number, Mr. Speaker. Those are facts, and the members 
opposite have an allergy to the facts. They don’t like them 
because they don’t prove out their argument. 
 



958 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2000 

(1515) 
 
But let me tell you that industry is confident that Saskatchewan 
is a land of opportunity, and they will continue to invest, and 
that is a fact that you and the people who work in those fields 
and the industries can bank on. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A great deal of 
pleasure that I get an opportunity this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to 
rise and speak to the rather inane motion brought forward by the 
member from Regina Sherwood. I found it rather highly 
amusing, Mr. Speaker, that someone would get up and bring a 
motion to this floor congratulating the government on the 
atmosphere that’s been created in this province in especially all 
sectors of natural resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where it . . . where I live in Saskatchewan Rivers, 
natural resources and the harvesting of natural resources is, is a 
large part of the economic sector. And one of the things that 
we’re having a great deal of trouble with is trying to understand 
the direction this government is going in and what it is they 
hope to accomplish in the, in the resource sector of this 
province. 
 
Now certainly many members here today have spoken about oil 
and gas and how it affects their constituencies. And of course 
one of the things we have known for quite some time is that in 
Saskatchewan Rivers there is no gas. All the gas is in Regina it 
appears to be, Mr. Speaker. And socialist gas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what we do have, and what has been a great 
problem for us in Saskatchewan Rivers and areas north of us, 
certainly through most of Saskatchewan, is the management and 
the handling by this government in the past eight years in 
natural resources and certainly in the forestry sector. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, three times now we’ve heard from this 
government, promises to revamp the forestry industry in this 
province. But even though they’ve promised it three times, 
we’re still waiting for the revamping to start. 
 
In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, while the revamping is going to 
. . . we’re waiting for it to start, 5,000 jobs have been lost in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, because of the inane policies of this 
government whose desire it is, is to control people and to put 
them out of work and say that we are doing good. Putting 
people on welfare and on unemployment insurance rolls is 
certainly not an attitude to take and say that this is good for the 
province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this revamping of the forest industry that is 
going to take place sometime in the future — and we certainly 
do not know when it’s going to start even — has left many of 
the independent saw mills in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
scrambling to get material, to get the wood sources that they 
need in order to keep operating. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, many of the smaller mills across central 
and northern Saskatchewan have gone bankrupt. Bankrupt, Mr. 
Speaker. And this is supposed to be the legacy that we’re 

supposed to support today of this government and be excited 
about. Well I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker; I’m going to have a great 
deal of trouble being excited about a government that puts 
policies in place that force businesses to go bankrupt and leave 
this province. 
 
Actually, one of the most regressive parts that we’re going to 
have to deal with in the very near future — and that’s why I’m 
very excited when the member from Rosetown-Biggar becomes 
the Premier, we’re going to be able to reverse this very 
regressive trend — and that’s the increase in taxation that’s 
taking place in this province. 
 
The cost of operating in this province for business has now 
gone up 6 per cent as of March 30. Now 6 per cent, maybe to 
the members opposite, doesn’t seem like a lot of money. But 
when you’re operating in this province, Mr. Speaker, on such a 
fine line that’s been created by this regressive government to 
begin with, an extra 6 per cent brought forth by this government 
actually forces business to cross the line into closure. 
 
And that’s a great problem for us. These small businesses, Mr. 
Speaker, provide a great deal of jobs in this country and in this 
province, and to attack those people is a very regressive and 
unfortunate circumstance that this government has forced them 
into. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, a few of the things that are now going to 
be taxed by this government that were never taxed before, this 6 
per cent PST will be going on in the forest industry, tires, 
logging chains, chokers, wire cable, oil filters, Mr. Speaker, 
cant hooks, saw chains, etc., and the list could go on and on but 
it’s just far too much to list here today. You’re only going to 
give me 10 minutes so I’d need much more time than that to go 
through the list. 
 
But another great regressive that’s taking place too is that this 
tax is now being applied on all the services that the forest 
industry needs to use to operate. And so the cost of their 
operation in total, Mr. Speaker, has gone up 6 per cent, forcing 
them into such a negative margin that many of them are now 
going bankrupt and are being forced to close their mills. 
 
But what is really amusing — and I use the word amusing, Mr. 
Speaker — that for decades and decades this province has seen 
to bring forth a tax on sawmill operators, a road tax — they 
have to pay the 15 cent road tax for the equipment that they 
operate on their sawmill landing. Now, Mr. Speaker, these 
vehicles never see a highway unless they’re being carried by 
another vehicle, and they’re already paying the tax. So they’re 
collecting a tax twice for this equipment to operate. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the sawmill operators of this province are 
paying such a regressive tax that puts them in a significant 
unfair disadvantage to our neighbours to the East and to the 
West and most certainly to the North. 
 
Now these regressive taxes that this government has brought 
forth has completely eliminated all opportunities, Mr. Speaker, 
for expansion in this province. Many of the mills are trying to 
do the best they can to increase the employment and increase 
opportunities for their bottom line, have talked about expansion 
in this province. 



May 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 959 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these mills are telling me that, no, we can’t 
do this any more. Any further expansion, any expansion of 
opportunity will have to be put on hold until a new and more 
progressive government replaces this one across the Assembly 
here from us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the policies that we are being 
forced to deal with in this province have been in place for a 
long, long time. 
 
Now the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, have talked about, 
and this motion talks about, all the good things that they think 
are happening in the natural resource sector. But unfortunately, 
Mr. Speaker, since 1944 when the government of the day that 
was elected in 1944 drove the natural resource sector out of this 
province, Mr. Speaker, drove them out in droves. Mr. Speaker, 
those people will never be replaced again and the opportunities 
that we had at that time were lost. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, at that time this province was booming 
and many good things were happening. More and more people 
were being put to work in the resource sector whether it was oil 
and gas or whether it was in forestry. But no, Mr. Speaker, in 
1944, Mr. Speaker, the government of the day took office of the 
day decided that no, no, we can’t have success in 
Saskatchewan; we must have a regressive government; we must 
stop all opportunities for people to want to live here and raise 
their children here and be successful. So then what’s happened, 
Mr. Speaker, is that since 1944 socialist governments from that 
time on have done their utmost to try to drive business out of 
this province. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, what we have found out is that it’s through 
a report that we had access to in the early 1950s. The 
government of the day, which, Mr. Speaker, was also the 
government that was elected in 1944, commissioned a report on 
what Saskatchewan was capable of; they wanted to know how 
good Saskatchewan could get to be. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that report, which was done by an outside 
agency, was able to indicate to the government of the day that 
the province of Saskatchewan was clearly capable, Mr. Speaker, 
of supporting life on this planet to the tune of 800 million 
people. The province of Saskatchewan could sustain life for 800 
million people, Mr. Speaker. We could have been a have 
province. Instead the government at that time and this 
government today continues to go down the road of high 
taxation indicating that we have to be a have-not province. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, they indicate to us that we should be a 
province that cannot support itself, that we must depend upon 
handouts from a federal jurisdiction. And I think that is very 
sorry in today’s society, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that is why, Mr. Speaker, when I see motions brought 
forward today, such as from the member from Regina 
Sherwood and seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland, I have a great deal of trouble, Mr. Speaker, 
understanding what it is that brought forth these ideas that they 
can . . . that things are going well in the natural resource sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot support this motion but I will be 
supporting the motion from the member from Thunder Creek 

very, very pleasingly, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The opportunity now exists for members to 
ask questions of those that have been involved in the debate. 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I have a 
question I think to my hon. colleague, the member for Thunder 
Creek. And I was listening to his remarks very carefully and I 
thought I heard him talk about one of the things the oil and gas 
sector needed was . . . talking about the better tax regime and 
lower taxes. I think he said something of this nature. 
 
And my question to my hon. colleague, the member of Thunder 
Creek, would be, Mr. Speaker, on our side of the House we 
have been saying that this development has been taking place 
because of the very policies of our government which have been 
balanced, well-thought-out policies which, given the debt that 
we were left at the end of the last regime and by the 
predecessors of the members opposite, how would they in the 
light of the debt, in the light of the tax cuts that we’ve brought 
in for Saskatchewan people, and in the light of other balances 
that are brought in, what, Mr. Speaker, would they do to lower 
revenues, lower taxes, and how would they better do what we 
have done to encourage the industry with their tax policies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I’d like to thank the member for his question. 
We’ve had meetings with the Canadian Association of 
Petroleum Producers and the small explorers and producers 
associations and they both told us the same thing — that 
Saskatchewan is the highest cost jurisdiction in Canada in 
which for them to do business, and one of the highest in the 
entire world, and they just won’t continue to spend great 
amounts of money in this province until we change our tax 
structure. 
 
It’s our position, it’s our position that we can give these 
companies, as well as all other corporate citizens in this 
province and all citizens in general, a tax break that will 
encourage more investment in this province and in turn, and in 
turn probably bring in more revenue to the coffers of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
member for Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Saskatchewan Rivers talked at 
great length about how dismal the forest industry is in the 
province and the multitude of problems that are being caused by 
the increase in the PST, and painting again the picture of doom 
and gloom. So I have a simple couple of questions for the . . . or 
question for the member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They 
may well be simple but they need to be that way for the 
members opposite. 
 
So to the member for Saskatchewan Rivers, how many people 
are employed in Wapawekka sawmill, and how many of those 
employed are of Aboriginal ancestry? And how many people 
are employed in the Carrier sawmill in your own constituency 
— both brand new sawmills — and how many of those are 
Aboriginal ancestry? Could he answer that question for me? 
 



960 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2000 

(1530) 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the things I 
have to agree with the member from Regina South is these are a 
little too simple. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, all of the employees at Wapawekka Lumber 
are employed. And 60 per cent of them actually have been 
designated of the Aboriginal ancestry. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the member from . . . opposite has also asked 
me about Carrier Lumber and how many employees were hired 
there for this new sawmill. Well, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I 
have to inform the member opposite that Carrier sawmill is not 
a new business in this province, and in fact they have had 
significant downsizing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Carrier Lumber has been in this province for 
about five years now and so I would not consider that a new 
business. I would consider that a new business as someone who 
would be starting up in 1999 or even the year 2000. 
 
So if the government has decided that in order to qualify as a 
new business it’s anywhere within the last five to ten years, 
then I would have to say, Mr. Speaker, that is a very dismal 
record indeed. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
unfathomable member from Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Member, I thought I heard him say during his speech that 
Pirate Drilling has left the province of Saskatchewan. I was 
extremely concerned to hear that because a couple of my 
constituents work for Pirate Drilling. So I wonder if the member 
could answer and tell me why it is that Pirate Drilling in 
Kindersley, as of 15 minutes ago, was answering their 
telephone in Kindersley? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I’ll be happy to. I will be happy to answer that 
question. I spoke with the owner of Pirate Drilling a few weeks 
ago — Louis Gierstoeffer. Louis informs me that the corporate 
headquarters, the corporate headquarters for Pirate Drilling has 
been relocated to Calgary, Alberta effective, effective May 1. 
Yes indeed, during the transition between the move between 
Kindersley and Calgary, the office will be, the office will be 
still open. 
 
But I’m also informed that the building is for sale and he will be 
moving all of his operations, all of his operations to Alberta as 
soon as possible. And he gives the reasons. The reasons are the 
taxation regime that he is faced with in Saskatchewan, the 
bureaucracy that he’s faced with here in Saskatchewan. And the 
simple fact of the matter is he does not want to operate in 
Saskatchewan any longer when he sees far greater opportunities 
in Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question’s also 
for the member for Kindersley. The member for Kindersley 
says that things are so bad because the tax regime is driving 

people out of the province, particularly industry. But he can’t 
seem to explain to me how it is we’ve got three times as many 
wells being drilled in the first quarter of this year as we did last 
year. I’d like to hear his explanation for that and then I have a 
supplemental. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — It may have a little bit to do with $30 oil. Did 
that ever occur to you? It may have a little bit to do with 65 to 
75 cent a litre gasoline at the pumps. People are drilling all over 
the world in numbers that we have never seen because the oil 
industry responds to price. The oil industry responds as quickly 
as possible to price, and the fact that we are seeing more wells 
drilled in this province is because they were reacting to a strong 
market right now even in spite of the fact, in spite of the fact 
that we had the highest tax regime of anywhere in Canada and 
practically anywhere in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My supplemental 
is: aren’t you really saying Saskatchewan’s such a great place 
you can mismanage and break even? And isn’t that exactly 
what you’ve been saying for ten years? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well the member’s question is so absurd, it 
almost doesn’t give reason to respond to something like that. 
The oil and gas industry isn’t in business to lose money. The oil 
and gas industry aren’t in business to simply break even. 
They’re in business because they want to make a living; they 
want to produce profits for themselves and their employees and 
for their shareholders. That’s the reason why they drill, that’s 
the reason why they invest money, that’s the reason why they 
employ people, and that’s the reason why they’ll continue to do 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
opposite seems to like to talk about the good old days of the 
Tories when they were in office and how wonderful things were 
for attracting investment. 
 
I was hopeful that perhaps the member for Kindersley could 
explain how during that time we were seeing as many as 15,000 
people a year leave this province. Fifteen thousand people a 
year and yet that has trickled down to virtually nothing today. 
 
How is it that our tax regime is crippling this economy when 
we’re seeing more and more people staying, compared to when 
that party’s predecessor was in office? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — It has trickled down to nothing in this province 
because of an NDP administration opposite. We’ve got a 
million people in Saskatchewan today. We had a million people 
plus when you took over in this administration. There’s been 
absolutely no growth. We see continued opportunity slipping 
away to the west of us every day. 
 
You want to talk about the ’80s, you can talk about it all you 
want, but the people of Saskatchewan are more interested in this 
century than what happened 20 years ago in this province. 
They’re more interested in jobs and opportunity and 
employment and investment in Saskatchewan today. And if we 



May 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 961 

form the next government — and I say we will in a very short 
period of time — we will do exactly that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The time has expired. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Mennonite Central 
Committee Saskatchewan Act 

 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move Bill No. 301 be 
now read a second time and referred to the Standing Committee 
on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Renaming of The 
Regina Golf Club Act 

 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move Bill No. 
302, The Renaming of The Regina Golf Club Act be now read a 
second time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

Bill No 303 — The Saskatchewan Roman Catholic 
Dioceses Reorganization Act 

 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill 303, The 
Saskatchewan Roman Catholic Dioceses Reorganization Act be 
now read a second time and referred to the Standing Committee 
on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 4 — Taxation Policy 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this afternoon I would love to stand here in the 
Assembly and pay tribute to the hard work and the dedication of 
the people of Saskatchewan to their province. 
 
The citizens of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are a hardy and 
very optimistic bunch. We live in a province that has all kinds 
of extremes. We go from trees and forest in the North to the 
Prairies in the South. 
 
Our weather can be almost as extreme. We go from 40 below 
zero in the winter to 35-plus in the summer. And in the summer 
when we get a bit of a breeze it cools off those nights and it’s 
wonderful. But that breeze in the winter, Mr. Speaker, is a wind 
chill and it makes our winters extremely miserable at times. 
 

Mr. Speaker, starting vehicles and the problems we have in this 
province can be a major inconvenience. And, Mr. Speaker, even 
with the conveniences we do have — all our little gadgets of 
automatic car starters, door openers, snow blowers — we still 
tend to grumble a little at times. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I like to stand sometimes and consider what 
Saskatchewan would have been like a hundred years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to even imagine what it would be like to 
have been a settler in this province — the miles and miles of 
prairie grass, no fences, no towns, no cities, but to be out in the 
middle of the prairie. It’s very hard to imagine, Mr. Speaker. 
The hardships that our parents and grandparents must have 
endured to build a new life and new homes in this very rugged 
but beautiful province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our ancestors — the people that settled this 
province — celebrated the good times: the spring rains, the 
beautiful sunrises, and the spectacular sunsets that we have in 
this province. But, Mr. Speaker, they also struggled through the 
tough times: the dust storms, the snowstorms, the ’80s, Mr. 
Speaker. And always throughout the last 100 years, the people 
of Saskatchewan have always held the belief that tomorrow, no 
matter how badly it got today, tomorrow would always be a 
better day. And that yes, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan really was 
the best place to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been times when we have strayed from this 
belief, but we have always come back to realize that if we work 
hard and make sound choices we will have a better tomorrow. 
Mr. Speaker, our tomorrow is quickly coming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 10 years ago, this province was in dire straits. 
Saskatchewan was on the verge of bankruptcy. Now for me to 
stand here, Mr. Speaker, I can’t even imagine what it would be 
like to have your province on the verge of bankruptcy. It’s hard 
to comprehend. 
 
The first few years that our government came into power, in the 
early to mid-1990s, were very stressful times. Very tough 
decisions had to be made. Drastic budgets, and yes, Mr. 
Speaker, tax increases were made to help revive our province 
and keep us from bankruptcy. But, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan realized that this is something that we had to do. 
A desperate situation required drastic measures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that true spirit of Saskatchewan citizens came 
through. We believed that by hard work and sound financial 
decisions and by sticking together in our resolve to make 
Saskatchewan a better place to live, we would see ourselves 
through those tough times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, gradually we began to see progress. And in early 
1992, this government began to ease the burden on the residents 
of Saskatchewan in a balanced and sustainable way. A balance 
that encouraged growth in many sectors throughout the 
province, and in a sustainable way, sustainable in the tax 
reduction but within our means and would not cause reductions 
in other areas and programs. 
 
Over this early period of this government, the corporate income 
tax rate was reduced, the education and health tax on 



962 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2000 

manufacturing and processing activities was reduced, and 
royalty structure for oil and gas were introduced maintaining a 
competitiveness with Alberta. Fuel tax rates on aviation fuel 
was reduced, and there was a personal income tax reduction in 
the debt reduction tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these may not be huge reductions, but they helped 
to stimulate the Saskatchewan economy and began our climb to 
a better tomorrow. Mr. Speaker, in March 1997, this 
government reduced our education and health tax from 9 per 
cent to 7 per cent and it eliminated the tax entirely on certain 
medical devices purchased by individuals. Again, Mr. Speaker, 
that balanced, sustainable way. 
 
Throughout the 1997 and 1998 budgets, a variety of fair, 
balanced, sustainable tax cuts were again put forward by this 
government. The livestock and horticultural facilities incentive 
program was introduced. The potash production tax structure 
was changed to attract new investment capital. The film 
employment tax credit was introduced, and, Mr. Speaker, this 
one introduction of a tax credit creates thousands of jobs in 
communities around Saskatchewan yearly. And that’s only one 
example, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1545) 
 
On July 1, 1998, the Saskatchewan personal income tax rate 
was lowered from 50 per cent of basic federal tax to 48 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, research and development tax credits was also 
introduced at a rate of 15 per cent at the same time along with 
the petroleum research incentives, rebates on mineral 
exploration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these tax reductions and incentives spread over a 
wide variety of sectors, industries, and personal reductions has 
helped to generate new optimism and prosperity in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the people of this province were 
seeing the benefits of their hard work — a better tomorrow. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, even though the province of Saskatchewan 
was still at this time carrying a huge debt and paying outrageous 
interest rates on that huge debt, our economy was showing signs 
of new life — hard work and perseverance by Saskatchewan 
citizens again coming through. 
 
During 1999 this government reduced the education and health 
tax from 7 per cent to 6 per cent. And again research and 
development, and development and exploration expense pools 
were enhanced. 
 
Commitment to a balanced, sustainable tax reduction was again 
demonstrated with our one-third, one-third, one-third approach 
— all new dollars being divided equally between debt 
reduction, social programs and education, and tax reduction. A 
commitment we have campaigned on through previous 
elections, a balanced and sensible approach that the people of 
Saskatchewan understand and appreciate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we just have to look at the facts and figures to 
realize that this balanced approach has done well for 
Saskatchewan. Look at the economic performance figures for 
these years to see the proof. From the period between 1993 and 

1998, Saskatchewan’s real economic growth averaged 3.7 per 
cent compared to Canada’s average growth of 3.1 — higher 
than the national average, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Real personal income growth. Saskatchewan averaged 3.5 per 
cent; the Canadian average was 3.0 per cent. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, higher than the national average. 
 
Personal disposable income per capita. During this time, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan’s grew by 3.5 per cent; the Canadian 
average grew 3 per cent. Again, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
was higher on average than the national average. 
 
Manufacturing shipments grew in Saskatchewan by 9.5 per 
cent, compared to a national average of 7.9 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker — way higher than the national average, here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Retail trade increased by 6 per cent in Saskatchewan compared 
to Canada’s retail trade growth of 4.9 per cent. 
 
And one of the best parts of all, Mr. Speaker, is that our 
employment level averaged 480,000 — the highest in our 
province’s history — and with a remarkable 31,600 new jobs 
created during this time. Mr. Speaker, hard work right across 
the province was paying off. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we can look at some of the communities in 
the province. And when you look at the Sask Trends Monitor 
there’s a little article in there this month, March of 2000, talking 
about retail sales by community. 
 
Increasing sales in motor vehicle dealerships in smaller 
communities enabled retail sales outside the 10 major cities to 
grow more quickly than sales within cities. Among these cities, 
sales since 1991 have grown the most quickly in Swift Current, 
Estevan, and Lloydminster. Mr. Speaker, this is good news that 
we never hear from the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new millennium and the new budget that was 
brought down in March of this year brings us to a better and 
brighter tomorrow. 
 
The rebate limit on farm use gasoline was totally eliminated. 
This may seem like a small measure to many people but, Mr. 
Speaker, we know in Saskatchewan that small things 
accumulate and we will end up with larger, better help. And, 
Mr. Speaker, this is one thing that will hopefully help the farm 
community through this farm crisis that we now have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also in this budget in March the new 
post-secondary graduate tax credit was introduced. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve heard criticism that this is not a huge amount by 
many people’s standards. But, Mr. Speaker, it is the beginning 
of a new and innovative program — a program that can be 
expanded and built upon in that balanced and sustainable 
fashion that has served the people so well over these last 
budgets. 
 
In this budget, our new system of personal income tax was 
introduced. Balanced and sustainable, Mr. Speaker, a budget for 
growth and opportunity. 
 



May 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 963 

A new three-bracket tax on income structure will replace the 
basic Saskatchewan tax on tax, eliminate the flat tax, and it will 
mean the elimination of the debt reduction surtax and 
elimination of the high-income surtax. 
 
These last three taxes — flat tax and the surtaxes, Mr. Speaker, 
may have been necessary in their day when they were 
introduced. But, Mr. Speaker, they have been a thorn in the side 
of Saskatchewan taxpayers every year when we sit down to do 
our income tax returns. So I’m very pleased to announce that 
these will be gone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Families, too, will see the benefits of increased non-refundable 
tax credits for individuals, for spouse or spousal equivalent, 
children, and seniors. A sales tax credit is now in effect to offset 
any effect that the PST may have on lower income families in 
our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this reform of Saskatchewan’s income and sales 
tax will provide provincial residents with an overall tax 
reduction of about 260 million when it’s fully implemented. 
This tax cutting includes $440 million in reduction in 
Saskatchewan personal income tax, the largest income tax 
reduction in the province’s history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another page to add to the long list of this 
government’s balanced, fair, and sustainable tax reductions that 
have benefited all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, therefore be it resolved: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the responsible, measured, 
and consultative manner in which the government has 
introduced reasonable, targeted, sustainable, and fair tax 
reduction in every budget since 1995. 

 
Seconded by the member of Regina Dewdney, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great deal of pride 
that I stand today to second the motion from the hon. member 
from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Today when I was asked if I could speak on this issue, I had 
asked our House Leader if we could extend hours this evening 
so I could give a full and detailed speech, and he declined that, 
so with regret I only have about an hour and five minutes in 
which to speak on this issue, Mr. Speaker. And as my 
colleagues would have enjoyed, I would have had a great deal 
more time. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the economic 
performance of the government before we get into the issue of 
taxation since 1992 . . . actually October, 1991 when the NDP 
formed the first government of the 1990s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, without doubt we’ve had great economic 
performance in this province over the last number of years 
despite what the members opposite like to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan. We inherited a province with the largest debt per 
capita in the entire country. We inherited a province that had 
been mismanaged for a long period of time by the former 

Conservative government. And, Mr. Speaker, we inherited a 
province that was on a road to destruction. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
with great pride that this government turned that situation 
around and has built some of the strongest economic growth in 
the entire country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just on a few points. Saskatchewan’s real 
economic growth averaged 3.7 per cent in the period from 1993 
to 1998 compared to Canada’s average growth of 3.1 per cent in 
the same period. Mr. Speaker, a province that was inherited in 
1991 with the largest per capita debt in this country was able to 
sustain economic growth far superior to the national average, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think that in itself indicates the record of this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite always want to talk about 
the negative things and they forget to look at all the very 
positive things that have gone on in this province. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan had the highest growth in real GDP (gross 
domestic product) per capita. Real GDP per capita measures 
income per person for those who don’t understand. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan’s real GDP per person grew by 3.3 per 
cent on average while Canada’s real GDP per person increased 
by only 2 per cent. Mr. Speaker, again Saskatchewan 
outdistanced the rest of Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the 
Saskatchewan the opposition so fondly likes to refer to with 
doom and gloom. A province with real economic growth, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan also outperformed the national 
average in almost all other economic indicators during the 
1990s and, Mr. Speaker, that’s good news for the province of 
Saskatchewan; and even the members opposite, the official 
Leader of the Opposition, would have to acknowledge that is 
good news, good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s personal income growth averaged 
3.5 per cent in the period from 1993 to 1998 compared to 
Canada’s growth of personal income of 3.0 per cent. A half a 
per cent higher than the national average in the province of 
Saskatchewan — very, very, very good news for this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
How can you deny these things? They’re there; they’re facts. 
StatsCanada puts them out. They’re great. They indicate what 
this province is all about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan personal disposable income per 
capita grew by 3.2 per cent compared to Canada’s growth in 
personal disposable income of 2.5 per cent. Mr. Speaker, all 
good signs of a great future for this province. And all at a time 
when we were crippled by a huge, huge debt and deficit left 
upon our backs by the previous government, Mr. Speaker. A 
very, very sad situation indeed. But this government turned that 
fiscal situation around and developed strong economic growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also important to indicate a number of 
other facts including that Saskatchewan retail trade increased by 
6 per cent in the same period, compared to Canada’s retail 
growth of 4.9 per cent. Our retail growth outdistanced the rest 
of Canada, Mr. Speaker. Is that not good news for 
Saskatchewan? 
 



964 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2000 

I just wonder how the opposition continues to have so many 
stories of doom and gloom. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s all a matter of 
having a positive outlook on life or having a negative outlook 
on life, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a few other very important points about our 
economy. In the same period, full employment in the province 
increased by 39,000 jobs, Mr. Speaker. Full employment by 
39,000 jobs. Mr. Speaker, good news again. Youth employment 
increased by 7,300 jobs, Mr. Speaker. Unbelievable — 7,300 
jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, employment in the agriculture area decreased by 
14,100 jobs. And non-agriculture employment increased by 
45,700 jobs, showing that we’re diversifying our economy at a 
period in time when it’s most important to do so. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are continuing to work towards diversifying 
our economy and . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — With leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s an honour to introduce 
to the . . . through you to the Assembly three individuals from 
my hometown of the city of Swift Current. 
 
And they are in your gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Seated on 
your far right, the city engineer, Bert Enman; His Worship 
Mayor Paul Elder, in the middle; and alderman Alan Bridal on 
the left, Mr. Speaker. They were in town today for meetings 
with the government and we hope that they went well. 
 
And thank you to the member for Regina for the leave to 
introduce guests and I’d ask all members to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 4 — Taxation Policy 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to also indicate 
that during this period of time Saskatchewan’s total population 
continued to grow. It’s good news, Mr. Speaker. StatsCanada 
indicates we have 1,027,300 people in September of 1999, Mr. 
Speaker. Positive growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing but good news in Saskatchewan if 
you really want to look for it, Mr. Speaker. Even the times 
when we are struggling with an agriculture economy that’s 
having difficulty, Mr. Speaker, we’re diversifying and we’re 
growing. 

And all the people of this province understand the need to help 
the agricultural community to diversify and to expand and to 
find jobs in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going 
to continue to do that. This government’s going to continue to 
work with rural Saskatchewan to expand our economy. 
 
Since March 31, 1993, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has moved 
from having the highest total public sector debt per capita of 
$15,071 per, to a position that’s sixth lowest at 11,308, Mr. 
Speaker. Over the same time Saskatchewan’s total public sector 
debt as a per cent of GDP has been reduced from the highest 
among provinces at 71.7 per cent to the fifth lowest at 39.9, Mr. 
Speaker. A tremendous turnaround in a mere eight and a half 
years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That shows that the government has committed and worked 
toward building a strong Saskatchewan for its people, Mr. 
Speaker. We need to talk about all the good things this province 
has; they’re very important things. 
 
I’d like to talk about a number of issues around our finances in 
that period of time, Mr. Speaker. Taxes have come down, Mr. 
Speaker. The members opposite can’t deny that. I can quote the 
taxes . . . I can talk about the taxes in 1991, early 1991, Mr. 
Speaker, and what they are today in many, many areas. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we have cut the taxes every year since the budget was 
balanced in 1995. 
 
Let me tell you, it was very difficult to balance a budget in this 
province, very, very difficult. And we would like to thank and I 
would like to thank the people of Saskatchewan. We were able 
to balance that budget because each and every taxpayer in this 
province, each and every citizen, worked with the government 
in a co-operative way to deal with our tremendous deficit and 
debt. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s unlike Tory Ontario, or unlike many, 
many other provinces, this province was first — first to tackle 
the debt, the first to tackle the deficit, Mr. Speaker, and first to 
do it in a meaningful, responsible, positive way. 
 
Ontario today, we understand, tabled their first balanced budget 
seven years after this province, Mr. Speaker — seven years, Mr. 
Speaker, seven years. It took them that much longer to catch on. 
But that’s okay — it’s a Tory province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk about a couple of other things. 
Taxes will continue to come down under this government. The 
only ones who will argue over this are those in the official 
opposition. The members opposite don’t want to talk about tax 
cuts because then they don’t have anything to run their platform 
on next time, Mr. Speaker. They don’t have any other issues. In 
fact the members opposite are probably very, very happy with 
this budget, but they just can’t acknowledge it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, look at the member opposite he’s so happy he’s 
just about crying. And that’s good, that’s real good. It’s . . . 
(inaudible) . . . to say that he’s so happy. 
 
But I like . . . Mr. Speaker, it’s good budget. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s so much more good news it’s unbelievable. This 
government going to continue to have a balanced budget. We 
have a solid commitment to continue balanced budgets, Mr. 



May 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 965 

Speaker, solid commitment. We’re not going to move from that. 
We’re steadfast in that, Mr. Speaker. But we also have a 
commitment to put one-third into taxation reductions, one-third 
into enhanced program spending, and one-third to the debt over 
the period of the four years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is really, really a balanced approach that allowed us to turn 
this province around, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to continue 
that balanced approach. This government is solidly committed 
to continuing that approach, Mr. Speaker. Our economy has 
grown, as I’ve indicated and it will continue to grow. More 
people are working than ever before, Mr. Speaker, and more 
and more will continue to work in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are going to continue to provide a positive climate for 
economic and social development, Mr. Speaker, because both 
are needed to have a thriving, vibrant economy. We have to 
have conditions in which the economy continues to grow. 
Business finds it’s profitable to be in this province. And at the 
same time, those profits convert into tax dollars that help us to 
implement our very, very modest but important, important 
increases in very, very large numbers of areas. 
 
I say modest, Mr. Speaker, is because we can’t be all things to 
all people at all times. We have to take a balanced approach 
when we’re enhancing programs as well so that those in our 
economy who have had difficulties need to be dealt with to be 
helped, Mr. Speaker. It’s not about leaving anybody out; it’s 
about being balanced in our approach to helping the people of 
this province, Mr. Speaker, balanced in all our approaches. 
 
The debt has come down, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve talked about 
before. We had the highest debt to GDP in the entire country in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. And today with good balanced, 
fiscal approach we’re down from 71.7 per cent to 39.9. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a terrific accomplishment. 
 
More resources are going into key public services every day, 
Mr. Speaker. As our economy grows, our commitments 
continue to expand them as well. Together we can build a better 
Saskatchewan if we all want to work together with that in mind. 
And that’s the challenge for all of us as legislators to build a 
better Saskatchewan for those people who live here, Mr. 
Speaker. A good idea is a good idea, Mr. Speaker, and we need 
to work hard to make those good ideas become reality within 
this province. 
 
The millennium, in the last number of years has resulted in 
great change in how our economy has come forward and how 
it’s developed, Mr. Speaker, and it will continue to change. 
We’re in a world of rapid change. 
 
And one of the tasks that any government has is to be able to 
take that challenge head on and meet the changes as they occur 
and still develop a vibrant, flowing economy, Mr. Speaker — 
one that the people of Saskatchewan have pride in, but also one 
that maintains those very essential social programs, Mr. 
Speaker. Because without those essential social programs, this 
province loses a great deal of its identity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Things that we fought for as a province and as a people, things 
like medicare, education. The people of this province, both 
urban and rural, made sacrifices over a long period of time — 

the 1930’s, ’40s, ’50s, and right through the 1990s — to make 
this province what it is today. And it’s our job to uphold this 
standard, Mr. Speaker, and to uphold the values of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s unbelievable the things that we’ve been able 
to accomplish in such a short period of time to turn this 
province around. And many, many people outside this province 
look to this province for guidance in its direction. Other 
governments look to us in leadership on issues like health care, 
education, and many others. 
 
And those members opposite who may not believe that, aren’t 
looking beyond our borders to see what they’re talking to the 
government about. They need to look at what other 
governments come and talk to us about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are viewed in this country as leaders in many, 
many ways. This province has been innovative and creative 
throughout its history. And that innovation and creation with a 
very narrow base of industry and resources in its inception, its 
beginning, has become a very strong and vibrant resource for 
this entire country. And, Mr. Speaker, those other provinces do 
recognize that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk to you a little bit about a couple of 
other important issues. Our credit rating, Mr. Speaker. Our 
credit rating is now in a substantially better position than it has 
been for a long, very long period of time. We’re A’s across the 
board, Mr. Speaker, and that’s very, very important. Standard 
and Poor give us an A rating, Moody’s gives us an A2, Fitch 
IBCA gives us an A+, Canadian Bond Rating Service gives us 
an A+, and the Dominion Bond Rating Service gives us an A. 
 
Mr. Speaker, A’s right across the board. Good ratings for a 
good province, Mr. Speaker. Ratings that reflect the values of 
our province and the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about a number of key things that 
have happened over the last number of years since this 
government came to power. 
 
I want to talk first about the corporation income tax rates, Mr. 
Speaker. Since 1984, Saskatchewan’s general corporation 
income tax has varied between 15 and 17 per cent with a rate 
returning to 17 per cent on January 1, 1992. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the small-business rate remained at 10 per 
cent for most of the period from 1984 to 1992. Then, on 
January 1, 1992, the NDP government in this province began a 
four-year decrease to where the small-business tax rate today is 
8 per cent, Mr. Speaker — 8 per cent. When we inherited this 
province from a Tory government, Mr. Speaker — 10 per cent 
— 10 per cent from a right-wing Tory government. A New 
Democratic government . . . (inaudible) . . . 8 per cent 
small-business tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let the people of Saskatchewan judge for themselves who has 
the best performance in corporate income tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m talking about 1984 tax here when we had a 
Tory government in place, and here’s a quote, “Effective 
January 1, 1984, the general Saskatchewan corporate income 



966 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2000 

tax rate was increased from 14 per cent to 16 per cent.” 
Increased under the former Tory government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know they talk about being the leaders and 
the innovators in taxation, but the right-wing Tory government 
did very, very little to help the people in businesses in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have to talk about the reality in 
this province. They always want to talk about Alberta. Alberta 
. . . it’s like comparing apples and oranges, Mr. Speaker. 
Alberta’s revenues from resources will never compare to those 
of Saskatchewan. You can’t compare apples and oranges, Mr. 
Speaker. We have to talk about within our own province, Mr. 
Speaker, and what the right-wing governments have done here, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
To talk about Alberta is like comparing an apple to an orange. 
They’re both fruit, and that’s about as close as you get. Mr. 
Speaker, we can’t be dealing with issues like that because we 
don’t want to get the members opposite all worried about their 
favourite province not being able to deliver anything. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Grant Devine . . . Grant Devine ran a 
government, Mr. Speaker, that’s fine. But we want to talk . . . 
we need to indicate what that right-wing government did in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. They increased taxation. They did very 
little to help business or individuals. And, Mr. Speaker, those 
are important things we need to talk about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s unbelievable, unbelievable, the problems that 
were created during the 1980s by the Conservative government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they can talk and they can talk about all the great 
things that happened during the 1990s, Mr. Speaker . . . or 
1980s, Mr. Speaker, but in fact the only thing I see looking 
through the 1980s is increased taxation, increased debt. Quite 
frankly, platforms that didn’t work trying to buy votes — giving 
us money to do all types of things that the people of 
Saskatchewan, quite frankly, couldn’t afford. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what did that lead to? It led to increased 
personal debt, increased government debt. It led to deficits. It 
led to irresponsible government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We couldn’t have that. In 1991 this government needed to turn 
that around and make responsible government, Mr. Speaker, 
and turn those years of deficit and debt around so this province 
could look again with hope towards the future in . . . (inaudible) 
. . . with hope towards the future. That was what we looked at in 
the 1980s, which was despair to the future. 
 
Unfortunately the members opposite are a little embarrassed to 
have to admit that we’ve balanced the budget seven consecutive 
years. Very hard for them to accept. Very, very hard for them to 
accept the amount of taxation cuts that have gone on since we 
became government in 1991, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s unbelievable, but they don’t have a lot to complain about 
when it really comes down to it because this government’s been 
a good government. And they know that. A great government. 
 

The members opposite are having a difficult time, having a very 
difficult time talking about this issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1615) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about 1987 here for a minute. 
We keep talking about education and health tax and have the 
members opposite attack this government, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to point out what the Tory government of 1987 did, Mr. 
Speaker. They increased the sales tax from 5 per cent to 7 per 
cent in 1987. Mr. Speaker, they increased it 2 per cent. All 
right? And the members opposite always want to talk about the 
sales tax. 
 
But I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, 
obviously I hit a little bit of a nerve over there, obviously I hit a 
little bit of a nerve because all of a sudden they’re reacting. You 
know, throw a stone, hit something, they yelp. And I understand 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they put us in debt. They created the problems we 
had to deal with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s 1991 I want to talk about now, and this is the 
last year just before the people of Saskatchewan kicked out that 
right-wing government. That right-wing government got kicked 
out by the people of Saskatchewan and for good reason, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But effective April 1, 1991, the goods base of the E&H 
(education and health) tax is broadened to include books and 
magazines, clothing and footwear, residential use of electricity, 
natural gas . . . (inaudible) . . . prepared foods and beverages, 
non-prescription drugs, Mr. Speaker, medication, pet food, 
snack foods, candies, carbonated beverages, and tobacco 
products making the E&H goods base equivalent to the GST 
(goods and services tax). That’s what the right-wing 
government of Grant Devine did. That’s what the Tory 
government in Saskatchewan . . . Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 
they wreaked devastation upon this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you what the NDP government 
did effective October 22, 1991, just days after we became 
government, Mr. Speaker — days after. Effective that date, a 
key day in history, effective October 22, 1991 the broadening 
goods base of the E&H tax was repealed by a responsible 
government, Mr. Speaker, a government, an NDP government, 
Mr. Speaker, sitting on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With the E&H tax returning to the pre-April 1, 1991 goods 
base, we were able, Mr. Speaker, despite the large debt and 
decreasing the tax base, to make significant change and make a 
very, very good situation for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and in fact enhancing our ability to be an effective 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk to you about a number of things, Mr. 
Speaker. I have about four or five pages of all the nice . . . the 
great tax cuts that this government’s put in place since 1991. 
And, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The list is a long one. Pay attention . . . 
(inaudible) . . . pay attention. 



May 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 967 

Mr. Yates: — It’s a long list. I’m glad I got this list, Mr. 
Speaker, because there were some things on this list I didn’t 
even know. Mr. Speaker, this is an education lesson — it’s an 
education lesson for us all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, I’m sure, want to hear this 
entire list so I’m going to have to go through it in some detail. 
It’s very, very important that we have an educational process 
. . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker, so that we understand what this 
government’s done, because before a person should criticize 
something, we should understand this. And I think in all 
fairness we need to take the time every once in awhile to get 
new members to educate us, including me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this is a very, very good list. And I think it’s very, very 
important that we have this discussion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m going to start out with the first point, Mr. Speaker. 
Effective January 1, 1992 the small business corporation tax 
rate was reduced from 10 per cent to 9.5 per cent. So we 
inherited a 10 per cent corporate tax from the Tory government 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . A 10 per cent corporate income 
tax rate and we reduced it to 9.5 per cent just months after 
becoming government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We wanted to indicate to the business community that we were 
serious about having business in this province. And we — very, 
very early in the first mandate — we sent a message. We would 
have liked it to have been more, we would have liked it to have 
been more, Mr. Speaker, as we always would. But our fiscal 
situation and our debt and our deficit left upon this government 
by our predecessors didn’t allow us to make substantial changes 
immediately, but we wanted to send a signal to the business 
community that we were interested in having business again 
have faith in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Unfortunately they didn’t have that in the later years, the 1980s, 
and I understand why . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker. We had a 
terrible situation here — rising debt, running deficit year after 
year, fiscal mismanagement. We even had an idea called fair 
share where they thought that they were going to change the 
economy by sending people from Regina to all the small 
communities of the province. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? Rural Saskatchewan got 
behind the employees in government and behind the city of 
Regina and they stopped that for us, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t 
Regina-driven that was stopping that, it was all of 
Saskatchewan stopped that. 
 
In the tradition of this province, urban and rural Saskatchewan 
rose against a bad idea. And then, Mr. Speaker, they soundly 
defeated the Devine government of that era and told them no, 
that their policies weren’t what we wanted. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we need to go on. I haven’t quite even 
finished the first point because there’s more good news on this 
point, Mr. Speaker. The rate was further reduced to 9 per cent 
January 1, 1993. So one year later, Mr. Speaker, one year later 
we decided we needed to send a further message to the business 
community, a further reduction, Mr. Speaker, so that they knew 
we were serious about wanting business in this province. 
 

Even in the worst, in the very worst of deficit and debt 
situations we needed to build a clime and environment and 
stimulate our economy, Mr. Speaker — and we did that, we did 
that. A very positive environment compared to what we took 
over, Mr. Speaker, and I think even the members opposite have 
to understand that. 
 
The rate was further reduced, the rate was further reduced to 8.5 
per cent in 1994. So each year, each year we sent that signal 
that we wanted business in this community and we wanted to 
move ahead in the economy. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s good 
news for the economy. It’s good news for the people of 
Saskatchewan — it’s good news for everyone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Effective January 1, 1995, we further reduced our rate to 8 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker; from 10 per cent to 8 per cent under that so 
terrible an NDP government the opposition talks about — the 
one who doesn’t like business. So we don’t like business so we 
gave them a tax break, Mr. Speaker. What sense does that 
make, Mr. Speaker? We want a vibrant, effective economy in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and we proved that early to the 
business community by reducing that tax from 10 to 8 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can talk about all the 
bad things we did, they can talk about all those types of things, 
Mr. Speaker, but the reality is, Mr. Speaker, we’re the ones that 
reduced the taxes. The opposition can say no, no. But all they 
have to look at is the business community and look at when it 
was 10 per cent — 10 per cent under a Tory right-wing 
government and 8 per cent under a New Democrat government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you don’t have to be too bright to figure out that 
you’re a lot better off with the 8 per cent than the 10 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 10 per cent to 8 per cent, I think it 
tells about itself. We don’t have to go on any more about that 
particular point because I’ve got about 40 more. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we only have a short period of time in which for me to 
continue my discussion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, effective July 1, 1992, the education and health 
tax rate on direct agents used in manufacturing and processing 
activities were reduced from 8 per cent to 5 per cent. Again this 
government wanted to help enhance the business community in 
this province. We reduced the tax that was there put on by the 
previous Tory administration. That was 8 per cent down to 5 
per cent to help business in this environment continue to build 
and thrive, Mr. Speaker. Done by that bad NDP government — 
the first tax cut in many years for these groups — done by a bad 
NDP government. 
 
I don’t know how the Leader of the Opposition can sit there 
some days and talk about how bad it is with all these great 
things we’ve done. He’s even smiling now. He’s happy about 
these things. That’s good, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was further reduced to 3 per cent effective July 1, 1993 and 
eliminated July 1, 1994. So we took a tax that was 8 per cent 
and in three years eliminated it — eliminated it — all in the 
interest of economic development in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
All in the interest of building a strong, vibrant economy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



968 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2000 

And the members on this side of the House are very committed 
to building a strong, vibrant economy, and our record shows 
that over the last nine years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, good news for the province of Saskatchewan 
continues — continues, Mr. Speaker. April 1, Mr. Speaker, 
April 1, 1993, the education and health tax on 1 800 telephone 
services was eliminated to encourage the location of calling 
centres in Saskatchewan — a new growing industry. We 
wanted calling centres in this province. We didn’t want them 
anywhere else — we wanted them here. 
 
So we were willing to eliminate that tax, Mr. Speaker, so that 
those businesses put their roots in Saskatchewan. And they’re 
still here today, Mr. Speaker. Many, many call centres exist in 
this province for services right across this country. Why did 
they come here, Mr. Speaker? Because we as a government 
were willing to make the sacrifices necessary to get business 
into this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what it’s all about. It’s about doing the 
things necessary to bring good government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know. Where’s the doom and gloom in 
this, Mr. Speaker? There isn’t any, Mr. Speaker. It’s simply 
about good government, Mr. Speaker, and responsible 
government. And that’s what you’re getting from this side of 
the House, Mr. Speaker — good government. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m only on point 4, 
and we only have 35 minutes left, Mr. Speaker. But I have to 
talk about a number of these points. So I’m going to speed it up 
a little bit. 
 
Effective January 1, 1994, we enhanced the price and profit 
sensibility royalty structures for oil and natural gas. Mr. 
Speaker, we wanted to build an oil and natural gas sector in this 
province. And we’ve done it, Mr. Speaker. We are sensitive to 
the needs of the industry in this province, Mr. Speaker — very 
sensitive. We wanted to build those industries far, far better 
than they were in the previous 10 years under a Tory 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We understood we needed to maintain competitiveness with 
Alberta. Mr. Speaker, that’s what we tried to do. We wanted the 
growth in this province, Mr. Speaker. And we worked towards 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite . . . Are you 
learning anything? This is all good news. It’s real good for the 
province of Saskatchewan. Even Bill’s smiling over there — I 
like that Bill. 
 
Effective February 17 — that’s an exceptional day, Mr. 
Speaker; that’s also my birthday, Mr. Speaker — 1995 the 
investment tax credit was introduced at a rate of 9 per cent of 
the capital costs in qualifying new property acquired and used 
in the M&P (manufacturing and production) activities in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’re willing to do 
what’s necessary to build the economy here, Mr. Speaker. And 
we have continued to reduce that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government committed to economic 

growth. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Including enhancing the coyote industry. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Well we’ll even enhance the coyote industry if 
we have to, Mr. Speaker. We’ll do what we need to do to make 
this a vibrant economy, because that’s our goal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, effective March 1, 1995, the fuel tax rate on 
aviation turbo fuel was reduced from 7 per cent to 3.5 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker — cut in half. Is that bad for industry, Mr. 
Speaker? No, it’s not bad for industry. I don’t know how they 
can think opposite that it is — tax cut after tax cut is bad for 
industry. Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . I don’t know, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s going to continue — the good news . . . (inaudible) 
. . . continues. 
 
1995 was a great year, Mr. Speaker, because that’s the year we 
balanced the budget and delivered the first balanced budget for 
the people of Saskatchewan, something that they had longed for 
for a great period of time, Mr. Speaker — a balanced budget. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are enjoying this 
educational class, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I apologize to the 
member for Regina Dewdney for needing to interrupt him but I 
want to draw the attention of all members of the Assembly that 
the level of noise in the Assembly has increased to the point 
where I’m having difficulty hearing the member for Regina 
Dewdney. And I think all members will be anxious to hear his 
remarks. So I’d like to ask all members to reduce the level of 
noise in the Assembly, and I invite the member for Regina 
Dewdney to proceed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The way the clock is 
ticking away, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know that I’m even going to 
be able to complete my discussion. I think when I asked my 
Hon. House Leader this morning if we could extend the clock to 
this evening and do some work, he turned me down, you know. 
I’m sorry because I may not get the full educational class in, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I’m going to try. I’m going to try because it’s so important 
to understand it. They need to understand the importance of all 
the tax competitiveness this government has put forward over 
the last number of years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about a number of things. I think 
I’m going to skip a couple of things, Mr. Speaker, because I 
only want to hit some more important issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, effective March 21, 1997, the E&H tax on certain 
medical devices purchased by individuals was eliminated. Mr. 
Speaker, we needed to eliminate those taxes in order to help 
those that were least fortunate in our society, those who had to 
buy medical needs that were taxed on top of the costs that they 
were going through, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We eliminated a tax just instantly. Again, good news for the 
people of Saskatchewan. We care about people. We’re 



May 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 969 

compassionate. That’s what being government is all about — 
caring about the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1630) 
 
The members opposite, well I’m not saying they’re not 
compassionate, Mr. Speaker, but I just want them to understand 
the good things that we’ve done for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, effective March 21, 1997 — obviously that was a 
budget day, March 21, because there’s several good pieces of 
news that day, Mr. Speaker — the livestock and horticultural 
facilities incentive program was introduced to provide a rebate 
on the E&H tax paid on building materials and certain 
equipment for the use in construction and renovation of 
livestock and horticultural facilities in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Again, again we eliminated a tax, Mr. Speaker. Good 
news, good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, effective January 1, 1998, the Saskatchewan 
potash production tax structure was changed to improve the 
province’s ability to attract new investment capital in the potash 
industry. Again, Mr. Speaker, we were looking to build the 
Saskatchewan economy, Mr. Speaker. We knew we needed to 
make incentive changes in order to get the potash industry to 
expand, Mr. Speaker. And we did that, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 
government that knows and understands the environment in 
which they’re working, a government that’s looked forward to 
building a strong economy in this province, Mr. Speaker, and a 
government committed to the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, many are sitting and 
listening attentively. Carl, I appreciate that. You’re paying 
attention. I really like that. Wayne, and some others. It’s good. 
It’s important that we all understand these issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Effective . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I apologize 
to the hon. member opposite. He’s correct. And I did not mean 
anything derogatory by it. Mr. Speaker, I have the utmost 
respect for those members, and I simply want to have the 
opportunity to share, to share the good news with them, Mr. 
Speaker. I just want to take that opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, effective January 1, 1998, the film employment 
tax credit was introduced at the rate of 35 per cent of qualified 
Saskatchewan labour costs. Mr. Speaker, again we wanted to 
build a new Saskatchewan industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to look and recognize new industry 
and to develop it, Mr. Speaker. And this government once again 
saw that. And, Mr. Speaker, again, again it was good news for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Eligible labour expenditures are limited to 50 per cent of the 
total cost of the film production, Mr. Speaker. An additional 5 
per cent is available for qualifying film productions completed 
in smaller Saskatchewan communities. So again we gave even 
greater incentive if they went and worked in smaller 
Saskatchewan communities, Mr. Speaker. Because we wanted 
to diversify the economy in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s important to our economy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, more good news. More good news. Effective 
February 9, 1998, the oil and gas royalty and production tax 
structure was changed to encourage the drilling of more new oil 
and gas wells in the province. Again, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
willing, we’re willing to work with industry to make this 
province continue to grow, to build a strong, vibrant economy, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s what it’s all about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Working good . . . for the good of the people of Saskatchewan. 
Building a strong economy for our children, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
all about passing on a better world to our children, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s what we’re concerned about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The members opposite, they’re obviously enjoying this, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’ll continue to give them enjoyment, Mr. 
Speaker. They need to hear all these things, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
very, very important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, effective March 20, 1998, the research and 
development tax credit was introduced at a rate of 15 per cent of 
eligible R&D (research and development) expenditures incurred 
by corporations in Saskatchewan. Again we were giving an 
incentive to have corporations expand, diversify, build new 
structures within their existing corporations, Mr. Speaker. To do 
research so that we could in fact broaden our economy, Mr. 
Speaker. The important things in this province. 
 
We are a province that had a very narrow economic base, Mr. 
Speaker, that was heavily reliant on agriculture, and it was 
important for us to diversify our economy. No member opposite 
can deny that. They all know the importance of building a 
broad, diversified economy. Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re 
committed to. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe the members opposite are 
committed to anything else as well, but they should at least 
acknowledge those positive things that have been done for the 
people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I think by how 
attentive they are, that they are in fact acknowledging that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, effective March 20, 1998, the E&H tax rebate on 
mineral exploration equipment was introduced in order to make 
Saskatchewan more competitive with other jurisdictions in the 
mineral exploration sector. Again the mining sector, the mineral 
exploration sector needed help to make it more viable, to 
expand, to look for the resources, Mr. Speaker, and this 
government reacted. We responded to the needs of that 
community, and in fact it’s helped enhance and make our 
economy more vibrant in this province, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, effective March 20, 1998, the E&H tax on fire 
trucks and attached equipment was removed to help 
municipalities, Mr. Speaker. We realized that we needed to help 
municipalities, Mr. Speaker, and we did that. Again we looked 
and talked to our communities. They brought forward ideas, 
and, Mr. Speaker, this government responded in a positive way, 
Mr. Speaker. Good news for those rural municipalities and 
urban municipalities, Mr. Speaker, and good news for all the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Effective July 1, 1998, the Saskatchewan personal income tax 



970 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2000 

rate was lowered from 50 per cent of basic federal tax to 48 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. We turned the corner, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’re in a position for the first time to reduce personal income 
tax of people. As soon as we could do it, Mr. Speaker, and keep 
balanced budgets without any prospect of going back in debt, 
Mr. Speaker — because we have a very balanced approach, and 
want to make sure that we can maintain any tax cut we put 
forward, Mr. Speaker — we reduced personal income tax. A 
great step for the people of Saskatchewan; in fact a great step 
for the economy of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that was done by a New Democratic 
government. Not like many Tory governments across the 
country, Mr. Speaker, we’re not running deficits. We’re not 
running . . . increasing our debt, Mr. Speaker. We have turned 
that corner and we put forward seven balanced budgets in a 
row, Mr. Speaker. Good news for the people. And that included 
tax cuts, Mr. Speaker, including personal income taxes I’m 
going through with the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, effective January 1, 1999, the Crown royalty rate 
for gold and base metal production was changed from a single 
rate of 12.5 per cent to a two-step increment rate, Mr. Speaker, 
based on accumulative metal production with an initial royalty 
rate of 5 per cent of net profit, Mr. Speaker. Again reacting to 
the industry, trying to help them expand. Mr. Speaker, it’s good 
news. 
 
The member opposite just waved to me. Obviously he has to 
leave, and have a good day. It’s been nice . . . he obviously has 
to go to the washroom or something, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a few more pages but I’m going to just hit 
on a number of highlights here, and hopefully we’ll have an 
opportunity to have some discussion, let the members opposite 
understand what we’re talking about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, effective March 27, 1999 the E&H tax rate was 
reduced from 7 to 6 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We again reduced 
the tax on E&H from 7 to 6 per cent, Mr. Speaker, fully 
understanding the impact on the economy. We’re trying to 
make the economy thrive and grow, Mr. Speaker, that’s what 
this government is about and we’re very proud of our tradition 
to do that in the 1990s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Effective for four fiscal years ending after March 31, 1999 
companies are allowed the option of deducting their unused 
research and development and exploration development 
expense pools in determining their taxable capital, Mr. Speaker. 
Again, Mr. Speaker, this government listened to industry, 
looked at what was needed in the province, and responded. 
 
That’s good responsible government. A government that listens 
to industry, listens to people, and acts in the interest of people, 
Mr. Speaker. Good government, Mr. Speaker, responsible 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very, very important the initiatives of this 
government took in the 1990s to build our economy, and as I 
talked earlier, Mr. Speaker, we had steady growth, and in fact, 
outpaced the rest of Canada for a reason, Mr. Speaker — for the 
reasons I’m talking about, good news, tax incentives grow 
industry, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s what it’s about, Mr. Speaker — government 
understanding the needs of the people in industry. And this 
government showed it and, in fact in showing that, outpaced the 
rest of Canada. Mr. Speaker, that’s incredible, that’s good, 
particularly for a province of one million people. It shows you 
what working together can do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now have to get onto talking a little bit about 
some of the things we did in this budget, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the plan for growth and opportunity that this 
government put forward in this budget is one of optimism and 
hope for the future. Our children needed to see a signal from 
this government that we wanted to keep them here, that we 
were going to grow. And they got a very, very solid indication 
in this budget when the Minister of Finance brought it down, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s more good news; good news for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are going to see the 
elimination of the flat tax over the next three years, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re going to . . . an average family saved, a family 
of four at $50,000 income, Mr. Speaker, save $1,000 per year, 
Mr. Speaker — good news, good news. That puts $1,000 back 
into the economy for each and every family, average family in 
the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, those average families don’t have the ability to have huge 
savings, Mr. Speaker. They spend the money they have. They’ll 
buy new things for their children. They’ll spend the money in 
ways to make their lives better for their children. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what it’s about for those of us who are parents 
— it’s about providing a better standard of life for our children. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I have three children and I try my 
utmost to help my children have better than I had in life, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that’s the goal of all parents — to create a 
world that’s better. And I think the members opposite have the 
exact same feel on that issue because that’s one of being a 
parent. It’s not about political philosophy; it’s about being a 
parent and wanting to create an environment for the children 
that’s good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we decided as a government to put forward a tax 
platform that resulted in a number of key things for the people 
of Saskatchewan. We wanted to implement a progressive 
three-rate structure of income tax, Mr. Speaker. We wanted to 
offer lower-income families a sales tax rebate up to $264 a year 
to offset any additional sales tax they may pay. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we did those things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We wanted the people of Saskatchewan to be better off through 
this budget, Mr. Speaker, and they are better off, Mr. Speaker. 
And those people in this province who have endured the hard 
times with us as we turn the corner, Mr. Speaker, are now going 
to reap the benefits, Mr. Speaker. They’re now going to reap the 
benefits, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to reap the benefits of 
good government, Mr. Speaker, and in fact they will see those 
changes in the very near future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, we want to help those 
low-income citizens in our province. Fifty-five thousand 
low-income taxpayers are going to come off the income tax 
rolls altogether in this province, Mr. Speaker — 55,000. 



May 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 971 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important that governments take responsibility 
seriously about helping those who need it most in our society, 
and this government’s done that. And they’ve proved it time 
and time again, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, 55,000 
low-income people are coming off the tax rolls, Mr. Speaker. 
Unbelievable! That’s good news for the people of 
Saskatchewan. It’s good news for our future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit more about the personal 
income tax system. The members opposite got the budget, but 
as they tend to look at it, I’m not sure they understood it. So I’m 
going to spend a little bit of time going through it with them, 
Mr. Speaker, if you don’t mind. Because I think it’s important 
to talk about all the great things this province has to offer, and a 
new fair, simple tax system is one of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we wanted to put forward a taxation system that 
people could believe in, Mr. Speaker. There’s some key 
elements to that taxation system that I think are very, very 
important, Mr. Speaker. Things that people need to understand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we wanted to have was a simpler, lower 
provincial tax rate applied to taxable income in a reasonable 
way, Mr. Speaker. We wanted to eliminate the flat tax, we 
wanted to eliminate the debt reduction surtax, and we wanted to 
eliminate the high-income surtax, Mr. Speaker. We wanted to 
do those things because we wanted to put in a progressive 
taxation system that people understood and believed in. And, 
Mr. Speaker, those things were all accomplished in this budget 
— a great budget for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to see on July 1 the flat tax will 
be cut in half — first step in that, Mr. Speaker, a very, very 
valuable, valuable first step, Mr. Speaker. All families benefit 
— as the hon. member just mentioned — all families. And he’s 
very proud of that, and I’m glad he’s proud because we should 
be proud of this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people from zero to 35,000 in income will pay 11 
per cent, Mr. Speaker. Unbelievable! The first up to $35,000 
will pay 11 per cent. Good news, Mr. Speaker. Same taxation 
rate as Alberta, our neighbour to the West, Mr. Speaker. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we weren’t trying to be competitive with Alberta 
with this plan. We wanted a good plan for the people of 
Saskatchewan and this good plan happens to incorporate that 
same level as Alberta. We’re not going to compare the apples 
and oranges. We don’t need to. Saskatchewan is a great 
province to live in and the people that live here know that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people will pay 13 per cent on taxable income 
from 35,000 to $100,000, Mr. Speaker. Good news again, 
significantly down from where we were, Mr. Speaker; and, Mr. 
Speaker, they’ll pay 15 per cent on taxable income over 
$50,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on top of that we wanted to make sure that we 
helped those that are on lower incomes, Mr. Speaker, and to 
that end we’ve introduced also higher tax credits, personal tax 
credits, Mr. Speaker. The basic personal tax credit of $5,000 . . . 
or $8,000, Mr. Speaker. It’s gone to $8,000 tax credit, Mr. 
Speaker. Very, very good news. 
 

A spousal tax credit of $8,000, Mr. Speaker; $2,500 per child, 
Mr. Speaker. All good news, Mr. Speaker, for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much was that again? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Twenty-five hundred dollars per child, Mr. 
Speaker. Good news. On top of that, Mr. Speaker, we believe 
very strongly in helping seniors in our society, and to that end, 
we’ve added an additional 1,000 senior supplement, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much again? 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Yates: — One thousand dollars more for seniors, Mr. 
Speaker, recognizing the needs of senior citizens in the 
community. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that, Mr. Speaker, I have to tell you I’m 
very proud to second the motion from the hon. member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
And with that, I’m going to take my seat and allow the member 
opposite to have a few words. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to thank the Government House Leader or Whip, whoever 
allowed the member for Regina Dewdney to speak so long. 
 
I’d like to inform the House the Saskatchewan Party fundraising 
has never been better. And for those who have been watching 
the Saskatchewan legislative channel, I understand that dollars 
and pledges are coming in. Except, Mr. Speaker, for those poor 
people who think that they are still watching the shopping 
channel. Those people think that they’re trying to be sold a load 
of garbage and they’re not buying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is ironic, it is ironic, Mr. Speaker, that the 
government chooses today to congratulate itself on its tax 
policies when the lead story in today’s newspaper says how 
unpopular the government’s budget was and continues to be. 
We have the unreality of the government side’s presentation, 
the government’s motion, and the reality of what people of 
Saskatchewan are saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 58 per cent of Saskatchewan people disapprove of 
the government’s decision to raise the PST by $160 million. 
And this was taken, Mr. Speaker, this poll was taken before 
people came to realize just how wide the expansion was going 
to be, and it was taken at a time when people weren’t told that 
the sales tax would remain at 6 per cent. They were expecting it 
to be dropped to 5 per cent, and they were still opposed to the 
expansion of the PST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can look at the list of things that are now taxed 
6 per cent by the current government. It includes repair services, 
Mr. Speaker. It includes non-prescription drugs, maintenance 
contracts, bedding plants, security and investigation services, 
dry cleaning, credit bureau and collection services, telephone 



972 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2000 

answering services. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, they went on to tax professional services 
including legal, accounting, architectural, consulting and 
engineering services, building services, advertising services, 
and employment services. That begins on July 1. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is the PST now being charged on used goods 
valued at $300 or more. And, Mr. Speaker, there is the sales tax 
now being applied to used vehicles. And, Mr. Speaker, with that 
in this budget we see a decrease in funding for agriculture. Mr. 
Speaker, we see that funding for health care is not keeping up to 
the inflation factor in health care. Mr. Speaker, we see this 
government continues to underfund education. Mr. Speaker, 
this government is not adequately funding highways. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have a lot of time, but I’ve got to 
talk a little bit about highways. I wish that the Deputy Premier 
who’s heckling me had a chance to drive on the highways that I 
had to drive to get here yesterday. Now, Mr. Speaker, I left 
home and I went to Riverhurst ferry but Riverhurst ferry was 
closed — closed without notice. Now, Mr. Speaker, then I had 
to proceed north of Riverhurst ferry all the way up to Macrorie 
dodging potholes, across Gardiner dam, down through Elbow, 
down to Eyebrow. 
 
Now when I got to Eyebrow, Mr. Speaker, the holes . . . the 
condition of the highway was so bad that at 40 kilometres an 
hour it was all one could do to keep one’s vehicle from being 
damaged. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked to my colleagues 
throughout the province and the highways are crumbling this 
year worse than they were last spring and we all know how bad 
they were last spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government and its budget is one of the most 
pathetic loads of garbage that the people of Saskatchewan have 
ever had to put up with. Mr. Speaker, despite the overwhelming 
opposition to this budget, the government credits itself for its 
consultative approach. Well, Mr. Speaker, their consultative 
approach is like a one-way conversation. It’s like they do all the 
talking and none of the listening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at what this government has done with 
regard to taxes over the ten years, nine years, that they’ve been 
in power. The taxes in this province have exploded by nearly $1 
billion. 
 
One billion dollars in a province with no growth. We still have 
a million people in Saskatchewan but it costs a billion dollars 
more to run the province. What kind of management does this 
province have in an NDP government that is now spending a 
billion dollars more, has some of the poorest growth, lack of job 
creation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the lack of progress in 
this province is despicable indeed. And yet this government is 
spending a billion dollars more now than it was 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have no improvements in Saskatchewan. 
Roads are worse than they were in 1991. Health care is worse 
than it was in 1991. Education is not funded at the levels that it 
was back in 1991. Ag spending, and the Minister of Agriculture 
is heckling, but I would tell the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, that agriculture spending under his government is less 
than it was before his government took office. 

Mr. Speaker, the additional taxes that the government is 
receiving does not include increased revenues that they have 
garnered by raising utility rates. Now how many times do you 
suppose they’ve raised utility rates in the last nine years? 
 
Mr. Speaker, someone said 19 times. Actually, 20 times that 
this government has raised utility rates on top of the billion 
dollars of additional tax revenue that they have raked in. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, there’s another source of government 
revenue. The source of gambling revenue which has multiplied 
many times. That’s not included in the additional billion dollars 
of taxation or the hikes in utility rates that this province has 
hoisted and hoisted upon the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has such an appetite 
for taxpayers’ dollars. They remind me of the person that sat in 
the restaurant, Mr. Speaker. The person that sat in a restaurant 
and ordered a bowl of soup. And when the bowl of soup 
arrived, Mr. Speaker, this poor NDP soul noticed that there was 
a fly in the soup. 
 
Now what would you normally do if you had a fly in your 
soup? Well some people might very carefully take a spoon or a 
napkin and set it aside. Someone with a little less culture, Mr. 
Speaker, might take and flick the fly out of the soup. 
 
Do you know what the NDP would do with that fly in the soup? 
They’d pick it up by the legs and say, spit it out; spit it out; we 
want it all, Mr. Speaker. That’s their approach to grabbing the 
taxpayers’ dollar. They want every drop, every penny that they 
can get from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in case the members opposite didn’t notice, the 
people of Saskatchewan passed record on their tax . . . they 
passed judgment on their tax records. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the election, in the election, Mr. Speaker, 60 per 
cent of the people of Saskatchewan said they were sick and 
tired of NDP budgets, sick and tired of tax and spend, sick and 
tired of big government — 60 per cent, 62 per cent of 
Saskatchewan people in the last election voted to boot the NDP 
from power. And they’re disappointed in it only because of the 
unholy marriage between the NDP and the Liberals that in fact 
they were able to foist another tax-and-spend budget on the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I hear some pretty descriptive terms of this 
wedding. Some people think it’s pretty funny, but the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan are wringing their hands in grief because of 
the expanded PST because of park fees that have gone up, 
because of senior long-term care homes that are charging 
additional fees to their residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the most vulnerable people, the most vulnerable 
people in Saskatchewan — seniors — those who require 
long-term care, saw their fees hiked beyond belief. Mr. Speaker, 
some long-term care residents are having to pay $5,600 more — 
$5,600 more under this budget that’s been foisted on the people 
of Saskatchewan by the Finance minister of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also off-loading. And as we all know the 
federal government has off-loaded onto the provinces. But this 



May 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 973 

government is the chief amongst sinners. This government, Mr. 
Speaker, is off-loading on municipalities. They’ve off-loaded 
millions of dollars onto property taxpayers who at the municipal 
level are now funding education. 
 
School boards in Saskatchewan know that this government is 
off-loading on them. They’re raising taxes through the back 
door, Mr. Speaker — raising taxes through the back door by 
demanding more from property taxpayers. Mr. Speaker, they’ve 
got that fly, and they’re still saying spit it out, spit it out, we 
want every drop, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now let’s not forget health districts. Most of them are now 
occurring . . . are incurring yearly deficits. Mr. Speaker, over 
half the health districts in Saskatchewan are in deficit position. 
That’s under the leadership, Mr. Speaker, of an NDP 
government that has provided worse health care than we’ve 
ever seen in this province and are spending more money on 
health care than we’ve ever seen spent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s so bad that they had to shut down the intensive 
care unit in Yorkton over the weekend. They had to, they had to 
send dialysis patients from Yorkton to Regina to receive 
treatment because health care has deteriorated so badly under 
the NDP government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about business, we’ve talked 
about seniors, we’ve talked about the sick. What about young 
people, Mr. Speaker? What about young people? Young people 
are leaving the province of Saskatchewan. I thought it was very 
insightful, Mr. Speaker, that in the Governor General’s speech 
to the Assembly, a historic speech in this very Assembly 
yesterday, one of the impressions that her trip, her visit to 
Saskatchewan, left upon her was the fact that the people of 
Saskatchewan, particularly young people, are planning an exit 
strategy from Saskatchewan. They are feeling forced to leave 
Saskatchewan because there’s no opportunity here. Can you 
imagine? And in a very non-partisan way, the Governor 
General expressed the sorrow and the unbelief of the fact that 
there was no hope, no prospect for a bright future in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legacy that this NDP government is leaving 
the young people of this province is a simple message — get 
out if you want to do well. Mr. Speaker, this budget with its 
expanded PST, with its expanded fees, with its attack on 
students by cancelling the six month interest free period for 
student loan repayment is an attack on young people. It’s a 
pointer, it’s a signpost to the young people of this province 
saying, leave Saskatchewan because the NDP government 
doesn’t care about you. We’re not planning for your future. 
You’re better off outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is unforgivable. Saskatchewan should be a 
province of promise, a province where the young people of 
Saskatchewan want to remain and to build a good life for 
themselves. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, time is short but we heard the Economic 
Development minister bragging about the $6 billion in projects 
underway in Saskatchewan. What she didn’t mention was that 
for the same period, the figure in Alberta is $58 billion — 10 
times more than the figure here in Saskatchewan. Something to 

brag about. And I see the minister is hiding back in her seat 
reading, busy reading a paper, because she doesn’t want to 
recognize the fact that while she was bragging about $6 billion 
of projects underway in Saskatchewan, next door in Alberta 
they are doing 10 times that, $58 billion of expenditure. A 
province with only three million people, three times the 
population, but 10 times the economic activity. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP are not providing the economic growth that some of the 
members were babbling about just a few moments ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for that reason we cannot support the motion that 
was introduced by the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
That motion is simply pure fiction, Mr. Speaker. It cannot be 
supported by anyone who’s a thinking person because everyone 
sees the signpost in Saskatchewan that says our economy is bad. 
And that the reason for our poor performance are consecutive 
NDP budgets that have been trying to squeeze every tax dollar 
out of the province. 
 
For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I want to amend the motion that 
was put forward by the member from Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, 
and I would move seconded by the member from Lloydminster: 
 

That all the words after “Assembly” be deleted and that the 
following be substituted therefor: 
 

And I quote: 
 

regrets the Minister of Finance’s decision to delay much 
needed tax relief in Saskatchewan and instead raise the 
provincial sales tax by $160 million. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party knows what will cure the 
ailments that this province faces. We know that we need tax 
cuts and we need tax cuts period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party, the Saskatchewan Party 
as the government of this province would come clean with the 
people of Saskatchewan and provide tax cuts and tax cuts alone. 
The members across there don’t like it. The members across 
there don’t like being shown short for their poor performance, 
Mr. Speaker. But that’s the way it is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to move the amendment to the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of things I’d like 
to say about this motion, but first I’d like to move adjournment 
of debate on the motion. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


