





























































Hansard: June 08, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1643 
 June 8, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of the good citizens of Lanigan who are 
concerned with the possible loss of their hospital, and the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions on behalf of citizens throughout our 
province who would like to see improved cellular telephone 
coverage in their area. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Prud’homme, Vonda, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present a petition requesting that smoking be banned in all 
public places. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions were collected by the youth of Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens of the province concerned about the 
impending closure of facilities, in particular Lanigan and 
Watrous hospitals. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, as you may expect, are 
all from the community of Lanigan. 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition in 
regards to cellular improvement . . . phone improvement. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from 
Prud’homme. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
stand today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens concerned about the future of health care in this 
province. And the petition . . . the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Lanigan, Leroy, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people interested in improved cellular telephone coverage in the 
districts of Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, in those districts. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, and Govan. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by people from Nokomis and Govan. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to read a 
petition concerning hospital closures in Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the people from Young and Zelma, Saskatchewan. 
 



1644 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2000 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here to reduce 
fuel tax by 10 cents a litre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Petitioners are from Regina and the good town of Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition of 
citizens concerned about hospital closures. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitioners are from the town of Young. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today on behalf of citizens concerned with poor cellular 
telephone coverage. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 

 
And the signatures to the petition come from the communities 
of Southey, Duval, Strasbourg, and Earl Grey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the 
closure of hospitals in this province: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure Lanigan 
and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from Lanigan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with possible enforced 
amalgamation of municipalities. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 

any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals form the communities 
of Courval, Coderre, Mossbank, and Mortlach. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the high 
price of fuel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Hudson Bay, 
Carrot River, and Arborfield, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to present a petition requesting that smoking be banned in all 
public places. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions were collected by youth from around the 
province. And the petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Christopher Lake, Prince Albert, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 

To not proceed with the amalgamation of municipalities; 
 
To not confiscate municipal reserve accounts; 
 
To ensure the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open; 
 
And to legislate a ban on smoking in public places and 
workplaces in the province. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 



June 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1645 

shall on day no. 61 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: what are the administrative 
costs incurred by your department to operate Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance in the last fiscal year, including salaries, 
building leases, and supplies? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
believe I’ve given notice of this to the Leader of the Opposition 
and I’d like to introduce to you, sir, and to the members of the 
House a very important delegation sitting in your Speaker's 
gallery — the Ambassador of China to Canada with his 
delegation. 
 
I’d ask each of the members to stand as I introduce them. First 
of all, His Excellency Mei Ping, who is the Ambassador. And 
he’s accompanied by his wife, Madame Sha Lin. Madame, 
please. 
 
Also accompanying the Ambassador and his wife are Mr. Shi 
Weisan, Minister Counsellor for Commercial Affairs; Mr. Li 
Xiaofu, the Counsellor of Science and Technology; Mr. Meng 
Jixin, Secretary, Commercial Affairs; and Ms. Yuxin Ai, 
assistant to the Ambassador. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ambassador and his delegation are visiting 
Saskatchewan for four full days and will be travelling to 
Saskatoon. During that time they are meeting with the 
Lieutenant Governor, the Speaker, members of cabinet, the 
mayor of Regina, president of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, 
the universities of Regina and Saskatchewan, discussing a 
variety of economic and cultural matters pertaining to the 
People’s Republic of China and to this province in agriculture 
and other areas. 
 
I had the honour and the privilege of meeting with the 
Ambassador and his charming wife and delegation yesterday. I 
must inform the House that the Ambassador and his wife speak 
very, very good English and it’s wonderful to see this. I just 
wish that we could reciprocate by speaking Cantonese or 
Mandarin, but nonetheless, the communication flowed very 
easily with some good exchange of ideas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to acknowledge the fact 
that we’ve had a long-standing, warm relationship with the 
People’s Republic of China here in Saskatchewan and all 
governments. We continue to look forward with good business 
opportunities and social relationships and contacts, and wish 
you a very pleasant and memorable stay. And come back soon 
for some of that fishing in northern Saskatchewan. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I too would like to welcome the delegation 
that was introduced by the Premier. I’ve had the opportunity to 
travel to your country several times, and it’s a real honour for 
me to welcome you here as well. 
 
Again, His Excellency the Ambassador Mei Ping, welcome; 

and I hope you enjoy your visit here. And of course 
accompanying the Ambassador, Madame Sha Lin; welcome, 
madame. Also, Mr. Shi, Mr. Li; welcome. Mr. Meng and of 
course Ms. Yuxin Ai; welcome. 
 
And I hope you enjoy your visit here in Saskatchewan as much 
as I enjoyed visiting in China. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce someone today who is a former member of this 
Legislative Assembly and is seated on the floor of the 
Assembly: Gordon Grant with his wife Helen. They currently 
reside in Kelowna. 
 
Gordon was first elected to the Legislative Assembly in 1964 
and re-elected in ’67 and ’71. He served our province and the 
people of Saskatchewan well as an elected member for Regina 
South. 
 
And he held a number of portfolios in the Thatcher government 
including minister of Highways and Transportation, ministry of 
Industry and Commerce, ministry of Public Health, Minister for 
Sask. Power Corp., Minister of Telephones, as well as being a 
former alderman and mayor of the city of Regina. 
 
And a number of streets and roads in Regina are named after 
Gordon Grant, and I would ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming him to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to briefly add 
my words of welcome to Mr. Gordon Grant and his wife. It was 
my pleasure to serve in the Legislative Assembly in 1967 in 
opposition at the time when Mr. Grant was already serving with 
distinction in the cabinet, the Ross Thatcher cabinet. 
 
In those days it was quite a House of talented people. Some 
great orators. Gordon Grant brought integrity, intelligence, and 
diligence to the work of the Legislative Assembly, and it was a 
pleasure, sir, to have served with you in the legislature — an 
honour to have served with you — and I wish you continued 
good health. Welcome home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of this House, a 
group of students from Dalmeny, Saskatchewan, from Prairie 
View Elementary School. There are 50 students in the east 
gallery. These are grade 6 students. 
 
They are accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. Darlene Thiessen 
and Mr. Gerry Hawkes, as well as chaperone Mrs. Ethel 
Quiring. 
 
I met with them just during our lunch time, and explained to 
them what they would see in question period. I also gave them 
the questions that would be asked this afternoon, and the 
answers, so they would be able to give a report card on the 
government as to the quality of their answers. 



1646 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2000 

Would you welcome them, please? 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west 
gallery we have this afternoon Jerry Ruehs, the Liberal 
candidate for Wood River constituency. Jerry won the 
nomination, hard fought nomination at a large and enthusiastic 
Liberal nominating meeting in Ponteix last Monday. 
 
He resides in Aneroid, married to his wife, Jean, and they have 
four children. He’s a graduate of the University of 
Saskatchewan School of Agriculture and has served as reeve of 
the RM of Auvergne No. 76. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this afternoon we get to welcome him as a visitor 
and in three weeks we get to welcome him as a colleague. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you, a class of children from the Cut Knife 
Elementary School, 26 grade 6 students from the Cut Knife 
community. And they are accompanied by teachers Holden, 
Peterson, and Hampson; and the chauffeurs or the chaperones 
are Gary, Kelly, and Grant. 
 
Welcome here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member from Rosthern in welcoming the students from the 
Dalmeny Elementary School. I lived in Dalmeny for a number 
of years with my wife and family and it’s a very great 
community. They have fine students there and even better 
teachers. 
 
So I’d like to, on behalf of the government, welcome the 
members here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
through you and to the members of the Assembly, it gives me 
great pleasure to welcome and recognize 44 students from the 
Brunswick School in Melfort. They’re sitting in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker, accompanied by their teachers Mr. Randy Steciuk, 
Miss Brenda Vickers, chaperone Ms. Pam Dymtrow, and their 
bus driver Mr. Gerald Miller. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask everyone to welcome these 
grade 6 students to Regina. It’s their annual outing to visit the 
legislature, and I want to welcome them all here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
When you get married a lot of wonderful things happen to you. 
And when I married my wife Virginia Wilkinson who is 
married . . . who is seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, along 
with my son Mayson Clark, we welcomed to our family a new 
uncle who is seated beside her who is here today from Toronto, 

David Clark, so you know where my son got his second name 
from. 
 
So I would ask all members to welcome them to the Assembly 
today please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet as 
well, I just wanted to say that I’ve told my uncle-in-law that 
there’s a remote possibility that I might be up on my feet later 
on today. I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that when the Premier 
appoints you to the ministry of Highways, a lot of wonderful 
things happen as well. You get to meet some very interesting 
and wonderful people and some of those — or several of those, 
I should say — are seated in the west gallery. 
 
Joining us today from the roadbuilders association, and I think 
I’m sure . . . I mean I’m sure I welcomed them on behalf the 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden — or I should say Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley — Wayne Morsky, and seated with him is Val 
Jakubowski. I hope that’s right, or very close anyway. Please 
join with me in welcoming them to the Assembly as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, through 
you and to the members of this Assembly I’d like to introduce a 
group of students who are in the west gallery, grade 5 students. 
Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of meeting with the students 
prior to lunch, and they are accompanied today by their teacher, 
Mrs. Mona West. And the sub teacher has joined them, Barbara 
Bruce, and a number of parents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this group of students have had a lot of interesting 
questions, and one of the questions they had was regarding 
tobacco and a petition yesterday. So I think either the teacher 
was informing them or they followed the news last night. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this group of students from Langbank are 
pleased to be here, I’m pleased to welcome them, and I’m also 
looking forward to the ceremony on Monday and the 
sod-turning for a new school that I think they’ll all look forward 
to enjoying over the years. So, Mr. Speaker, join with me in 
welcoming the students and their parents. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the legislature, a group 
of students from SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) who are taking English as a Second 
Language. And they’re in the west gallery. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Ingrid Allesich, who I think 
should be well known as a constituent of the member from 
Regina Centre and she’s very welcome here as well. 
 
Let’s all welcome these students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 



June 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1647 

with the Minister of Highways and Transportation in 
welcoming our guests from the Saskatchewan roadbuilders 
association — the president, Wayne Morsky, and Val 
Jakubowski, the executive director. I think they’re here because 
they couldn’t believe what they had heard or read in the press 
lately. They want to be here to see and hear for themselves 
today. 
 
And Mr. Ruehs says, the Liberal candidate in Wood River, has 
said roads are going to be the number one issue in his riding. I 
can assure the Minister of Highways that he will be on his feet 
for Mr. Ruehs’s benefit as well as ours today. 
 
Would you please welcome these people once more. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to introduce to all members of the legislature, a group of 
licensed practical nurses that are attending the legislature this 
afternoon to witness the continued second reading of their own 
legislation, The Licensed Practical Nurses Act, 2000. So I want 
to welcome them to the legislature. 
 
I also want to welcome Jackie Sedley who is the public 
representative to the licensed practical nurse group as well. And 
I would ask all of these members attending here from the 
licensed practical nurses to rise in order that we can 
acknowledge their presence. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to join with the Premier and the Liberal leader in 
welcoming Mr. Gordon Grant back to this Assembly. As the 
current representative of Regina South, I can tell you that he is 
still well-loved and well-thought-of in the Regina South riding. 
 
As a person who actually lives on Grant Road, I certainly think 
about him often. It is one of the few roads in our riding which is 
still very well paved. I don’t know why the city has not kept 
better care of say Gordon Road or Grant Drive, which are also 
of course named after the member. And I will certainly seek 
some advice from him later on how you get all these great roads 
named after you in your riding. 
 
But if you would join with me in again welcoming him. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Leader of the Opposition Promises Challenged 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the credit union 
where I was president for seven years we know the whereabouts 
of every penny for which we are responsible. Balancing our 
budget is an irritating habit we have. 
 
Given this background, you could imagine my difficulty in 
listening day after day to the Leader of the Opposition as he 
takes us through the looking glass into his world that doesn’t 

add up. It’s a good thing the Opposition leader lives in this 
imaginary world because he wouldn’t last past his first coffee 
break as a teller at the credit union. 
 
At this time yesterday, the combination of his spending and tax 
cut promises this session totalled more than $1.3 billion in extra 
expenses to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. The scary thing, 
Mr. Speaker, is that he’s just getting warmed up. 
 
Last night at the Regina Chamber of Commerce, he added 
another $105 million of debt in just one speech. That brings his 
running total to more than a billion and a half dollars. And the 
day’s still young, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It seems to me he has two choices. One, he can shoot for $2 
billion in promises by the end of June; or two, he could take the 
refresher course in basic arithmetic. Let me suggest some 
education material for him. A CD-Rom called, “The 
Pre-Algebra Math Blaster Mystery — The Great Brain 
Robbery” or a textbook called, Problem Solving: What You Do 
when You Don’t Know What to Do. 
 
I’m glad to be of help, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party Nominates Candidate in Wood River 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
evening in Assiniboia the Saskatchewan Party nomination was 
held. Yogi Huyghebaert was our successful candidate. 
 
Wood River is a seat that has been held by either the Liberals or 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) for a long time, up to and 
including the Deputy Premier who held it during the early days 
of our province. 
 
It should be an interesting campaign, Mr. Speaker. It was a 
tremendous nomination with four very, very strong candidates. 
Wood River now boasts the largest membership in the province 
of Saskatchewan for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
A packed hall last night following meetings in Shaunavon and 
in Glentworth. 
 
We would also want to welcome the Liberal candidate here 
today and I would urge him not to get too confident. We had 
more people standing outside on the step than they had at their 
nomination meeting. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party is now ready to go forward in the 
by-election proudly with our new candidate, Yogi Huyghebaert. 
In a constituency that has seen the loss of hospitals, highways 
crumbling, people even taking highway maintenance into their 
own hands, it should be an interesting campaign. We look 
forward to the by-election with great anticipation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party and 
hopefully all members of the Legislative Assembly, I want to 
congratulate Yogi Huyghebaert on winning the Saskatchewan 
Party nomination for the Wood River by-election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1648 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2000 

Oil Recycling Partnership 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. In keeping with the spirit and 
intent of Environment Week, I am pleased to inform the House 
of a new partnership between Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management, the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres, and the Saskatchewan Association for 
Resource Recovery Corporation. 
 
This new partnership will see the expansion of used oil material 
collection depots, called ecocentres, by 24 centres across 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Sixteen of these ecocentres will be 
managed and operated by the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres is a 
provincial coordinating and advocacy organization comprised 
of 62 independent agencies dedicated to improving educational 
and training opportunities and the employment potential of 
persons with disabilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan association for the recovery corporation 
industry ran product stewardship management programs for the 
collection and recycling of used oils, oil filters, and oil 
containers across Saskatchewan. They are responsible for 
recovering over 32 million litres of used oil, 2.95 million oil 
filters, and 164,000 kilograms of oil containers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recycling of used oil not only helps protect the 
environment by removing a potentially hazardous substance, 
but also recovers a valuable non-renewable resource, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Senior Games in Foam Lake 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, yesterday I was extremely pleased and honoured to be 
asked to be part of the official opening of the Seniors 55-plus 
Games for the year 2000. The community of Foam Lake was 
this year’s host for the zone 4 seniors’ games. 
 
Over 260 participants from at least 15 communities were 
involved in 10 different events such as bridge, horseshoes, 
shuffleboard, and billiards along with other more physically 
active events like bowling, golf, slow-pitch, and track and field 
attracted numerous athletes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was leaving the community of Foam Lake 
yesterday I stopped at the high school grounds, and I was 
pleased to be able to talk to a gentleman who was taking part in 
the 70-plus track and field events. He was entered in the 100 
metre, the 200 metre, the 400 metre, and the discus. He 
advanced to the nationals last year in Alberta and he wants to 
win again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a very successful day of competition produced 
numerous medal recipients with the gold medal winners 
advancing to the provincial competition in Weyburn on July 16 
to 19. I would like to congratulate all the participants, the 
100-plus volunteers, and the entire community of Foam Lake 

for a job well done. To every individual who’ll be representing 
zone 4 in Weyburn — good luck, good sportsmanship, and have 
fun. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Tourism Awards 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, this being Tourism Awareness 
Week, it was fitting that Prince Albert chose to hold its sixth 
annual Tourism Awards during this week. Wanda Carter of 
Prince Albert Tourism hosted the event Tuesday night. There 
were a record of 54 nominations in eight categories, and that’s a 
testament to the vitality and the dynamism of the Prince Albert 
tourism sector. 
 
Because they are doing an exceptional job to enhance 
Saskatchewan’s reputation as a tourist destination, I quickly 
wanted to mention the names of eight winners in the category 
they won in. 
 
First Lisa Martsinkiw won the Tourism Individual of the Year 
Award; the Gateway Mall took the Tourism Business of the 
Year Award; the Prince Albert Travelodge won the Customer 
Service Award for a business; Joanne Isbister of Saskatchewan 
Rivers School Division received the Customer Service Award 
for a business with fewer than 50 employees. 
 
Cathy Grayson of Smitty’s was awarded the Customer Service 
Award for a business with fewer than 50 employers; Jeanette 
Boyko of Marlboro won the Customer Service Award in a 
business with more than 50 employees. The Tourism 
Organization of Year is Saskatchewan Forestry Expo; and Larry 
Donald won the Tourism Volunteer of the Year Award. 
 
Congratulations to all of the winners and the nominees for an 
excellent job done in promoting Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Maintenance of Highways 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you 
know things are getting pretty bad for the government when the 
Liberal leader becomes the voice of reason. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Deputy Premier suggested maybe everyone 
should start fixing their own highways. And even the Liberal 
leader said this idea doesn’t make any sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier completely missed the point 
of what happened in Val Marie the other day. Those people did 
a wonderful job but they were acting out of frustration and 
desperation. That does not replace your responsibility, Mr. 
Premier, to look after highways in this province. 
 
Mr. Premier, when are you going to take responsibility? When 
are you going to start fixing the highways instead of telling 
Saskatchewan people, go fix them yourselves. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I did guess 
right, I did get a question. 



June 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1649 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say first of all to that member, there 
would not be any people in Saskatchewan that would have to be 
out fixing roads if the Leader of the Opposition in years past 
hadn’t spoken out so strongly in favour of the Crow rate 
abolition. The member from Kindersley, as I remember, I think 
he described it as tough love, I think he said to farmers. He 
described it as tough love, that the Crow rates be abandoned. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they won that debate and we lost that 
debate, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why railroads are abandoning 
branch lines and that’s why thin-membraned surface roads are 
breaking up and people are out trying to fix them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to hear an 
answer from the Premier instead of the flat answer from his 
Minister of Highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next thing you know the Deputy Premier is 
going to be saying, oh, you people out there on waiting lists, 
why don’t you just do your own surgery, why don’t you operate 
on yourselves? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier thinks everybody should go 
out and fix their own highway. After all, this happens all the 
time in the United States. Isn’t that interesting? The Deputy 
Premier is endorsing American-style highway policy. I guess he 
wants to turn Saskatchewan into Alabama North or something. 
And you know even Mr. Flip-flop, the Liberal leader, knows it. 
 
Your government, Mr. Premier, your government collects $460 
million every year in gas taxes and licence fees. Why should 
Saskatchewan people have to fix their own highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, and we pay $700 million a 
year in interest costs on the debt — $2 million each and every 
day, Mr. Speaker. We could repair miles and miles and miles of 
road each and every day, Mr. Speaker, for $2 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member opposite as well that 
in the past four years, Mr. Speaker, we have increased the 
maintenance budget for roads 68 per cent, and in the last few 
years, Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased the number of employees 
in the department who are responsible for maintenance by 113 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have set Highways and Transportation as a very high 
priority for this government, and we will do our very best to 
ensure that the roads are safe in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
let’s deal with the facts, and let’s deal with the current problem 
that we have. We asked the Highways minister whether he 
plans to turn new gravel highways over to the RMs (rural 
municipalities). He said absolutely not. 
 
But yesterday the Deputy Premier admitted that’s exactly what 
his plan is. He’s already trying to dump Highway 18 onto the 

municipalities. That’s their real agenda — to gravel the 
highways and then dump them off on the municipality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s just review the new highway policy outlined 
by the Deputy Premier yesterday. The NDP will keep on 
collecting $460 million a year from Saskatchewan taxpayers in 
gas tax and licence fees, but then they want volunteers and now 
RMs to look after the roads. 
 
Mr. Premier, what kind of nonsense is that? Your house is 
divided. When are you going to take some responsibility? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to clarify 
one point where the member is factually incorrect, Mr. Speaker. 
I could spend a lot of time doing that sort of thing, correcting 
those errors. But, Mr. Speaker, the one point that I want to 
make to the public of Saskatchewan who have seriously asked 
this question as well — who are of the view that because a road 
is a gravel road is the responsibility of local government — 
nothing could be further from the truth. 
 
We have over 5,000 kilometres of road that are gravel and are 
provincial responsibility. So just because, Mr. Speaker, we 
make the roads safer, there is no reason or rationale at all that 
this now becomes the responsibility of local government. It’s 
absolutely incorrect. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 
Deputy Premier, fumbled the ball so badly yesterday that the 
Premier’s allowing the Highways minister to answer the 
questions today. In fact he’s fumbling the ball so badly that I’m 
really looking forward to our football game that we’re planning 
in the near future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier says people should fix their 
own highways. The Liberal leader said that doesn’t make any 
sense. The Highways minister says there’s no plan to download 
gravel highways onto municipalities. The Deputy Premier said 
that’s exactly what they plan to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ringmaster hasn’t even retired yet and the 
clowns are already fighting to see who’s going to be running the 
circus. 
 
Mr. Premier, Mr. Premier, the NDP collect . . . NDP 
government collects $460 million a year in highway revenue. 
Why don’t you just forget the gravel, forget the downloading, 
forget the do-it-yourself highway crews, and fix the highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, based on the quality of 
those questions, I think he should let the Highways critic ask 
the questions as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, and here’s the reason, Mr. 
Speaker, why he doesn’t let the Highways critic ask the 
questions because I think the Highways critic from the 
opposition really is a responsible individual and knows what the 



1650 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2000 

facts are. 
 
I want to quote from an April 15, 2000 article in The 
Leader-Post and this is a quote. It starts like this: 
 

However, there is only so much construction the province 
can complete each year as long as the federal government 
refuses to contribute its (fair) share of . . . twinning costs, 
Elhard said. 

 
So the Highways critic understands, Mr. Speaker, that the 
province can’t do it on their own. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we can all ask questions. It would be nice if the minister would 
actually answer some of them. 
 
That minister, Mr. Speaker, can’t afford to twin the highways 
but he can afford to have twin deputy ministers of Highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now have a Liberal leader criticizing the 
Deputy Premier’s loopy highway policies. The problem is the 
Liberal leader really doesn’t have much credibility when it 
comes to this issue. 
 
In the last election the Liberal leader said, and I quote: 
 

A Melenchuk Liberal government will put every penny 
collected in fuel taxes into our highways, streets, and 
roads. 
 

Every penny of fuel tax to highways, streets, and roads — that’s 
what the Liberal leader said. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, according to your budget you’re exactly 
$9.760 billion short. And you might want to check your pockets 
because about 10 million of those pennies ended up there after 
you accepted . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the hon. member to 
kindly go directly to his question. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After the 
minister collected his 30 pieces of NDP silver . . . Mr. Minister, 
you have completely abandoned your own Liberal highway 
policy, why should we believe anything you have to say on this 
issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’m still not convinced. I 
still think we should have the Highway critic asking the 
question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I still find it strange, Mr. 
Speaker, that day after day and including today as well, Mr. 
Speaker, in the Assembly today they come with petitions asking 
for the fuel tax to be reduced, they asked for the tax to be 
dedicated, they spoke in favour of the Crow rate being 

abolished, Mr. Speaker, and at the same time, Mr. Speaker, they 
ask us to increase spending on highways. 
 
It doesn’t add up in years past and it doesn’t add up today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Deputy Premier won’t answer the questions, the minister 
won’t answer the question, the Liberal leader won’t answer the 
questions, and they won’t spend the money on the highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question again to the Liberal leader who 
promised to spend every penny of gas tax on the highways. 
He’s short $100 million this year. But I guess when he said 
highways, he really didn’t mean highways. He really meant a 
big, fat cabinet salary and a big, fancy office full of hacks and 
flacks. 
 
Mr. Minister, what happened to that promise? Where has the 
extra $100 million from taxes collected, where has that gone 
because it certainly hasn’t gone on highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, that $100 million and 
another 600 million on top of it goes towards servicing the debt 
each and every year, Mr. Speaker — that’s where it’s gone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have identified Highways and Transportation 
as a very high priority in our government this year. We’ve 
committed $250 million this year, Mr. Speaker; a 6.6 per cent 
increase, Mr. Speaker — the highest budget in Saskatchewan’s 
history. 
 
That’s our commitment, Mr. Speaker. What’s their commitment 
to highways, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
the challenge today. 
 
We have heard from the government a variety of numbers — 78 
cents, 80 cents, now recently 87 cents — of the net dollar going 
into highways. And the only number that really counts is the 
100 per cent of pure bologna we’re hearing from the 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this House we 
pointed out the real numbers for the public. The government 
takes a $460 million take in revenue from gas tax and motor 
vehicle fees and only spends 170 million of that on roads. 
That’s 37 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and that’s pathetic. 
 
But what also is disturbing is the government’s far-fetched 
claim that selling some of their highway equipment back in the 
mid-’80s is the reason they can’t fix the roads today. Road 
construction companies tell us, Mr. Speaker, that this equipment 
was sold . . . I’m sorry . . . road equipment . . . 



June 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1651 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the hon. member to kindly 
go directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I’d be pleased to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The sale of that road equipment is not the reason the roads are 
not being fixed today. It’s an excuse and an excuse only. 
 
Mr. Minister, why won’t you admit that nine years of NDP 
neglect is the real reason that we are the pothole capital of 
Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, in reference to the sale of 
that equipment, I’ve never, ever said that that was the sole 
reason. I’ve said that that contributes. 
 
One of the main reasons, Mr. Speaker — and the member is 
absolutely correct — one of the main reasons is the amount of 
interest that we pay on the debt each and every day, Mr. 
Speaker. At $2 million a day, Mr. Speaker, we could buy a lot 
of new equipment to repair those roads — we could repair a lot 
of roads. 
 
So he’s absolutely correct, Mr. Speaker. That isn’t the only 
reason. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in a news release 
this morning, the Road Builders and Heavy Construction 
Association of Saskatchewan raised serious questions about 
highway budgeting for the past couple of years. 
 
President Wayne Morsky says they are very concerned that only 
a quarter of our total Highways budget for this year is actually 
allocated for highway construction. The government keeps 
boasting about an increase in the Highways budget. They don’t 
explain that all of it is going to administration, salaries, or one 
airport project. In fact, the construction budget actually is $3 
million less than last year.  
 
Mr. Minister, how do you explain your interest in having 
volunteers take over road maintenance in this province, 
volunteering their time, their equipment, their energy, at their 
own expense? And that’s all coming at a time when the 
administration budget for Highways has increased significantly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are that there has 
been a huge change in traffic patterns in Saskatchewan. And the 
member knows it as well, especially in the southwest part of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, where just a few years ago, Mr. 
Speaker, 10 to 15 years ago, elevators existed 10 to 15, 20 
kilometres apart, and now we have large inland terminals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since that time those elevators have closed and 
branch lines have closed and, Mr. Speaker, people are trucking 
with large trucks a much, much further distance, Mr. Speaker. 
So what we have done, Mr. Speaker, we’ve done our very best 
with the budget that we have in place that we can possibly do, 
and that’s why we’ve increased it to $250 million. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have never said that that is enough money for 
highways and transportation. We have always said that we need 
to contribute more, but part of that contribution — and even the 
member opposite has acknowledged in the quote that I referred 
to earlier — has to come from the federal treasury, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the quote the 
minister used earlier, I was specifically referring to twinning of 
the No. 1 Highway. I don’t think we want to confuse the two 
issues today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the road builders and heavy construction 
association are very concerned with the excuse that the sale of 
highway equipment in 1984 is the reason that roads can’t be 
maintained in this province today and I quote from their press 
release: 
 

Our association supports the principal of public tendering 
and our members have the equipment required to maintain 
our (roads). 
 
Our industry does not have enough work, companies are 
having to make some hard decisions about staying in 
business in (this province). 
 
And it is difficult for us to understand that the people of 
Saskatchewan cannot have their roads repaired because of 
an auction sale that took place in 1984. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier suggested people should 
volunteer to fix their roads, but you have Saskatchewan 
companies here that have the equipment, have the trained work 
crews, but have no work because the highways are not a priority 
for this government. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you explain your position that volunteer 
labour is the way to go to these companies and to their 
employees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, except for his last 
statement, I could almost agree with everything he said. We 
certainly value the role that the road builders play in 
Saskatchewan. We understand that there would be much more 
work for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As recently as yesterday, Mr. Speaker, yesterday evening, I 
appeared before the Standing Committee on Transportation in 
Ottawa, making many of the very same arguments that the 
highway critic makes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Simply put, Mr. Speaker, there has to be much more money at 
the table from the federal government so that we can employ 
many more road builders in Saskatchewan than we currently do. 
It’s not complicated at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the road 
builders association is also very concerned that while most of 



1652 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2000 

the Highways budget is not being spent directly on road 
construction and maintenance, the department itself has been 
purchasing its own equipment fleet. This is at a time when their 
members, the Saskatchewan road construction companies, have 
no work and are laying off their employees. 
 
And then we also learn that you’re having your own fire sale of 
Highways equipment. It was advertised yesterday in The 
Leader-Post. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, if the equipment sale in the mid-’80s is to 
blame for you not fixing roads today, then why are you selling 
off your own machinery now? And why are private 
Saskatchewan road construction companies having to lay off 
people because they have no work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The facts are first of all, Mr. Speaker, 
that the equipment that the province is buying is simply 
replacing old equipment. It’s nothing more than replacement, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, as well, in the maintenance in 
Saskatchewan many private contractors are involved in 
maintenance in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have increased as a percentage of the total 
budget, Mr. Speaker, in the last four years, we’ve increased 
maintenance on our provincial highway system by 68 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sex Offender Registry 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you are well aware the special legislative 
Committee to Prevent The Abuse And Exploitation Of Children 
Through the Sex Trade is working very hard gathering 
information with the intent to put forward recommendations on 
policy and practices that will help protect our children from 
sexual exploitation. 
 
One very important way to help end this exploitation is a sex 
offender registry because convicted sex offenders may pose a 
significant risk of reoffending when they are released back into 
the community. A registry would give police the means of 
tracking the whereabouts of sex offenders in their communities 
and police forces across the country, and here in Saskatchewan, 
have expressed interest in such a registry program. 
 
Mr. Minister, is your department and is your government 
committed to introducing strong measures to end the abuse of 
children by sexual offenders and will you consider 
implementing a sexual offender registry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, first of all let me thank the member for the question 

and commend her on her continued interest and work in this 
area. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’m a little confused because I think the 
member must know that the introduction of a sex offender 
registry, which she is proposing, would in fact be much less 
effective than the program we have in place. 
 
And indeed, ministers of Justice across Canada have agreed to 
that, and therefore have taken the approach that the most 
effective way of dealing with this question is to boost the 
national registry, the CPIC (Canadian Police Information 
Centre) system, which not only deals with sex offenders, Mr. 
Speaker, but deals with the criminal history of offenders who 
might affect children in a whole range of different ways. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are committed to dealing with this 
question. We have committed, as you know, significant 
resources to the criminal justice system in the province, in the 
budget and before. And, Mr. Speaker, I reiterate my concern 
about the member’s position here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, as it stands today, this province has 
not done anything in this regard to take the leadership role in 
their own province for this. And that is what is happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this afternoon in this legislature I will introduce a 
Bill which mirrors legislation passed in Ontario earlier this 
year. It is an Act to establish and maintain a registry of persons 
convicted of sex offences in order to protect children and 
communities. 
 
In effect it would allow the establishment of a sexual offender 
registry system in Saskatchewan. This registry, when 
established, would help police by requiring people who have 
been convicted of sex offences, anywhere in Canada, to register 
with police in their community within 15 days of their release 
from custody or if they should make a change of address. 
Failure to comply would result in significant penalties. 
 
A registry of this type, Mr. Speaker, would contribute to 
ensuring public safety and confidence. Mr. Minister, will you 
support this legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member would 
surely know that this kind of registry, which has been in 
existence in a number of states in the United States, simply 
doesn’t work very well. It might not surprise any of us that sex 
offenders, even though they are supposed to register and in fact 
it’s compulsory to register, they don’t actually do it very often. 
And so we have a huge problem of the process working. 
 
And I just say to the member again, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Canadian Police Information Centre, which is CPIC, our 
national process, is the most effective way to protect our 
children from pedophiles. It’s preferable in a number of ways. I 
could reiterate them but I won’t unless the member really wants 
me to. Well, okay, I can. 
 



June 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1653 

It’s a national registry. It contains standard information which is 
accessed by police nationally, not just here in the province. It 
contains information of the criminal history of the offender — 
not limited to convicted sex offenders, Mr. Speaker. And in 
summary, Mr. Speaker, the ministers of Justice across the 
country recognize that this is a better system than the one the 
member is proposing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the minister, Mr. 
Speaker, I have spoken, I have spoken with the Saskatoon city 
police as well as the Prince Albert police and the Regina police. 
The Saskatoon police and the Prince Albert police have told me 
that this legislation would be of great assistance to them, and 
they see a great need for it. So whatever you’re talking about 
that’s in place right now, it’s obviously not helping the police. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Ontario legislation came about after an 
inquest into the death of an 11-year-old boy, who had been 
brutally murdered by a pedophile who was released on federal 
parole. The inquest recommended the Solicitor General of 
Canada, along with the provincial governments and police, be 
responsible for establishing a registry for convicted, dangerous, 
high-risk, sexual offenders. 
 
A similar recommendation was made in the Stockholm Agenda 
for Action, which came from the first world congress in 
Stockholm in 1996. They emphasized . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I would ask the hon. 
member to kindly go to her question. 
 
Ms. Julé: — . . . including the registration of sexual offenders. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you please commit today to the intent of this 
legislation, and to making Saskatchewan a national leader in 
attempting to stop the abuse and exploitation of children for 
sexual purposes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this province does 
not take a back seat to anybody in dealing with the sex trade 
against children or against anyone. And our record on criminal 
justice system can be matched up with anyone. 
 
The point, Mr. Speaker, that I’ll reiterate, and I’ve now said it 
three times. Maybe the member doesn’t agree with all the 
ministers of Justice. Maybe the member, the member opposite 
doesn’t agree with the police forces across this, across this 
country. But the system that is in place, the system is in place, 
is a better system than the one the member proposes. 
 
She proposes a system which has been shown not to work in the 
United States. And, Mr. Speaker, she’s proposing a system 
which the Ontario government has proposed. And we know that 
the Ontario government are big friends of the party opposite, 
Mr. Speaker. But we also know that the Ontario government 
does things for . . . We know, Mr. Speaker, that the Ontario 
government does things for show and not action. We know that, 
Mr. Speaker, on a number of fronts. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this was not the way to go. The member 
should know that. The member should know the system we 

have is the best one we could possibly have. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 235 — The Sex Offender Registry Act 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move first 
reading of Bill No. 235, The Sex Offender Registry Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day, 
yesterday the Opposition House Leader raised a point of order 
regarding whether the Deputy Premier was required to table 
certain documents from which he was quoting during question 
period. 
 
The practice of this Assembly on this matter is clear. If a 
minister quotes from, and I quote, “a despatch or other state 
paper not before the House . . .”, he may be called upon to table 
it. This was the citation in Beauchesne’s 6th Edition, paragraph 
495, referred to by the Hon. Opposition House Leader. 
 
However, there is no requirement for a minister to table a 
document if the item is a confidential document, a document of 
a private nature passing between offices of a department, or 
internal briefing notes prepared by a department for the use of a 
minister. These documents are regarded as private in that they 
are used to prepare ministers for deliberations in the House, 
whether that occurs during oral question period, Committee of 
the Whole, or legislative committees. 
 
While ministers sometimes share this type of material 
voluntarily, they are not required to table it. I direct your 
attention to previous rulings of the Chair on February 4, 1935; 
December 4, 1973; April 13, 1981; December 12, 1986; and 
June 20, 1996. 
 
This interpretation is also consistent with that of the Canadian 
House of Commons. I refer members to a ruling of Speaker 
Fraser in the Debates of the House of Commons on October 13, 
1987, pages 9898-9. 
 
I have reviewed the verbatim for yesterday’s question period 
and it would appear that the documents cited by the Deputy 
Premier on page 1620 are in the nature of briefing material. 
However, I call upon the minister to indicate to the House the 
exact nature of the documents in question. If they are not 
briefing material, I call upon him to table them forthwith. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the materials that I 
was using were a briefing material from the Department of 



1654 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2000 

Highways for the Minister of Highways which I was using on 
behalf of the minister for question period yesterday. 
 
The Speaker: — On that basis, the point of order is invalid. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being an open and 
accountable government, we are extremely happy to table the 
answer to question 164. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 164 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — Convert. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being an open and 
accountable government, where the question is possible to 
answer, we answer it. And we’re happy to do so. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question no. 166 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again we are extremely 
happy to submit the answer to question 167. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 167 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, being an open 
and accountable government, we’re extremely happy to table 
the response to question 168. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 168 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, being an 
open and accountable government, we’re extremely happy to 
table the response to question 169. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 169 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 73 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 73 — The 
Licensed Practical Nurses Act, 2000 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today to speak on Bill 73. Mr. Speaker, health 
care in Saskatchewan has never been in a more volatile state 
than it is today. The people of Saskatchewan, no matter what 
part of Saskatchewan they come from, whether it is north, 
south, east, west, rural or urban, the number one issue in the 
province and in the public’s mind is health care. 
 

Every day, Mr. Speaker, MLAs receive inquiries and concerns 
from people who themselves are trying to access health care or 
they are inquiring for a family member or a friend. The waiting 
lists, access to specialists, operating room cutbacks, bed 
shortages — the list goes on. 
 
As deputy Health critic for the Saskatchewan Party I, along 
with my colleagues, place the health care crisis in this province 
at the top of our list. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see as part of the solution the importance of all 
the players in the health profession being allowed to contribute 
to their fullest. The licensed practical nurses in Saskatchewan 
have a critical role to play in the delivery of health care in our 
province. And we applaud them, as well as RNs (registered 
nurse), lab techs, admitting clerks, unit clerks, porters, and all 
others who work as a team to provide the best possible care for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Many times, Mr. Speaker, this care is provided under the most 
trying of situations, but it is the dedication of the people who 
work in the health care system every day who have held the 
health care system in our province together over the past several 
years. Mr. Speaker, I thank them and I know the people of 
Saskatchewan thank them for the contribution that they have 
made to all of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation before us today speaks to the LPNs 
(licensed practical nurse) and their role in the health care 
system. The clause being removed, under the direction of, has 
been a contentious issue. While the official opposition agrees 
that LPNs should be able to function without being under direct 
supervision of an RN at all times, we qualify that by believing 
that the scope of practice of an LPN must be clearly defined 
within the legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that this will benefit all those working 
in the health care field as well as those who we have a health 
care system for, and they are the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The citizens of Saskatchewan accessing health care must have a 
clear understanding of the role of the different care providers, 
and as members elected by the citizens of Saskatchewan, we 
owe it to them to provide that to them. Mr. Speaker, the official 
opposition believes all players in the health system have a very 
vital role to play, that they need to be independent but also to 
work as a team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that each member of the team must be 
able to translate into everyday practice the legislation that they 
work under so that it actually can be practical in the workplace. 
Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day and when this legislation is 
finally passed, the legislation should improve the workplace. 
 
The legislation should allow LPNs to practice to the full extent 
of their education. The legislation should allow for improved 
health care delivery in our hospitals and health centres where 
duties now carried out by RNs could be delivered by LPNs and 
a true team could be realized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation should give the public the 
assurance that they will receive the care they require. And, Mr. 



June 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1655 

Speaker, the legislation’s main goal must be to improve and 
enhance health care delivery for all people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition believes there should be an 
amendment to more clearly define the scope of practice in the 
legislation. And we are looking at this with the appropriate 
people in the legal and health fields. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on this 
very important day to discuss and offer some insights into our 
perspective in terms of this very important legislation. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, hon. member. Why is the 
member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thank you to the member from Melfort. 
 
Today in the gallery are some people that we have who 
represent the Head Start program, Mr. Speaker, from Val d’Or 
and from Sennetere, Quebec, where they have 44 children 
enrolled, and from my community of Yorkton, where they have 
40 students enrolled. 
 
Our guests are involved in the Aboriginal Head Start program. 
And today I want to introduce in your gallery from Val d’Or 
and Sennetere, Quebec Head Start programs, Nathalie Rivard 
who is the psychologist educator; Yvonne Lecoursiere, who is 
the educational assistant and school bus driver; and Donna 
Sanford, who is the participating parent. And from Yorkton, 
Joan Delowski, who is the program coordinator and director; 
and Yvonne Rusnak, who’s the head instructor. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in welcoming them to our 
Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 73 — The Licensed Practical Nurses Act, 2000 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
began to say, it’s with great pleasure that I rise today to speak to 
this very important legislation that’s in the second reading 
stage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important today because it marks 
another milestone in the practice of nursing in the province of 

Saskatchewan. As I reviewed material leading up to discussions 
about this legislation, it was with great interest when we met 
with the licensed practical nurses, that they shared with us some 
of the information about their history and the tradition that they 
have established in the delivery of health care service in the 
province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it strikes me as today is an important 
milestone in their long and important record of service in the 
province. And it isn’t an end in itself and we shouldn’t consider 
it as something that automatically for all times solves any of the 
ongoing challenges that the nursing practice faces in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the information provided, I’m mindful of the 
fact that the very first time that this association or organization 
was put into a legal perspective goes way back to 1955 when 
they were incorporated under the registered nurses’ association 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a long time ago. And beginning at that 
time it was important, I think, that what they wanted to do was 
begin to develop and mature as an independent agency that was 
very responsible and capable of delivering a very important 
component of health care services in the province. 
 
In 1958 they were incorporated as a non-profit agency under the 
Act, or became an entity under the Act, and since that time have 
served the province of Saskatchewan in a meaningful role. 
 
I’m also very mindful of the level of dedication and frustration 
that they must have experienced in the ensuing years, because 
it’s my understanding that they really never received their own 
legislation to govern their own actions until 1988, in fact, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And for that long period of time there was a series of meetings 
and information that happened. There were tours across the 
province, meetings with people that worked in hospitals and 
other agencies, registered nurses, medical professionals, to try 
to . . . (inaudible) . . . and get a consensus that there should be 
their own appropriate legislation to consider them as a 
professional entity in this province. And that happened in 1988. 
 
In 1992, there was a further amendment that gave them the 
designation of licensed practical nurses and some other 
amendments in the legislation. And from that day to today, that 
legislation has essentially been what we’re operating under the 
authority of. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it hasn’t been a perfect world. It’s been an 
evolution, a transition. As the needs of the health system have 
changed, so too has the practice of licensed practical nursing, so 
too has the practice of registered nurses, so too has the practice 
of medical doctors and specialists in this province. 
 
Health care service delivery is not a static thing. It is not 
something written in granite and that can live and stay the same 
no matter what happens. It’s a thing that changes and evolves as 
our needs evolve. As people’s understanding as to what is the 
most appropriate care delivery change, it evolves and it 
changes. 
 



1656 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2000 

And, Mr. Speaker, human nature being what it is, very often 
there’s a great deal of fear and mistrust that enters into the 
system. There ends up being harsh words spoken sometimes. 
Sometimes inferences are made by people in the professions 
that are taken the wrong way. And before you know it, people 
get their backs up, people start misinterpreting things, people 
start operating in a way that is no longer co-operative and 
supportive, but confrontational. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that there is many professions 
anywhere, and certainly not in health care, that have undergone 
more pressure for change than the nursing profession. And I 
mean that in the broad category of nursing, those people who 
deliver those nursing services across the spectrum. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been ebbs and flows about the relative 
importance and prominence of different components of the 
health care system. Certainly we’ve gone from a period of time 
when physicians were the only gatekeepers. The physicians 
were indeed the people that pretty much determined how people 
were going to access and where they were going into the health 
care system. 
 
That is changing, not just in this province or in this country, but 
around the world. And increasingly there is an increased 
discussion happening everywhere about expanded and broader 
roles and functions for nurses in the health care delivery field. 
And we think that’s an important direction and an important 
service that can be provided in health care. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would be the first one in my colleagues to 
say clearly and without reservation, that licensed practical 
nurses serve a critical and important role in that service 
function. It’s absolutely essential and critical. 
 
And when I received the honour, I think, of being the Health 
critic by our leader, one of the things that I came to understand 
very clearly is that the whole relationship in health care needed 
a lot of work, needs some healing, needs some bridging of gulfs 
that have been created over the years, and certainly that is 
across the piece. 
 
But in particular, there’s been a particular hurtful gulf between 
people within the nursing profession between registered nurses, 
registered psychiatric nurses, and the LPNs. And I think that 
frustration of trying to bridge that gulf has resulted in recent 
time — the lawsuits and the frustration of saying we’ve got to 
establish a new relationship that is professional, that is 
respectful, and that is independent and lets all of us, all of us, 
practise to the limits and the potentials of our scope or practice 
that are based on our education and training, which determines 
our competency. They all need to function. 
 
(1445) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, and members of this House, we need these 
people, all of them. And no one can afford the luxury any 
longer of having people that are only allowed to do parts and 
parcels of what they’re trained to do and what their 
competencies clearly indicate is appropriate. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we are very supportive, in principle, of 
this legislation. We do believe that it is going to be another step. 

It isn’t the end and it isn’t everything to all people for all time. 
But it is an important step in the transition of the way health 
care is going to be delivered, not only in this province but in 
this country. And so, Mr. Speaker, we support the general thrust 
and the principles in this legislation completely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have had discussions with a number of people, 
including the licensed practical nurses, about our concern about 
wording in terms of the clauses related to the definition and 
scope of practice of licensed practical nurses. And the intent of 
this is not to limit what should be allowed, but to clarify it, to 
give clarity to it so that we try to eliminate as much as we can 
misinterpretation and misunderstandings between the categories 
in the nursing profession. 
 
It is our endeavour, and serious endeavour, in discussions that 
we’ve had with people in the nursing profession and indeed 
with the minister’s office, in terms of trying to find words that 
we believe will be helpful in clarifying what we think is an area 
that needs to be strengthened and improved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we intend to continue that process and we’re 
working with people who are good at the legal words and the 
appropriate words and we’re seeking advice — and I think it’s 
fair to say everyone is trying to seek the advice — to find the 
words that will appropriately describe the important role and 
function that this very critical segment of the nursing profession 
should have within their legislation. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, that process is ongoing. We believe that 
we can work through that in the next days as we move into 
committee work and into the detailed clause by clause 
discussion of this legislation and we look forward not only to 
working with licensed practical nurses, but all people that are 
concerned about how we do a better job of delivering health 
care service in this province, with legal people who will give us 
appropriate wording to make sure that happens. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like for us, as the official 
opposition, to go on the record in principle at this stage of 
saying we’re supportive of this legislation, we’re supportive of 
the direction that it’s heading, we’re supportive of the fact that 
we believe it’ll go some distance in the journey towards a better 
understanding between all nursing professionals in this 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to working 
further on it as we move into Committee of the Whole in the 
days ahead. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 63 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 63 — The 
Legal Aid Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to rise in the Assembly today to speak to Bill 63, An 
Act to amend the Legal Aid Act. 
 
As is my understanding, Mr. Speaker, one of the main changes 
that is being made is to remove one of the clauses that presently 



June 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1657 

allows a legal aid client to choose any lawyer in Saskatchewan 
to represent them for a crime that is punishable for life in 
prison. 
 
As the minister stated in his second reading speech, this is 
something that has been cost-shared with the federal 
government; that they have now removed this. So what does 
this Bill . . . what this Bill does now is allows the Legal Aid 
Commission to determine whether outside counsel is necessary. 
 
The minister also made reference, Mr. Speaker, to the rising 
costs of legal fees. And with this provision being removed, I 
have some concerns that families will not have the financial 
means for the best defence. There are also some other 
references to recommendations made in the Rosten report and 
these are to separate some of the complexities of the 
administrative system in the legal aid process. 
 
I don’t even have to say, Mr. Speaker, that the government 
opposite are the members of creating administrative nightmares. 
But it is important that they have addressed this by separating 
the offices of the chief executive officer and the chairperson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyone in our province deserves the best 
possible defence if they find themselves in trouble with the law, 
particularly if it is a murder charge. As we have seen in the past, 
Mr. Speaker, with the Larry Fisher trial, the province picked up 
the entire tab for this individual. Now one has to question 
whether every citizen in Saskatchewan can expect that to 
happen for them. I would suspect not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been some cases that I am familiar with 
where an individual has chosen counsel outside of 
Saskatchewan to represent them and the province has picked up 
the tab for the entire costs. But conversely to that, I have heard 
of instances where the exact opposite has happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel that at this time there is more need for 
consultation and careful study of this piece of legislation, and 
therefore I move adjourn debate of Bill No. 63 at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 66 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Axworthy that Bill No. 66 — The Personal 
Property Security Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once again 
it is my pleasure to rise in the Assembly to speak to Bill No. 66, 
An Act to amend The Personal Property Security Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister indicated in his second reading 
speech, there are two main purposes of these amendments: the 
sale of assets from the Bank of Montreal to the credit unions; 
and the second is to transfer all assets, employees, and functions 
to the land information services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the time when the Bank of Montreal announced 
that they would be making some major closures in rural 
communities, it was indeed very unfortunate for a number of 

community members out there who regretted seeing the Bank of 
Montreal do these closures. But the credit unions did step in and 
they decided that they would provide the necessary banking 
services to rural residents, which came as somewhat a relief. 
 
Regarding the second main purpose of the Bill, the minister 
stated in his second reading speech that this would increase 
efficiencies for land titles. Well, Mr. Speaker, I sincerely hope 
that these efficiencies will not have to cost any more money 
than they already have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed in this Bill and the 
concerns that we have, I feel would be best addressed in 
committee. There are many, many items within this Bill that I 
think need to be questioned. There is many, many people in 
Saskatchewan and certainly in our caucus that are quite 
concerned about some of the statements here and the 
implications. And so I think that those questions would be best 
answered in Committee of the Whole, and we look forward to 
doing that at the nearest opportunity. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 61 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 61 — The 
Engineering and Geoscience Professions Amendment Act, 
2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
members of the opposition have put forward their thoughts and 
concerns regarding this amendment Act, and we agree that we 
would address any further questions during Committee of the 
Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 43 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 43 — The 
Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2000 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once again 
it is my pleasure to rise and speak to Bill 43, an Act to amend 
The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990. 
 
As is my understanding, Mr. Speaker, one of the main 
provisions being made in this piece of legislation is to disallow 
those individuals with an outstanding driving offence to renew 
their driver’s licence. But as my colleagues pointed out that 
having a driver’s licence is not a privilege — in a sense it is — 
but it’s also a necessity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other amendment is regarding the red light 
cameras which now will be allowed to be used as evidence if 
one fails to stop at a red light. I had the instance not certainly of 



1658 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2000 

having been caught at this, Mr. Speaker, but I did . . . they must 
have been practising out there in the cities with the red light 
cameras. And I recognized the officers sitting by the roadside 
and really wondered what was happening here, whether there 
was a law passed that I hadn’t been aware of yet. But it 
certainly does make a person think twice, that’s for sure. 
 
Like I said, fortunately for myself, I did not receive one of those 
tickets in this province or any other province. So I really 
haven’t had an opportunity yet to see the clarity of the photos. 
And that is the concern that I do have with this is that the right 
person gets tagged with the ticket. And so I’m sure that many 
other residents of Saskatchewan will be questioning that. 
 
I recognize also, Mr. Speaker, that in Alberta a friend of mine 
did receive a ticket in this manner and were presented with the 
photo when the ticket came. And these people could see their 
licence plate quite clearly. 
 
However, there was an indication to me by the person I was 
speaking to that as the ticket was written, it was indicated that 
there was an assumed speed — I think it was, so that was the 
wording on it — or a sort of judged speed. So there was no 
absolute evidence of what the speed was and that caused them 
to question exactly whether or not this is a really just measure. 
 
So I think that that’s some of the things that we will probably be 
talking about further in Committee of the Whole. And there are 
other parts of the Bill that we need some clarification on from 
the minister. 
 
But I do feel that all of these questions would be best addressed 
from here on in in Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 48 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 48 — The 
Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act, be now 
read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is yet 
once again my pleasure to rise in the Assembly to speak to Bill 
No. 48, The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision- making Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation before us is to replace The 
Dependent Adults Act which includes a variety of provisions to 
protect those adults that require guardians. And as is my 
understanding from the minister’s second reading speech, the 
steering committee that was set up in 1997 made several very 
positive recommendations. And I too would like to commend 
them on all of their work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in those cases where a guardian is needed, 
particularly in emergency situations, it is very important that the 
right person is put in charge of the affairs. 
 
This is where most of the concerns that I have are, Mr. Speaker. 
They surround some questions regarding the assuredness that 
those very vulnerable people are not taken advantage of any 

further. 
 
And as I read through this Bill, Mr. Speaker, there was a lot of 
language in the Bill that suggested to me that there could be 
some complications when there’s co-guardianship. And I think 
just about every member of this Assembly, as well as many, 
many people in our province, have a member of their family, or 
certainly extended family, that might require extra help — those 
that are incapacitated mentally or that cannot make decisions on 
their own. 
 
(1500) 
 
And I would certainly hope that if, in fact, their extended family 
members, for instance, in the event that the parents of a 
handicapped person should pass away, I would hope that the 
extended family members would be considered as the 
guardians, if that has already been provided for in a will. 
 
If in fact this Bill assumes to ensure that there are any members 
of state, for instance, that would also have the right to make 
decisions with the family, I think there would be some rebut on 
the Bill. And I think that those questions we can certainly put 
forward in Committee of the Whole. 
 
And, as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, it’s just my concern that all 
vulnerable adults are not taken advantage of in any way or 
form. And so I will forward this Bill to Committee of the Whole 
and I look forward to addressing the minister with further 
questions of concern. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 52 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No. 52 — The 
Wildlife Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi 
sur la faune be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
make a few comments in regarding Bill No. 52, The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we’re all aware and people across this province 
are aware and certainly just looking outside today and the 
sunshine and the fact that we’re into that spring season, summer 
season; and people are thinking, while we’re sitting in the 
office, and we’re thinking of Friday and the weekend and the 
opportunity of being able to — if able — to head out to the lake 
for the weekend or enjoy the great outdoors. 
 
We certainly in Saskatchewan, many times, just take for the 
granted the environment that we are so privileged to enjoy, and 
certainly our province has a lot to offer when it comes to 
activity, resource activity and recreational activities as a result 
of the type of climate we have and the lakes and that type of 
recreation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, however, when we look at this piece of 
legislation, we’re quite concerned as an opposition in regards to 
a number of the changes that have been . . . have taken place 



June 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1659 

and the fact that people across this province who have and 
continue and will continue to enjoy the great outdoors, 
however, find that it’s going to cost them significantly more to 
enjoy that lifestyle — to be able to enjoy our parks, to be able to 
go out and enjoy fishing or even the hunting pastime. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I might add when it comes to hunting, I’ve 
talked to certainly the wildlife federation in this province and 
many people who have been avid hunters for a number of years 
who are concerned about the fact that we’re actually losing 
people who are interested in enjoying hunting and fishing and 
what have you. And part of the reason for that is the increase, 
the continuing costs that are placed upon people, that financial 
burden. And the fact that the . . . as you increase the costs, it 
restricts people from being able to enjoy those areas of 
recreation and fun. And in many cases, Mr. Speaker, they are 
the types of activities that families certainly can enjoy. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we look at The Wildlife Act one has to 
recognize as well though, while we take for granted the number 
of species of wildlife, whether it’s game or whether it’s flowers 
or shrubs or whatever in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, we also must be mindful of the fact that through the 
period of the last number of years the human species certainly 
has destroyed a number of . . . or has been instrumental and 
guilty of destroying a number of particular species that we have 
had in the past, some extinct, and some that are becoming very 
. . . 
 
Well when we talk about the word extinct, Mr. Speaker, I was 
just looking at the Minister of Finance and I was beginning to 
wonder if the Minister of Finance was exactly wondering what I 
was talking about when I was talking about extinct, and I guess 
that’s something we’ll find out when we get to the next 
provincial election. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we as a group of 
individuals certainly need to be concerned about our resources, 
about the species that we take so much for granted. And when I 
say that, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been raising the question about 
highway construction and certainly the upgrade of some of the 
highways in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And one of he highways in my area in particular, this is the first 
time that people have come to me. But I’ve had a number of 
people have come to me and said, you know, they’re quite 
concerned about the fact that, well Highway No. 48 needs some 
major construction and actually needs to be rebuilt. 
 
They got driving down that highway as rough and as uneven as 
it is, floating from side to side. And they happened to notice, I 
guess because they had to slow down because of the potholes 
and the nature of the highway, they happened to notice a 
number of species of plants along the roadway and the right of 
way and they thought to themselves: you know, if we rebuild 
this road, we’re going to destroy those species and they may 
never come back. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we have seen through the years that, 
whether it’s highway construction or whatever, a lot of the 
species of flowers and plants that we have, usually regenerate 
themselves, even if they’re . . . some of the area is destroyed as 
a result of highway maintenance. 

And I’m not for once saying, Mr. Speaker, that we don’t 
construct roads, because we need . . . we definitely need to 
maintain our infrastructure. Because part of this legislation talks 
about even tourism in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And while we can bring people in because people might like to 
come to the large expanses in the province to look at the 
animals and nature and the different flowers and those species, 
but, Mr. Speaker, in order for them to get to observe those types 
of nature, they’ve also got to have good road . . . they need a 
good road base to travel on. They need a good highway system, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so it’s important, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the 
environment, we talk about wildlife, that we keep all of these 
things in mind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also important when we look at the Act 
in front of us, the Act, I believe, eliminates totally the big game 
damage fund. And I know when the government removed that 
fund two years ago, we were quite concerned as an opposition 
party about the fact of the . . . who was going to address the 
concerns in regards to wildlife damage in regarding . . . or in 
regards to agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since I’ve been in this Assembly, on many 
occasions over the past number of years, I’ve had farmers come 
to me with concerns and with problems they’ve been facing as a 
result of wildlife damage on their crops. 
 
And as you’re aware of, Mr. Speaker, and members of this 
Assembly are aware of right now, while we’re into the seeding 
phase of putting another crop and hopefully looking forward to 
an excellent crop this fall, farming is not as rosy as the picture 
may be painted right now. There’s a lot of farmers who are just 
sitting on the edge, and the crop, a good crop in the bin will 
mean quite a difference as to whether or not those farms 
continue to function or operate into the coming year. 
 
And so when you have wildlife damage on your crop, 
something that you’ve worked so hard and you put so much into 
it, and then there’s no compensation for it, Mr. Speaker, it 
becomes very frustrating. 
 
And our concern, Mr. Speaker, with the elimination of the big 
game damage fund is the fact that the new plan that is put in 
place, we’re concerned about the fact that it may become just 
another area of more bureaucratic red tape that farmers have to 
go through. And while we appreciate the fact the federal 
government’s involved in helping fund the program, we’re 
concerned about what farmers may see at the end of the day — 
whether or not they will be . . . receive the proper compensation 
for the loss they incur. 
 
So that’s an area in this piece of legislation we’re somewhat 
concerned about. While it’s been removed, I think, Mr. 
Speaker, the government should have given a little more 
consideration, and we trust and we certainly, Mr. Speaker, will 
be offering some suggestions to the government when we get 
into committee on the Bill in regards to the wildlife fund and 
. . . or the big game damage fund, and how it is currently 
functioning, whether or not the new role that is playing is 
indeed meeting the needs of producers in this province. 



1660 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, also in this legislation I believe there’s a section 
that allows wildlife officers to lay charges for possession of 
wildlife for the purpose of trafficking. And it says, I believe the 
minister mentioned . . . made the comment in his second 
reading speech that the officer doesn’t have to wait for the 
offence to occur now and can act accordingly. And he said, it’s 
similar to the drug enforcement legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would have some concern with that. The reason I 
would have some concern with that, I don’t believe wildlife and 
the selling of drugs are two and the same things. I think there’s 
a considerable difference. 
 
And in regards to, if you will, as the minister talked about 
trafficking in wildlife — and I’m not saying that we don’t have 
people who don’t go and bag big game and then turn around 
and sell it — but we have for years acknowledged the fact that a 
person can go out and get a licence and bag big game for their 
own personal use. You can’t turn around and sell it. And there 
is concern that there have been people who have violated this. 
 
However, my concern is the fact that if an officer believes, and 
that’s what I’m reading from what the minister is saying, if the 
officer believes that a person is out hunting simply to traffic, 
they can go and actually step in and arrest that . . . or lay a 
charge before the act has even occurred. 
 
And I would have to ask exactly what do we mean by this. 
Exactly where are we going? Because I would be concerned 
about the fact that a person might be legitimately hunting and 
have a resource officer come up and say they believe that the 
only reason they’re out there hunting is so that they can sell the 
meat in order to raise some cash. 
 
And I think there are some questions in regards to that section 
of the Bill that we’re going to have to certainly take some time 
to deal with the minister and get some clarification on as to 
where we’re going in regards to that piece of the legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that in the past we have dealt on a 
number of cases with the areas and concerns that have been 
brought to our attention in regards to how wildlife and resource 
officers have treated people. 
 
And there’s no doubt, Mr. Speaker — some people in this 
Assembly have actually worked in the police services — and 
we’re all aware of the fact that no matter what area of life 
you’re involved in, that there are people who really take their 
job and take it seriously and work very diligently and treat the 
public with fairness and dignity. 
 
And then there are other people who take . . . especially when it 
comes to a resource officer or the police force, some people 
who go overboard. They’ve got a bit of power now. And that’s 
why I have some concerns with regards to this section. 
 
And it’s important that we really set out the criteria as to what is 
involved in regards to arresting a person or laying a charge 
against a person because that resource officer may feel that 
individual may be only out there hunting for the purposes of 
trafficking. So as I said, Mr. Speaker, it’s a question that we 
want to and will take some time to raise and hopefully get some 
clarification and answers when we get into committee. 

Mr. Speaker, as well the minister talked about the fact that there 
are many endangered species. There are species where we’re 
really . . . the number of species and any . . . or number of, 
whether it’s birds, the number of birds in any specific species of 
birds are really becoming low. And we have excellent habitat in 
our province for different species of birds or animals. 
 
However we need to take the time to protect those areas of 
habitat as well so that these species or at risk, Mr. Speaker, will 
be . . . the at-risk area will be addressed so that the young 
generation of today and tomorrow will be able to continue to 
enjoy the vast array of species of birds and animals we have in 
the province of Saskatchewan, so that we can continue to 
generate tourism and create tourism in the province because 
people want to come to this province because of the many lakes 
and the wide-open spaces that we have for people to enjoy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I talk about lakes I hear that over the past 
few weeks there’s been a terrific movement of people to Long 
Lake to . . . or Diefenbaker Lake I believe, if it was, where the 
accidental spill of . . . from a fish farm. 
 
And it sounds to me like a lot of people have all of a sudden 
flocked to Diefenbaker Lake and from some of the media 
reports they’re actually getting some . . . pulling out some pretty 
. . . or having pretty good luck in getting a pretty good catch out 
of Diefenbaker Lake. 
 
(1515) 
 
And when you talk about fish farming and the accidental 
release, I guess there is a concern as well when you have a large 
number of certain species entering in a water system or a water 
ecosystem. The concern is that there might be other species in 
that lake that might be threatened because of the certain influx 
of that specific species. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, for the angler out there it’s been a time 
of great fishing and so I hope that . . . And I guess as well it’s 
great, it’s some economic development around Diefenbaker 
Lake as people have gone out to fish in that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well we’ve seen and will continue to see that 
our wildlife system continues at times, it really builds, and you 
get large influxes of animals such as coyotes and foxes, 
certainly in our area they were very high. The last couple of 
years they’ve kind of reduced again because of the fact that as 
they overpopulate, the nature itself seems to take care of itself. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one of the concerns that has been raised with 
our caucus in regards to coyotes, and certainly wolves in the 
northern part of the province, is the fact that some of these 
species tend to attack domesticated livestock. And we want to, 
Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that the livestock industry 
in this province are, as well, protected when we talk about 
wildlife species. 
 
We may want to protect the wolf or we may want to protect the 
coyote species, but at the same time, Mr. Speaker, we also want 
to share the concern of livestock producers who may lose the 
livestock. And many have. In fact, Mr. Speaker, this last spring 
and certainly a year ago, many producers were finding that they 
were having a major problem with coyotes in their pastures. 



June 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1661 

And so when we talk about The Wildlife Act, Mr. Speaker, we 
want to make sure that the Act reflects not only protection of 
our resources, but also recognizes and carries with it some 
responsibilities in how we deal with people and certainly the 
different sectors of our economy who depend so much not only 
on wildlife, but also their livelihood that may be hindered as a 
result of an overpopulation in the wildlife sector. 
 
And when I say that, Mr. Speaker, I think of our area. And I 
come back to the fact of the wildlife. And certainly in the 
southern part of the province, which we haven’t seen in a long 
time, we are seeing larger flocks of Canada geese certainly 
beginning to nest in our area. And that is becoming a concern. 
And that goes back to the whole debate of wildlife 
compensation for damage to property, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think there are a number of areas, Mr. Speaker, in this 
piece of legislation that need to be reviewed very carefully. We 
need to take the time to review them, need to take the time to 
determine whether or not we are actually protecting resource or 
whether we’re creating an imbalance in the province of 
Saskatchewan in our resources to the detriment of the people 
and the livelihood of individuals within this province. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think and I believe it 
would be appropriate for us to just review this legislation a little 
more diligently before we would move on. And we certainly 
look forward to a time in the future to address some of these 
concerns directly with the minister in Committee of Finance. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 53 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No. 53 — The 
Wildlife Act Consequential Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know, Mr. Speaker, 
that the thoughts I shared a few moments ago had everyone on 
the edge of their seat, and they’re waiting for what I have to add 
to, in regards to The Wildlife Act Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2000. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I will say this: that Bill No. 53, with all 
due respect, reflects a lot of what is coming forward in Bill No. 
52. And at this time, I’m not sure that it would take a lot or that 
I should tie up a lot of the Assembly’s time in debating an issue 
that where most of the meat of the legislation is actually dealt 
with in the previous one. 
 
This Act just adds to the Bill No. 53 in talking about wildlife 
species at risk and naming them. And I believe we can address a 
number of these concerns more directly and more succinctly in 
Committee of Finance . . . or Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 60 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No. 60 — The 
Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2000 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to enter into debate on Bill No. 60, The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
And as I enter into the debate, Mr. Speaker, I note that some of 
the members opposite are howling and it’s almost as if it’s a 
howl of pain, Mr. Speaker. But I can assure the members 
opposite that whatever pain they’re in is nothing like the pain 
that this government has inflicted on the province of 
Saskatchewan in the eight years, nine years that they’ve been in 
power. 
 
I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, we will all agree that the protection of 
our forests is an extremely important issue. And not just 
important for us here today, but important for all future 
generations to come. 
 
The forestry resource is a magnificent resource, Mr. Speaker. It 
not only is part of our ecosystem and takes a . . . plays a 
tremendous role in terms of renewing our environment, but it 
has also created and allowed for a livelihood for many, many of 
us in this province since we became a province, Mr. Speaker. 
So there is no doubt that we must do all that we can to protect 
this resource. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, has a couple of primary components to 
it, some of which cause us some concern, and one of the first 
areas is the area of the licensing. The harvest of forest products 
in this province is done through the granting of licences, Mr. 
Speaker. And one of the things that this Bill intends to do is to 
give the government greater control in terms of the application 
of those license conditions and in situations where the holders 
of those licences may change, where their licences may in fact 
be transferred. 
 
Now if this is a responsible approach to monitoring the use of 
the forest and monitoring the ability of the licence holders to 
responsibly use the resources of the forestry, then I think we’re 
headed in the right direction. But there is some concern here 
that this Bill could encroach a little into that area of undue 
interference. 
 
There’s a difference between being responsible in terms of the 
monitoring of the resource on behalf of the citizens of the 
province and interfering to the degree that we could actually 
restrict business from being successful, from employing the 
large number of individuals that are employed in the forestry 
industry in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on the responsible, monitoring side, I think we’ve got to 
look at how we do that. With the transfer of licences, there are a 
lot of things that happen as a licence is transferred from one 
licence holder to another. 
 
And in the last couple of years in this province, we’ve actually 
had quite a significant number of licence transfers. And not in 



1662 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2000 

all cases has that gone smoothly. We have had transfers from 
one company to another in this province over the very recent 
past that has caused some concern in a lot of the communities 
where those companies operate, Mr. Speaker. And I think 
specifically of the community of Hudson Bay and the large area 
surrounding it. 
 
Certainly there were a couple of transfers that occurred there in 
the last couple of years. And I think while the community 
generally was hopeful that those transfers could be monitored in 
a way that there wouldn’t be any negative impact on their 
community and the surrounding resource, there in fact have 
been some difficulties, Mr. Speaker, not the least of which is 
what appears to be a lack of monitoring that has led to a lot of 
waste in the Hudson Bay, Carrot River areas. 
 
And I’ve actually had residents of those communities, first of 
all, tour me through some of those areas, and in fact show me 
photographs of other areas where the amount of waste is in fact 
something to be of great concern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think that while we’re looking at the ability here to monitor 
the transfer a little more closely, we have to look at the ongoing 
monitoring of the licence as it evolves over the time that it’s in 
effect. We can’t have the communities in which some of these 
companies operate concerned that their interests aren’t being 
looked after and that the interests of the resource around them 
aren’t being looked after. 
 
Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I on a lot of occasions am so very 
impressed with the people that live in the communities whose 
livelihood generally comes from the forestry because these 
people are probably the most ardent conservationists that I 
know. And the reason for that, Mr. Speaker, is is that they do 
make their livelihood from the forestry. They understand that in 
order for them to continue to earn a livelihood from it, they 
have to manage it with respect and they have to treat it well in 
order that they and their families for generations to come can 
continue to earn a livelihood from the forestry as well. 
 
So I think one of the things that we’ve got to look at, and 
perhaps one of the suggestions that we would like to be making 
is, is that while we do want to monitor the transfer of licences 
and we do want to have a better handle on how that happens 
through mergers and sales, etc., we also want to make a better 
effort, Mr. Speaker, to manage and to monitor the after-effects 
of a transfer of licence in order that the communities can 
continue to sustain their resource. 
 
We also want to be able to do it in a way, Mr. Speaker, that 
involves all the stakeholders, that involves the communities, 
that involves the business folks involved, in the sense that they 
can all be happy with their input being respected. 
 
Now oftentimes we put these types of monitoring regimes into 
place, and without adequate consultation, and consequently we 
may in fact end up undermining both sides of the equation here, 
Mr. Speaker. And certainly while we want to respect the 
communities’ input, the one thing that we do not want to do is 
go to the degree that now we’re starting to interfere with a 
business that is generally ran by individuals from those small 
communities to the degree where they can’t, where they can’t 
operate. 

Now I know that there were a number of public meetings 
around some of these issues with the land use planning and 
those kinds of things, and certainly those are part of a process 
that one has to follow in order to be able to strengthen what it is 
that the government and the Department of Environment and 
Resource Management wants to do here. 
 
And I think to be fair, Mr. Speaker, the other thing is that 
SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management) officials themselves probably need a little more 
time in order to fully understand how the transfer of licences is 
going to affect the ongoing forestry. Because as I indicated, 
we’ve had a couple of fairly rapid turnovers in the transfer of 
licences here just within the last couple of years. And I don’t 
think we fully understand the fallout from that rapid series of 
changes just quite yet. 
 
(1530) 
 
The other interesting part of this Act, Mr. Speaker, is that it 
addresses an issue in the wild rice industry. And we’re talking 
about, through this Act, being able to allow government to 
confiscate wild rice crops for the non-payment of fees. 
 
Well I have some concern around that, Mr. Speaker, in the 
sense that instead of jumping to the conclusion that people 
aren’t paying their fees and that we should automatically start 
confiscating their crops as a result of that, I think maybe the 
government should be looking at why it is, investigating why it 
is that these fees aren’t being paid. 
 
Could it be, Mr. Speaker, that they are in fact too high in the 
first place and that the producers can’t afford to pay for them? 
Could it be, Mr. Speaker, that the taxation levels in this 
province are so high that it makes their ability to pay the fees 
more difficult? 
 
So I think somehow we’ve jumped a step here, Mr. Speaker, 
where we’re going straight into talking about confiscating crops 
and wild rice crops and how they would be disposed of, but we 
haven’t, or the government doesn’t seem to have really made an 
effort in terms of trying to understand why it is that those fees 
aren’t being paid. And I think that that is something that we 
certainly would like to take a little more time and be able to 
understand a little bit better. 
 
Now there are a number of stakeholders affected by both 
components of this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and we 
would like to have the opportunity to be able to consult with all 
of them, and I think particularly the communities with respect 
to the licence . . . transfer of licence issue that have been 
affected by the licence . . . the number of licence transfers over 
the course of the last couple of years. 
 
And in the case of the wild rice industry, I think certainly we 
would like to be able to consult with the producers, Mr. 
Speaker. Because I think any time we hear about government 
confiscating crops, that gives us all cause for great concern. 
 
So just in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that we 
will attempt to consult with these stakeholders as quickly as we 
can. And at this point I’d like to adjourn debate. 
 



June 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1663 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 3 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 3 — The Health 
Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 1999 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for me to rise in the Assembly today to point out a few 
issues regarding Bill No. 3, the labour health reorganization 
amendment Act. 
 
This Bill simply extends provisions for . . . of health 
reorganizations passed in 1996. It seriously reduces the number of 
bargaining units in the health care professions in the province. 
This reorganization is commonly known as the Dorsey 
commission. 
 
The number of bargaining units were reduced from 538 to 45. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is a large number to be dropped down to. 
The SGEU (Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ 
Union), usually a staunch supporter of the NDP, was upset in 
particular about the changes since many of its members were 
moved to other unions. In total it lost about 3,500 members. 
 
This was supposed to make labour negotiations more manageable. 
It is ironic then, that we’ve had so much labour strife in the health 
care files in the last year. 
 
In reality this Bill did little to calm labour problems because the 
government was . . . has done nothing to improve working 
conditions. We still hear from nurses and other health care 
workers constantly about the working conditions in our hospitals. 
 
While reducing the number of bargaining units it did make sense 
. . . the heavy-handed approach of government took in 
accomplishing this was typical. It’s the same type of approach we 
saw with the creation of health districts themselves and what we’ll 
probably soon see with the NDP’s drive to amalgamate 
municipalities. 
 
And like the amalgamation of health care unions, there will 
probably be little consultation in the area of municipal 
amalgamations either. And what consultation there is will likely 
be ignored as the provinces . . . as the province probably had this 
legislation already to go. 
 
As in the case of municipal amalgamation, we were told at the 
time of the Dorsey report, that these changes would make labour 
negotiations more smooth and make the system run better. And 
then we were faced with the nurses’ strike last year, Mr. Speaker. 
And there’s a strike that went on, and on, and on. 
 
Clearly, amalgamation in the health care sector did not cure the 
real problems. Just like the government’s plan to force 
amalgamation will not do anything to improve the lives of those 
living in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
When the original Dorsey recommendations were put in place, 
not only were some union members angry, there were plenty of 
non-union workers who were angry to find out themselves they 

were being forced into joining a union. 
 
This is typical of the NDP Party and their labour policy, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ll soon see the same thing in the construction 
industry where the government plans to force non-unionized 
employees into unions whether they like it or not. 
 
If we are to attract health care professionals to Saskatchewan, 
especially our nurses, we’re moving . . . we’re going to have to 
do a lot more than tinker with how the unions operate. We’ve 
heard over and over this government’s commitment to hire 
hundreds of new nurses in Saskatchewan, who are deeply 
needed. But we’ve heard from many health care workers how 
the nurses that are coming here are refusing because of the 
labour unions that are in place now. We don’t seem to be 
making any progress fast. 
 
Instead of tinkering with health care unions, let’s get on with 
the job of improving our health care system. Let’s find a way to 
make the jobs for those working in health care more tolerable 
once again. This will make it better for the workers, but it will 
also make it better for the ones that really need — and that’s the 
patients. 
 
Let’s find out what’s going wrong with our health care system. 
We have to find out where the money is going. We spent more 
than even before on health care, but are receiving less in the 
way of our services. 
 
On the labour front let’s bring fairness back to our trade union 
laws. Just as it is wrong not to allow someone to join . . . or to 
form or join a union, it is also wrong to be forced into joining a 
union. It is wrong to make it clearly impossible to decertify 
even if a majority of workers want that. We should have a 
system in place that is fair for both employees as well as 
employers or we are going to start losing more jobs to other 
provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been a lot of questions raised regarding 
this Bill. There are a lot more members who have questions for 
. . . regarding this Bill. But therefore I would like to have them 
done in Committee of the Whole. Therefore I move Bill No. 3, 
the health labour reorganization Act to be moved to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
 
The Chair: — I’d like to ask the minister if she’d introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much. Next to me I 
have Larry Spanier, who’s the deputy minister. Next to Larry is 
Debbie Wilkie, who’s director of marketing and corporate 
affairs. On my right is Bryon Burnett, assistant deputy minister 
of operations. Behind Bryon is Lynn Oliver, who’s the chief 
information officer of the information technology office. And 
then we have Donna Johnson, who’s the executive director of 



1664 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2000 

corporate management; and Rob Greenwood, who’s the 
assistant deputy minister of the policy division. 
 
The Chair: — Thanks very much, Madam Minister. 
 
Subvote (EC01) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister. 
Welcome to your officials. I think we had a chance to greet 
them once before, but I’d like to continue on with some of the 
questions that was carried over from our earlier conversation 
some time ago now. 
 
Madam Minister, when I look at the materials in vote 45, we’d 
already responded to some of the questions and I appreciated 
those answers. 
 
I would like to refer to the section on the Saskatchewan Trade 
and Export Partnership. I wonder if you could just give me a 
quick overview of the objectives and the role of that particular 
subvote, please? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 
opposite for that question; it’s a very good question. The 
Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership is a private/public 
sector partnership; that is, it’s got government funding but it 
also has private sector funding. It’s run by a board of private 
sector people who are involved in trade and they set the overall 
objectives in terms of which parts of the world we’re going to 
focus on, which missions we’re going to take to different parts 
of the world. 
 
The government retains a policy role with respect to trade. 
Clearly we have to because we’re responsible for working with 
the federal government on trade policy. 
 
But what this has really helped to do is, it’s helped to focus the 
government’s activities. So that now if a minister goes on a 
trade mission, we’re on that trade mission because the private 
sector business people have said they need a minister there. And 
we have a specific objective in mind. 
 
I just came back from a meeting with the Ambassador to China, 
and he pointed out to me China of the . . . what Canada exports 
to China, 25 per cent of it comes from Saskatchewan. So that, 
for example, that was one of the places I went on a trade 
mission to in February because it’s a huge, huge export market 
for this province. 
 
And the business people will tell you we need a minister on this 
trip because we need access to the highest levels of government 
or industry. So it’s a very good partnership. We have the policy 
role; they have the role in terms of the practicalities, the trade 
missions, the parts of the world that are most important to their 
members. And that we co-operate — they tell us when they 
need us involved in their missions to ensure they’re successful. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
I have a question following up on that, and I appreciated the 
response. I have personally been involved in some of those 
trade missions, and I know just how valuable they really are, 

and I would encourage the minister to continue that. 
 
I think the important part is that it is very much focused on the 
private sector partnership with direction becoming particularly 
from the private sector. And I think that that has a lot of 
positive implications for the future. 
 
I would like to move to the next item in the budget statement. 
And before I really talk or ask questions about the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation which I’d like to in a 
moment, I’d like to touch on another growth fund that you have, 
and that’s the Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund. 
 
I would like to look at some of the comments that were made in 
the Report of the Provincial Auditor, 1999 Spring Report. And 
as I read through some of the comments, I see that the mandate 
of the Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund has been 
changing over the years. Could you give me a bit of a summary 
of what the purpose originally was, how the focus has changed, 
and for what reasons, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The Saskatchewan Government 
Growth Fund was an immigrant investor fund created in the 
1980s by the federal government. The province has no money 
involved in it. We have no guarantees. We don’t guarantee any 
of the loans. So we have no direct financial role in the program. 
In 1999 there was a new program introduced to replace the 
existing program and Saskatchewan was one of several 
provinces that declined to participate in the new program. 
 
And there were several reasons why we declined to participate 
in the new program but the main one was the government was 
going to have to guarantee the loans. And so we were not 
prepared to do this. So that particular program will be wound 
down after the current investments in the system are placed. 
 
Now the auditor made some comments about the changes in 
directions of funding there which we actually are taking under 
advisement. Basically — I’m not sure which comments you 
were referring to, we could clarify that — but he made some 
points about what happens to the surpluses. And those surpluses 
don’t exist now. That’s a future prospect. But we’re actually 
looking at his comments and probably will look at complying 
generally with what he’s saying. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess one of 
the comments that I found interesting was that the management 
corp — and I assume that’s the overriding board that reviews 
these investing groups or investing funds — decided to reduce 
the risk of the investments held by SGGF (Saskatchewan 
Government Growth Fund) by investing in assets and lease 
them to the Saskatchewan Crown Corporation. Is that 
essentially what is being done now with at least one of these 
funds? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, there are eight 
different funds. The management board really does nothing 
except ensure that the policy framework is in place in the 
overall management but they don’t actually do any of the direct 
investments. 
 
Each fund has a different purpose designated to it so some of 
the funds . . . And that’s because the fund itself would have 



June 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1665 

decided that this particular fund will be dedicated to leases; this 
particular fund will be dedicated to small- or medium-size 
enterprises. But that’s decided when the investments first are 
placed. They’re not decided now by the government but by 
those investors. And as I say, it varies from fund to fund in 
terms of what the purposes were of the fund, what the scope is 
of the investment. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
just one further question then on the Saskatchewan Government 
Growth Fund. It seemed to me that there was an overall positive 
aspect to these funds when they were originally introduced. 
Conditions changed, as you explained, probably made them less 
attractive from your point of view. 
 
Is there any opportunity to go down this trail once again and try 
to initiate in conjunction with the federal government some 
offshore investor funds? Because they are not funds from 
taxpayers. It is coming from offshore and certainly is a source 
of funding for economic development in this province if we 
could make sure the right conditions were in place. Would you 
agree with that? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, I think that’s a possibility. 
Again it’s . . . Saskatchewan wasn’t the only province that said 
they weren’t prepared to sign on to this new arrangement 
because of some of the provisions. Certainly it’s a possibility. 
 
And before we would just allow SGGF to be wound down, we 
will look at other options for investment in the access to capital 
that can be invested in Saskatchewan through SGGF. 
 
So certainly our commitment is to not just sit here and allow it 
to be wound down but we are looking actively at other choices 
open to the government. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Madam Minister, Mr. Chairman, just to 
reiterate then, and I think from your earlier question I wanted to 
make sure. Is there any exposure to the provincial government 
on the basis of these funds as they are being played out or being 
wound down? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, no, there’s 
absolutely no exposure to the government. And as I say, that’s 
the main reason why we weren’t prepared to sign on in 1999 to 
the new program, because under that program there would have 
been exposure of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
I have another question and I want to jump to the last item on 
page 37 of the 2000-2001 Estimates, and that is referring to the 
office of Northern Affairs. 
 
And I looked down some of the initiatives, some of the 
objectives at the top, and I see it says the office works in 
partnership with federal and provincial departments, works in 
conjunction with industry, communities, to enhance the 
planning, coordination, integration, implementation, and so on 
for some of these projects. 
 
Could you give me some examples for the record of what these 
projects might be. 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the office of 
Northern Affairs is actually a separate, is a separate entity. Now 
they were here for about an hour yesterday I know. And they’re 
not here today because they, of course, have to come from 
northern Saskatchewan. So I can take those questions under 
advisement and get you answers to those questions. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I would 
appreciate just some examples of what these programs have 
been, what their . . . your evaluation of their effectiveness. 
 
And I have another more specific question if you could please 
relay that too — the one under the sub-programs, northern 
development fund, of 1.730 million, for this particular estimate 
it’s up slightly from 1999-2000, lower a little bit from the year 
previous. Can you tell me what that fund is intended for, how 
it’s administered, and where the fund is at this position . . . at 
this time, who’s in control of the fund, and what’s it intended 
for? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, we will check with 
Hansard, get the transcript of the question. We’ll send it to 
Northern Affairs and we’ll be sure that you get an answer to 
those questions. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
another question I would like to propose now is focusing on the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. And I know it has a 
very extensive investment portfolio, there’s several aspects . . . 
or several reports that I’ve looked at and summaries. 
 
Could I just get an overview again please of what the objective, 
the overriding objective, for Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation is? And in fact what its mandate is in terms of its 
economic development opportunities here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, yes. To the member, 
thank you very much for that question. Every province and 
virtually every state in the United States has a vehicle of this 
kind. And really the issue is there are many usually small, but 
sometimes medium-sized, businesses that simply would not get 
off the ground, would not see the light of day if they had to rely 
on traditional financing mechanisms. 
 
That is if they had to go to the banks or even the credit unions 
or even sometimes other funds, they wouldn’t get access to 
capital because they often don’t have a track record, they’re 
brand new companies. They are companies like . . . One of the 
examples that I use in our province is the Moose Jaw spa. Who 
would have ever believed that you could have a successful spa 
in Moose Jaw? 
 
And so they come to an agency like the Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation, which takes newer, smaller, in some 
senses riskier — but not always, just newer and smaller 
sometimes — ventures that traditional institutions, financial 
institutions won’t lend money to. 
 
This corporation has acted very effectively. It’s created about 
. . . created or sustained about 1,700 jobs. It’s levered 38 . . . it’s 
invested about $38 million dollars and levered much more 
activity from the private sector. 
 



1666 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2000 

And I think the point that has to be emphasized, is there’s no 
cost to the taxpayer. In fact, there’s a return on the investment 
that SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) makes. 
We actually make money on our investments. We’ve been 
fortunate because if you look at the track record, the success 
record is very, very, very high. 
 
So from our point of view, the taxpayer is not footing the bill. 
There are benefits in terms of jobs being created, and there are 
benefits in terms of many, many businesses in this province that 
are incredibly successful, started with the help of SOCO. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
I was looking at the financial statements of Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation annual report 1999. And under the 
financial position statement on page 22, I noticed that the 
investments are listed as $18,773,000 for 1999. And that’s up 
quite significantly over 1998. 
 
Can you give me a bit of a summary as to why that increase in 
investment please? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the investments are all listed on page 12 of the report. 
And as you’ll see there’s been a lot of activity in that time 
period in hog barns, which is a very key sector of our economy 
. . . (inaudible) . . . to promote hog barns, and to promote the 
processing of pork in our province. 
 
And you talk to people, like I was just talking to the ambassador 
from China — they’re big consumers of our agriculture 
products — and ag biotech is another area where there’s a lot of 
activity in this past year. And when you travel to different parts 
of the world, Saskatoon is known to people in different parts of 
the world because of its world-wide reputation in agriculture 
biotechnology. It is truly a world leader there. 
 
And if you look at some of the companies that are at Innovation 
Place at ag biotech, they are literally from all over the world. So 
that’s the activity that’s occurred. And as I say the specific 
firms are listed on page 12. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Those on 
page 12 do in fact list the . . . both the equity, which would be 
the investments, and also loans. 
 
Looking at the number of loans, for instance, and I’m looking at 
the investments in the notes on page 26, I noticed that the loans 
receivable as well has increased — as well as the equity — it’s 
increased considerably from ten million three roughly to 
eighteen million. That’s quite a percentage increase over seven 
million. 
 
Can you tell me if all those loans that are listed there under 
loans receivable, are in fact . . . are they currently in place? Are 
there any of them in jeopardy at this time? Or what is the risk 
for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan against these loans? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — They are all in place. They are none 
that are regarded as risky to the taxpayer. And a lot of them are 
in the agricultural area, particularly in diversification in 

livestock activities. And so, as I say, that’s the explanation, but 
none of them are in a risky category. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chairman. 
Following that I, just for clarification, I noticed under that note 
2 on the same page 26, there is an item called the total, and then 
under it less total provision for investment impairment, and 
following that, referring back I believe to loans receivable, there 
is an item called non-performing loans. 
 
Can you give me an indication of the difference between 
investment impairment and non-performing loans because 
they’re both listed under the investment section? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. They are essentially the same idea, and it’s the idea 
that because you want to ensure that any risk there is is covered, 
to set aside a certain provision; 25 per cent is set aside so that in 
case there is an impairment of a loan, you have the money set 
aside. 
 
Now if you look at the level of loan loss provision and 
investment impairment which is essentially a provision for 
investment impairment, the same idea, you’ll see that the loan 
loss provision is actually quite generous. It’s conservative in the 
sense that we set aside a significant percentage of the capital to 
ensure that we aren’t in a vulnerable position. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess my 
question then would be from an investment in this year — 
sorry, I’m just going back to the number again — investment of 
18.7 million or roughly 18.8 million as indicated in the financial 
position, you’ve set aside $5 million for investment impairment. 
That’s a significant percentage against loan. 
 
That would lead the average person to suspect that a lot of these 
loans might be suspect or in trouble, or why would that kind of 
money be set aside against the investment impairment section 
of the report? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — This is actually an accounting 
requirement; that is, it doesn’t vary from year to year. It’s just 
you’re being very cautious. You’re saying we’re going to set 
aside this amount of money to ensure that if there is a problem 
with any of these loans, nobody is caught off guard; there’s 
money to cover any losses. 
 
It doesn’t mean in any sense that you expect that level of losses. 
And if you look at the history of SOCO as I said before, you 
would find the success rate is very, very high. And those loan 
loss provisions then turn out to be a lot higher than they needed 
to have been. But we’d rather have them higher than they 
needed to have been than to be in a position where we were 
leaving the government, the taxpayer, vulnerable. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman, that sounds very prudent, 
and I just wondered why the loan loss provision has increased 
quite substantively in 1999 compared to 1998. There was a loan 
loss impairment there as well, but increased this year. Is that a 
signal of something? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. The only reason the loan loss provision has increased 



June 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1667 

is because the level of activity has increased. So it’s just a 
percentage of the level of activity. The more money that you’re 
lending or investing, the more the loan loss provision has to go 
up to ensure that you’re covered. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess that 
leads me to something that is similar in intent and also in that 
particular note where it says that the . . . included in the loans 
receivable is this $3.645 million of non-performing loans. That 
is a provision set aside. 
 
But I noticed that 3 million, 3.6 million roughly, has increased 
from only $119,000 last year. That is a very significant increase 
and I’m wondering why that very large number from 1998. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — First of all, I’d say to the member 
opposite that that figure needs to be explained. 
 
What you’re saying when you talk about a loan that’s 
non-performing is that there are issues out there that have to be 
resolved. It doesn’t mean though that you’re potentially on the 
hook for that amount of money because you’ll have for those 
loans or investments, collateral or security of various kinds 
which in . . . you haven’t probably accessed yet. 
 
But you put them in that category because they are the ones that 
you regard as, at that time, risky. And in many cases, the issues 
are worked out before you ever have to go to the collaterals or 
security. 
 
But for all of those there would be as well collateral and 
security. So it doesn’t mean in any sense that those number of 
dollars are at risk. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. 
Chairman, would that mean then that some of these loans, 
although you called them not at risk and then we talk about a 
provision for risky, does that mean that some of the loans that 
you feel are pretty secure are in fact . . . non-performing to me 
would be that the interest is not paid, principal is not paid, but 
you still have confidence that they are going to, sooner or later, 
respond as you had anticipated in the earlier statement of 
non-risk. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Right. You were asking me about 
the increase in activity of the loans receivable from 10 to 18. 
You asked me whether they were dispersed. They’re dispersed. 
They’re in good shape. There are no risk in those. 
 
This is part of the whole portfolio going way back to the 
beginning. And so what this is really saying is that there is that 
amount of . . . those loans are non-performing right now. That 
is, they are not keeping up with their obligations. It doesn’t 
mean that they’re going to be written off as a loss though 
because those often are worked out over a period of time. 
 
And certainly the other point is we will have security for those 
loans, or collateral of some kind, that we can access if in fact 
they go to the point of being more than just non-performing. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that response. 
I’m just wondering if I could ask again — maybe I didn’t hear 
the response or maybe I didn’t understand it — why the 

increase, the very large increase in 1999 over 1998. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. A couple of comments about this. First of all we’re 
very cautious. That is, we quickly, if there’s any problem at all 
in your payment, we’ll put you in this category. So that if you 
miss one payment, you’re very likely to end up in this category. 
So it doesn’t mean in any sense that you’ve got a long-term 
problem. You may have a short-term problem. 
 
If there’s any one explanation for the increase in the people in 
that category, was because of the amount of investment in hog 
barns, the downturn in hog prices. Now because prices will 
come back up, a lot of these, if you ask today, would not be in 
this category. They would have exited from this category back 
into the performing category. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. If I understood 
you correctly, that might be an anomaly just for 1999, 
depending upon things like the hog barn and other commodities 
that affect the ability to service the loan for SOCO. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, that’s correct. Because a fair 
number of our investments are in agriculture in one way or 
another. And so if there have been problems as there have been 
in prices, this can be a . . . this can temporarily affect such 
numbers. But once you come out of the problem, most 
companies usually do survive and they go out into performing 
loans once the prices go back up. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I think I have 
that clear. 
 
On page 23 of the annual report under statement of operations 
and retained earnings, under the section, revenue, operating 
contribution from the General Revenue Fund, I see a figure of 
4.085 million, up slightly from the year before. 
 
I assume that that operating contribution . . . would that be 
things like rent against capital projects that you have? And what 
might those capital projects be? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — That money would be primarily to 
fund research parks, operations, and the investment division. 
 
But the other thing that we haven’t talked about, which is a 
huge part of this portfolio, is the research parks — the proposed 
research park in Regina and the very, very well-known, 
world-class Innovation Place research park in Saskatoon. 
 
Which again, to go back to my ambassador from China, he was 
on his way to Saskatoon to visit Innovation Place because 
they’re extremely interested in working with us on what we’re 
doing in agricultural biotechnology. He thinks it’s got a 
tremendous future in his country and wants to learn from us. 
 
So that’s the other part — the big part that’s in that subvote . . . 
or that number. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I thought it 
might be. And I want to talk a little bit about the research park 
because I think it really is a showpiece for Saskatchewan and 



1668 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2000 

has a lot of potential. 
 
But before I get there, under that same revenue heading that I 
was referring to earlier, on page 23, statement of operations and 
retained earnings, there’s another entry called investment 
contribution, and that would be from the General Revenue Fund 
as well — 2.664 million. 
 
Now that is a very significant increase from 1998, which was 
1.072 — well over a $6 million increase between the last figure 
of operating contributions and investment contributions. 
 
What particularly is the investment contribution? Is that for 
investing or is that for a potential for bad loans that you were 
referring to earlier? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, it’s the latter. That is 
exclusively the loan loss provision. So it’s the money that is 
there in case there is a problem with any of the loans, and it’s 
increased dramatically just because the activity has increased 
dramatically. Because you’re lending, you’re investing more; 
you have to have a higher loan loss provision but it’s 
exclusively loan loss provision. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess my 
comment is that that is a very significant increase in a demand 
on the taxpayers’ ability to contribute money to this SOCO — 
almost a 45 per cent increase in 1999 over 1998, if you look at 
both the operating contribution and investment contribution. 
 
When I look at the provision of $2.6 million from taxpayers’ 
money set aside for potentially a bad loan or bad investment, 
that makes me kind of nervous that there isn’t the confidence 
there that I would have hoped to see from some of these 
investments. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Again to the member opposite, as I 
explained before it’s an accounting requirement that is 25 per 
cent no matter what you’re investing in. It’s got nothing to do 
with the particular companies you’re investing in. 
Automatically from an accounting point of view, 25 per cent 
has to be set aside as a loan loss provision, same as a bank 
would have to. So that if there was a problem and there was for 
some reason or other a big sector of the economy that was 
completely wiped out, you wouldn’t be . . . you would be able 
to meet your obligations and the taxpayer wouldn’t be 
vulnerable. 
 
So it’s just an accounting requirement. It’s an automatic 25 per 
cent. And all that really says is there’s more activity in the 
province. And I think if you look at Saskatchewan, one of the 
things that you’re going to find is that rather than needing less 
of this, what I would call venture capital type money, we 
probably more of it than we do have. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I would agree 
that if our future is to look bright we need sources of venture 
capital. Where we get that from I guess will be determined. 
 
I want to go back to your comment about the research part, 
because I think it is like such a showpiece for the province. I 

see that in 1999 under the financial position under assets, it’s 
showing $105.528 million and I assume that includes the assets 
both in Saskatoon, Innovation Place, and also the new park here 
in Regina as well. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I agree with the member opposite. 
And I actually would not mind reading into the record, 
comments made by the Bank of Montreal, Vice-Chair, and he’s 
talking about Innovation Place in Saskatoon. And he said: 
 

He singled out the work being done in Saskatoon by the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. “With 100 
companies involved in advanced research and 
development, Innovation Place in Saskatoon is an 
outstanding example to other Canadian cities on the 
potential of joint ventures by the public and private 
sectors,” . . . “And the list of value-adding capabilities in 
Saskatchewan goes on and on, from extensive expertise in 
information technology and telecommunications to the 
pure science promise of the Canadian Light Source 
Synchrotron.” 
 

And then he goes on to explain what a Synchrotron does. 
 

Mr. Chisholm emphasized that making the transition from 
capabilities to commercialization is where many e-business 
clusters falter. As a member of the Canadian e-Business 
Opportunities Roundtable, created to establish Canada as a 
globally recognized e-business leader . . . (he) was one of 
30 Canadian business executives who delivered a report 
. . . to this year’s federal budget: 

 
I agree with the member opposite. Innovation Place is 
something that put Saskatchewan on the map well beyond our 
province and well beyond our country. I can go to other parts of 
the world, as I say, Canada’s ambassador . . . I mean China’s 
ambassador to Canada was off to Innovation Place because they 
want to learn from what we’re doing there as well. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
just following up on the research park, what percentage of 
occupancy do we have here in the research park in Regina? And 
what do we have in Saskatoon? 
 
I know it’s a very costly infrastructure that we have here. And I 
want to just for the record, make sure that we have a record of 
what the occupancy is here in Regina particularly. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the Regina research 
park isn’t constructed yet. It’s still a concept. It’s still a series of 
proposed buildings, but it’s not constructed. 
 
In Saskatoon the occupancy rate at Innovation Place would be 
well over 90 per cent. In fact our main problem at Innovation 
Place is keeping up with demand. It’s a park that is actually 
difficult to get into. 
 
We only build buildings at Innovation Place when we have the 
tenants already lined up. We think of ourselves as the landlord. 
When the tenants are lined up ready to pay the rent we’ll build 
the building or the research facility. But we always have 
waiting lists for them to get in. And the occupancy, as I say, is 
well over 90 per cent. 



June 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1669 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for 
the correction on the Regina facility. But following with your 
question, you would only move ahead with the Regina park if 
there was tenants already lined up. I guess that was the direction 
that I was going with my question. 
 
Is in fact . . . is there a list of people interested in coming into 
that park, and is some of this money that we’ve . . . you’ve set 
aside in 1999 going to go toward that, or is that just for the 
existing park? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the answer to both 
questions is yes and yes. Part of the money is for the Regina 
research park. It’s being constructed because we have tenants 
who are ready to move into it when it’s constructed. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. 
Chairman, I have . . . still talking about SOCO — just because 
it’s such a varied and broad investment portfolio that you have 
— and I’m looking at a report actually from just this past April 
which I think is very similar to the one that you have published 
very recently. 
 
I guess I’m wondering what the parameters are for selecting a 
particular investment or investment opportunity as you might 
say it and I might see it rather. And I guess the one that I would 
look to . . . I’m very familiar from my own constituency, the 
loan, the $2 million loan that was placed with Ballater 
exploration in the Lloydminster area. At least Ballater 
exploration from Calgary, with the loan going to a 
Saskatchewan field. 
 
What was the . . . why was Ballater selected? There’s a lot of oil 
companies in that area. They operate side by side with other 
companies — Husky, and we can name others — I wondered 
why Ballater was given the honour of the $2 million loan in this 
case. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I would say, first of all, they came 
to us; they applied. It’s from the point of view of return on 
investment, we can’t give you all the details, but it’s a very 
attractive investment. 
 
Our policy is that we go after companies in strategic sectors of 
the economy, agriculture, agri-food, oil, gas, forestry are the 
key sectors of our economy that we focus on as growth sectors 
or the preferred sectors. 
 
Our criteria is much tighter than Alberta’s. Alberta’s will fund 
mom-and-pop operations which are very controversial. And 
very disliked by the business community because we don’t like 
investing in your company when you’re competing with the 
person sitting right next to you. That is we don’t want to 
compete, we don’t want to compete with the private sector. 
 
So we try to avoid that. We try to focus on companies that are 
in key sectors that are not . . . they cannot be in retail. They 
cannot be at the retail level and we cannot be saying that we’re 
supporting your corner store relative to somebody else’s. That’s 
a bad place for government to be and it causes a lot of criticism 
of agencies that do that. 
 
So our Opportunities Corporation — which is actually the same 

name as the Alberta one — is much more constrained in terms 
of not competing, getting in there and favouring one kind of a 
sector company over another. 
 
So this company came to us with a proposal. It’s attractive in 
terms of return on investment, but it would be open to any one 
of those companies, and we would welcome those others 
coming with a similar proposal because it is a strategic sector 
and it is one that is a growth sector in the economy. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. It’s an area 
that I think has not been investigated before. I think this is one 
of the original investments into the petroleum field if I 
remember some of the discussion and press statements earlier. 
 
And I know there are some people and younger people that 
venture, young entrepreneurs wanting to get established in the 
oil industry with the innovation of one kind or another. They 
were turned down or the conditions were so stringent that they 
just actually backed away and in fact moved to Alberta to use 
some of the facilities there. And now we don’t have them as 
either a resident or a company. 
 
So I’m wondering, is the focus of those kind of investments, is 
it for investment return for SOCO or is it for venture capital to 
try to help these young people or early initiatives get off the 
ground and established? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Certainly the goal, as I mentioned at 
the beginning, is to take small- and medium-sized enterprises 
that often don’t have a track record and get them off the ground. 
So that’s the main goal. But it has to be commercially viable, 
because if it isn’t commercially viable, really what you’re doing 
is giving away taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
And I think SOCO has a good track record in taking on 
ventures that are new and don’t have a track record. The 
Temple Gardens spa in Moose Jaw which I gather is now 
planning yet another expansion, and it’s one of the most 
successful tourism facilities in the whole province. We backed 
that when a lot of conventional lenders would have said, a spa? 
We don’t think it’s . . . we don’t think a spa is going to fly in 
Moose Jaw. 
 
So we have no problem backing something that is new without 
a track record. But what it has to show is commercial viability, 
that it’s going to return the money back to the taxpayer. And so 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well this wasn’t from SOCO. 
We’re talking about SOCO. And I think if you look at the track 
record, it’s a very good track record. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like to 
look at an example of Clifton Associates. I see that they’re 
developing engineering software programs used for 
environmental management. That’s a million dollar loan. Can 
you give me some assurance that that software which shouldn’t 
cost a million dollars, that particular loan is going to what the 
description has stated? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — If you look at . . . that’s a company 
in Innovation Place as well. If you look at what they’re doing, 
it’s leading edge. It’s leading edge in terms of the engineering 
component, the information technology component. And that 



1670 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2000 

particular loan was to assist them in exporting. Because we 
have to get more and more of our companies into the export 
markets. 
 
And you may remember that there was a ceremony just about a 
month ago with Clifton Associates landing a major contract in 
Latin America — in Central America actually — with the 
Government of Colombia to provide environmental equipment, 
environmental technology to Colombia. 
 
So their goal was to expand into export markets. And certainly 
if you look at the recent announcement of that major contract 
just a few weeks ago, they’re succeeding in that goal. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Yes, Madam Minister, I remember the press 
release. So against an engineering company that develops the 
software and then looking at future export markets, I assume 
then that the million dollars is fully covered by some kind of 
security that SOCO is comfortable with. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — All loans have to be covered by 
some kind of collateral security that we feel comfortable with, 
that in the end of the day we will be in a secure position. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thanks, Madam Minister, I hope that’s 
right. The other question that I have about one of these other 
ones . . . and I’m selecting some of the ones that I’ve kind of 
red flagged because I thought they were interesting. One of 
course is Shuttle Craft International that has been in the papers 
recently — that’s a listing here at least — a 1.25 . . . a $1.250 
million loan, and from the press releases that I’ve seen, that’s a 
loan that might in fact be in jeopardy if Shuttle Craft 
International is . . . has ceased operation. 
 
Or maybe you can tell me what the status of Shuttle Craft 
International is and how SOCO’s involvement continues there, 
please? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — On that one we’re still looking at 
restructuring and refinancing options for Shuttle Craft, and now 
you know that you’re getting into difficult territory in terms of 
talking of the status of a loan that is under current 
consideration. 
 
I would say about Shuttle Craft is it was one of the big winners 
of the ABEX (Achievement in Business Excellence) awards, 
the Saskatchewan business excellence awards. So it was a 
company that was regarded as a star, and obviously it ran into 
some difficulties. 
 
We’re still working on that one, and that’s about all I can say 
right now. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
then is it the . . . can I make an assumption that some of these 
loans might turn into equity positions in the restructuring? Not 
trying to get into the details, but is that a common practice? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — All I can really say to the member 
opposite is what we’ll do is we’ll do the due diligence. The goal 
is always to ensure that a company carries on and survives, but 

we have to look at the whole scenario. 
 
And we’re in a state now where that’s about all I can say about 
that particular investment. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister, and Mr. 
Chairman. It might only be only one and a quarter million, but 
it’s taxpayers’ money, and I think that disclosure sooner or later 
is really warranted. 
 
The other one that I’ve red flagged . . . And I’m not sure, Mr. 
Chairman, how much time we have to proceed here. Is there 
another estimates to be followed? 
 
Then I have another question if I could then, Mr. Chair, and it 
would be regarding Unitec International Controls Corp., 
Burnaby, British Columbia. I see that they have on your record 
a $2 million loan. And they’re talking about manufacturing 
systems sensory control and data acquisition systems and 
environmental monitoring equipment. 
 
Can you tell me, because it was Burnaby, BC (British 
Columbia), can you tell me a bit about that particular portfolio 
and where is it going? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Okay. The company’s actually 
located in Regina and they actually supply SaskEnergy with 
equipment. 
 
I would say before we wrap this up, when you have that many 
loans and investments out there, I mean you know what the 
odds are. There are going to be some . . . and this isn’t one by 
the way. It’s got nothing to do with the last company I’m 
talking about. 
 
There are going to be some that — the member from Kindersley 
should get his files straight; we’re talking about SOCO — there 
are going to be some that are going to be problematic. But 
they’re all done on a commercial basis, and you’d find exactly 
the same thing in a credit union or a bank, as you know. And if 
you look at the track record here, it’s actually quite a good track 
record because you’d find over 90 per cent have panned out the 
way they should so far. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I move that we now rise and report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 
 

The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote on page 100, I’ll 
invite the hon. minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
introduce to you today Wynne Young who is the Chair of the 
Public Service Commission; and seated on my right behind 
Wynne is Clare Isman. Clare is executive director of human 
resource development division of the Public Service 
Commission. Beside Clare and behind me, directly behind me, 
is Sharon Roulston, director, administrative and information 
services division; and diagonal to myself and just beside Sharon 
is Rick McKillop, who is executive director of employee 
relations for the Public Service Commission. 



June 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1671 

The Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Subvote (PS01) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I’d like to thank 
the minister and her officials for being here. 
 
My first question from the estimates is regarding the 
administration. It is my understanding that role of the 
administration is to provide excellent . . . or executive direction, 
leadership, and a variety of other tasks. 
 
Madam Minister, the costs for the administration is estimated to 
increase by over $100,000. Could you please indicate the need for 
such a drastic increase? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Yes, I thank the member opposite for 
the question. As you would know, the Public Service 
Commission is responsible for the collective agreements and 
salary adjustments for the public service. And so you would see 
an increase of $57,000 for the Public Service Commission itself 
for pay equity and negotiated salary increases. 
 
You would see a $65,000 increase for a return of a one-time 
information technology funding that is being reduced later, 
which will help for reductions in later years. And as you would 
know, the Public Service moved to a new location, which also 
on the savings side produced a savings of $352,000 per year. 
 
So we do have some increases there related to salaries and to 
some information technology advancements. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
Madam Minister, in going through the most recent Public 
Accounts book that I have, I noticed an unusual expenditure of 
$35,652 to Peoples Jewellers. Could you explain why we had 
that expenditure? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Yes, I would say to the member 
opposite, it was a pleasure for me this year to attend the 
long-service recognition awards nights. And as you would 
know, we baby boomers are making quite an impression all 
through the land; this is not any different within the public 
service. And so we honoured 400 individuals this year for 
service of 25 years, 30, and 35 years. They could choose a 
watch for their long service commitment — or rings — and the 
money is allocated through the Public Service Commission, but 
each department then is responsible to pay for the costs of the 
long service recipients. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
Madam Minister, also in this same Public Accounts, there is 
$130,000 spent on travel expenses. Could you please provide 
some indication as to why there would be that travel expense 
within the Public Service Commission? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I thank the member opposite for the 
question. It’s been outlined to me that we do participate with 
other provinces in many conferences to talk about 
compensation and human resources issues, and training and 
staffing and the updated information on how we would relate to 
the public service. 
 

And many items are related to the Chair of the Public Service 
Commission who would travel to such things as The 
Conference Board of Canada public sector executives network 
meeting, which was held in Winnipeg; the civil service 
commissioners’ annual conference and meeting, which was 
held in St. John’s, Newfoundland; the IPAC (Institute of Public 
Administration of Canada) round table that occurred in January 
in Edmonton, Alberta; public services sector executives 
network that was held in Toronto. 
 
So those would all be related to one or perhaps a few 
individuals depending on their area of expertise to be able to 
take advantage of national conferences and training 
opportunities, and to learn what’s the newest and updated 
material in the area of training opportunities, executive/human 
resource decisions that are taken and those kinds of things. 
Thank you. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
Madam Minister, have you had an increase in the number of 
public servants in your department, and if so — from last fiscal 
year to this one — and if so, in what departments have we 
increased public servants on that are hired? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Just for clarification if the member 
opposite wouldn’t mind, are you speaking about the Public 
Service itself and the administration of the Public Service? Or 
you’re saying government-wide, what would be the difference 
in the number of people employed from last year to this year? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Government-wide. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — This year’s budget overall would show 
a net increase of about 68 full-time equivalents, and that’s over 
the budget the year before. On a department by department 
basis, you would see four departments have no change at all, six 
see a reduction in their staffing complement, and eight receive 
an increase. 
 
Now largely this budget has been called almost a status quo 
budget, and as I said, with some increasing slightly and some 
having a reduction. The four department areas that have the 
majority of the increases, one would be no surprise to you and 
your members opposite, would be Agriculture and Food with 60 
full-time equivalent increase. Many of them transferred in from 
the Agricultural Credit Corporation and they weren’t previously 
recorded in our estimates. So that was the net influx there. 
 
The next one again wouldn’t be a surprise. My colleague, the 
Minister of Highways, mentioned that we have additional 
workers who are trying to get much needed work done on our 
highways. And they would see a full-time equivalent increase 
of about 45. 
 
And in Social Services. We’ve had that discussion as well in the 
Assembly and the workload of people who are involved in 
people issues and protections of people and children in our 
communities, you would see 40 for regional services to address 
the workload issue. So you would see overall in Social Services 
about a 47 full-time equivalent increase. 
 



1672 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2000 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
Madam Minister, I’m going to a specific issue that I’m sure has 
been brought to your attention because I’ve received a letter, 
and there is also a letter to the editor in the newspaper. It’s a 
letter from a Miss Wendy Stone, indicated that those who 
graduated with a Bachelor of Human Justice degree from the 
University of Regina will no longer be recognized as an 
equivalent to the Bachelor of Social Work and a Bachelor of 
Indian Social Work, and this is apparently a new policy for your 
department. 
 
Could you please indicate the need for the change of your 
policy, particularly since there are so many of our youth that are 
leaving the province due to a lack of job opportunities, and 
particularly since we need so many workers in the social work 
area? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — We have tried in as many areas as 
possible, to move to a competencies model. And each 
department gives us information on what they would see would 
be equivalencies when we’re talking about jobs and 
qualifications and degree qualifications. 
 
And so Social Services has been the one that gives us that 
information. And we try to provide, then, what would be the 
core competencies that would be needed for those positions and 
what would be equivalent educational requirements in those 
areas. They are the ones dealing with Ms. Stone and her 
complaint in that area. 
 
That’s all I can say on behalf of the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
Madam Minister, in the Public Service Commission’s annual 
report it states that under the collective bargaining that it will be 
phased in and the final pay equity adjustments will occur on 
April of the year 2001. Madam Minister, my question is what 
will be the cost of this pay equity adjustment to your 
department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. The member opposite will 
know that equal pay for work of equal value can be done in a 
number of ways. We’ve chosen to do that in a structural way 
and to look at the job evaluations. To provide that we don’t see 
sort of a bump up at a one time and then see the lag come into 
the future, we’ve tried to do that job by job in a structural way. 
 
And when that is completely implemented through executive 
government as of April 1, 2001, the total cost for the new job 
classifications and the equal pay for work of equal value will be 
$16.1 million. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
Madam Minister, with all the panic centred on the Y2K (Year 
2000) bug that we had last year and all the computer systems 
were required to go through major upgrades in order to become 
Y2K compliant, could you tell me what the cost was for your 
department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. In the package of standard 
answers that we gave to you, there’s a reference in one of those 
pages to the computer hardware, software, and training 

supplies. And on that page, it does say for toner cartridges, 
$890,000, and those are capital costs over the piece. 
 
But you would be asking more about some of the computer 
maintenance upgrading and so on. And it’s hard to differentiate 
because we did have a major purchasing, as I mentioned earlier 
when you asked the question earlier about where the 
expenditures were. One of them is for an updating of a system 
that would see better tracking of the people who are employed 
and their salaries, and to be able to keep track of all of that on a 
more updated basis. 
 
And the overall cost was about $1.6 million last year. Some of 
that would be Y2K related, but some of it would just be 
ongoing maintenance or upgrading and some of the purchasing 
to complete the system that we’ve gone into at present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
Madam Minister, could you please indicate if you have any major 
capital projects that are currently underway or that you’re planning 
for the near future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — To the member opposite, we’ve outlined 
to you where we’ve just looked at the new computer system and 
the maintenance, the Y2K commitments to those. We have new 
premises that are now in our second year. They are saving us some 
dollars. And there are no planned additional capital expenditures 
in that way. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chair. 
Madam Minister, for a final question, I’d like to give you the 
opportunity just to give a brief outline of the mandate of your 
department. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Well we do have a strategic plan, so 
I’ll answer the question in two ways. First to tell you basically 
all provinces have a Public Service Commission. We’re 
certainly not alone in that and it has been in place for a good 
number of years everywhere and is responsible for the 
independence of the hiring practices, to look at a professional 
civil service, so the training and development of our employees. 
 
And as the legislated mandate outlines, the Public Service 
Commission is the independent agency responsible for leading 
effective human resource management in government and 
representing the public interest in the administration of The 
Public Service Act. 
 
And to that end, we try to . . . as our vision outline, that a 
preferred employer that attracts and retains people to the public 
service, and people who are talented with commitment and 
innovation and have innovative ideas that can contribute to the 
upgrading and the professionalism of the civil service. 
 
It’s acknowledged for its effective human resource management 
policies and practices. And in that I put, respect for its attitudes, 
knowledge, and skills, and so responsible for . . . for example in 
equity initiatives, the education and the training that people 
would need to make sure we’re carrying forward with our goal 
in the equity issues. 
 
We have ongoing training and development of our managers 
and people who are in the field with respect to human resources 



June 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1673 

and the hiring practices. And people who are dedicated to 
providing quality, affordable services that Saskatchewan 
citizens need, and representative of the diversity of the 
province. 
 
So with that we, in all of our areas, try to maintain the integrity 
and the independence and the professionalism of the civil 
service that would give government its knowledge base, 
recommendations, and information in all of the critical areas of 
service to the public today. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and I thank all 
your officials for being here. I have no further questions. 
 
Subvote (PS01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (PS02), (PS06), (PS04), (PS03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 33 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would just 
like to thank the member opposite for the work and the interest 
in the vision and the goals of the public service for the province 
of Saskatchewan, and thank the officials for their support, and 
the timely advancing of the information to me to be able to 
respond to you. 
 
And with that I would move that the committee rise, report 
progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 


