





























































Hansard: May 09, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1087 
 May 9, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens throughout our 
province. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
grandfather vehicles that were tax paid on budget day 
therefore providing these dealers the opportunity to pass on 
the savings to their customers. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Humboldt, from Rosthern and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 
to present a petition today — a petition to reduce fuel tax by 10 
cents a litre. And the prayer says: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from such communities as 
Biggar in my riding, as well as Swift Current, Moose Jaw, 
Regina, and a number of other communities. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition today as well for 
cellular coverage for Watson and area. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to ensure reliable cellular service to Watson 
and area by installing a cellular tower at the town of 
Watson. 
 

And the people that have signed this petition are from Watson 
and Englefeld and Quill Lake. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the high price of fuel. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 

community of Melfort, Carrot River, and Watson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition in 
regards to high price of fuel and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And these . . . the signatures are from the town of Unity and 
area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition to reduce the fuel tax by 10 cents a litre and the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by residents of 
Wymark, Kincaid, Stewart Valley and the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I too present a petition on 
behalf of citizens against municipal reserve account 
confiscation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this petition is signed from citizens in the Nipawin area. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I also rise to read a petition to reduce fuel tax 
by 10 cents a litre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good people of Melfort, Tisdale, and St. Brieux. 
Thank you. 



1088 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2000 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition to reduce fuel 
tax by 10 cents a litre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal, provincial 
governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes by 10 cents 
a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Petitioners are from Davidson, Yorkton, Indian Head, and even 
one signature from the city of Boston. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to stop municipal reserve account 
confiscation. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is from the good citizens of Prince 
Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province petitioning the 
Assembly on the following matters: 
 

To ensure reliable cellular service to Watson and area; 
 
To provide funding for the Swift Current Regional 
Hospital; 
 
To reduce fuel taxes; 
 
To provide regular, reliable cellular service in 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, a gentleman by the name of Mr. Allan Stevens, 
who’s seated behind the bar on the government side. 
 
And Mr. Stevens is a retired farmer and he also is the former 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from Rosetown 
constituency, as I think it was then called, from 1960 to 1964. 
And members will recall that that period of time was the time 
when the government of the day under Mr. Douglas and Mr. 
Lloyd introduced medicare to Saskatchewan, which ultimately 

was introduced to the rest of Canada. 
 
So obviously Mr. Stevens would have been in a very busy and a 
very active government. And we have a great debt to pay to 
people who have served in the legislature before. 
 
And I know that all members will want to join with me in 
welcoming Mr. Stevens back to the Legislative Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to be able to 
introduce to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly 
today, 25 students from St. Jerome School which is in the 
constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. They’re sitting in 
the west gallery. And they are accompanied by their teacher, 
Mr. Domm, and chaperone, Mrs. Britton. 
 
We’d like you to join in welcoming them to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Moose Jaw Women of Distinction 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saturday the member 
from Moose Jaw North and I were privileged to attend the 
fourth annual Moose Jaw Women of Distinction awards 
sponsored by the YM/YWCA (Young Men’s/Young Women’s 
Christian Association) and the Moose Jaw Transition House. 
 
As the member from Regina stated last week of their awards 
dinner here, all the nominees are noteworthy women in our city 
and all deserve the recognition they receive. 
 
In addition, proceeds from the luncheon go towards supporting 
the work of the Moose Jaw Transition House and the YWCA 
and programs that support underprivileged children. And that in 
itself made the evening worthwhile. 
 
The eventual award winners were: Dorothy Boschuk for 
leadership in the workplace; Doreen Mowers as community 
mentor; Lena Hartman for science and technology, Yvette 
Moore for community enhancement; and Lisa Franks in the 
youth category. 
 
My congratulations to each of the outstanding Moose Jaw 
Women of Distinction and to each of the nominees. It’s a 
pleasure to represent a city which provides such outstanding 
community leadership. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Nursing Week 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to rise in 
this Assembly today to ask all hon. members to join with me in 
saluting a very dedicated and hard-working group of 
individuals. 
 
This week is National Nursing Awareness Week in Canada. 



May 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1089 

This year’s theme is “Challenge Yourself: Get Active.” Over 
the next few days, provinces and territories across Canada will 
be honouring those that have dedicated themselves to ensuring 
our society’s better health, well-being, and quality of life. 
 
Nowhere more than here in Saskatchewan could we be more 
grateful for this group of men and women who are committed to 
providing the utmost in professional health care. Citizens of 
Saskatchewan place a great deal of trust in those who work in 
the nursing profession. We value the services that they provide 
and advice that they give. 
 
Nurses know that healthy living contributes to disease 
prevention and overall better health. As a society we owe it to 
ourselves to listen to them and to take an active role. Yet even 
as we talk about the unique and very special contributions that 
nurses make, we cannot help but remember that they are a 
group under siege. 
 
Over the years we have watched their numbers decrease while 
their workloads have increased. Repeated attempts to call 
attention to this critical situation have gone unaddressed. Yet 
through it all they have maintained their compassion, 
competency, and professionalism. 
 
We owe much to them, for they along with other health care 
professionals that work on the front lines every day have held 
this crippled health care system together. So now during 
national awareness week, let’s take an extra moment to thank 
them for all that they have done for us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to take 
this opportunity to recognize the celebration of National 
Nursing Week which runs from May 8 to May 14. 
 
Nursing encompasses the professions of registered nurses, 
registered psychiatric nurses, and licensed practical nurses. 
Each of these professions plays an essential and valued role in 
our health system, and I know all members will join with me in 
saluting their achievements. 
 
Nurses are the heart and soul of the health system. Nursing 
combines clinical skill with the more elusive qualities of caring 
and human kindness. Nurses are there for us in the newborn 
nursery. They have the skill and understanding to help us stay 
well and improve our health, and are managers who make our 
health system function. And nurses are there to support our 
needs with compassion at the end of life. 
 
Nurses today are taking on new roles, gaining advanced skills, 
and increasing their value to the health system in many settings. 
They are in short supply across the globe, Mr. Speaker. And in 
Saskatchewan we are working with nursing organizations and 
health districts to attract and retain the nurses we need today 
and into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens, I want to 
thank each and every individual RN (registered nurse), RPN 
(registered practical nurse), and LPN (licensed practical nurse) 
for their effort, skill, and dedication. We value the contribution 
you make, and join you in celebrating this special week. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Carrot River Health Care Facility 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in 
this Assembly to declare a victory for the small town of Carrot 
River, located in the heart of the Carrot River Valley 
constituency. 
 
Now as we all know, this government has done nothing to elicit 
trust from the rural areas of this province — a fact that was well 
documented by the numbers in last fall’s election. In fact, rural 
residents have been treated very shabbily by this government; a 
government that says one thing and then does another. 
 
Take the case of the Carrot River Hospital. After repeatedly 
saying that it would not close the Carrot River Hospital just two 
short months ago, that’s exactly what this government did. The 
hospital became a wellness centre — a term we’re all sadly very 
familiar with — and only one acute care facility was left in the 
entire North-East Health District, one of the largest in the 
province. 
 
As was to be expected, there was frustration, outrage, and a 
backlash. People in the area were not prepared to accept this. 
Only after the Saskatchewan Party repeatedly hammered the 
government on this issue and residents of the town and 
surrounding communities rallied together, did the coalition 
government finally wake up. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve very pleased to announce that after a 
long and hard-fought battle, the residents of Carrot River and 
surrounding areas will be seeing an integrated 24-hour health 
care facility, something the community itself suggested about 
20 years ago. 
 
This 2.3 million, three-phase project will restore many of  . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Spring Seeding 
 
Mr. Harper: — As we know, spring has arrived in 
Saskatchewan, which means farmers are out in their fields 
seeding. This spring they are hard at work as they always do. 
The result — seeding is right on track. 
 
This spring the Canada-Saskatchewan Adjustment Program is 
helping producers put the crop in the ground. The goal of this 
program is to get the money into producers’ hands as quickly as 
possible. Well, Mr. Speaker, that goal has been met. 
 
Of the applications mailed out on April 13, Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance has received from farmers 37,700 applicants, of 
which they have processed 35,275. Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance has paid out approximately 93 per cent of the 
applicants they have received. To date, just over $147 million 
has been paid out to Saskatchewan farmers to help them put in 
this spring’s seeding. 
 
The 147 million is in addition to the $40 million in tax cuts to 



1090 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2000 

farm fuel and education land tax, 300 million available under 
the AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) programs, 
400 million available under the spring credit advance program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to this encouraging news, I am pleased 
to announce that 18 per cent of the estimated 33 million acres 
have been planted. This compares to 15 per cent planted at this 
time last year and the five-year average of 14 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly the programs such as the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Adjustment Program and other programs 
that I have mentioned are working very well for Saskatchewan 
farmers. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Increases in Taxes 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, each 
week we hear from the members opposite talk about the 
so-called good news happening in Saskatchewan. Every day we 
hear those in the back benches across the way who never get 
any media attention and never will. Mr. Speaker, Sask Party 
staff actually get more headlines than many members opposite. 
 
We hear chattering from those across the way who will never 
get a cabinet post. Maybe they should ask the Hon. Education 
minister or the Hon. Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs why 
that is. Well they put on their rose-coloured glasses and tell 
about life in their own little fantasy world. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
on this side we deal with reality and facts. 
 
And today the residents of my home constituency of 
Saskatchewan Rivers are dealing with reality, Mr. Speaker. The 
fact is, is that thanks to this NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government taxes are going up. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Rivers school division is facing enormous hikes at the local 
level which will unfortunately have to be passed on to their 
residents. Thanks to this NDP government, the Saskatchewan 
Rivers school division is faced with a 10 per cent hike in 
utilities — 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s also a hike in fuel which they use to run the school 
buses; that’s up 30 per cent. All of this, thanks to the NDP tax 
machine, Mr. Speaker. If this is what the NDP call reality, 
maybe we should pay a visit to their fantasy world and get fitted 
for some of those rose-coloured glasses. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Women of Distinction Awards in Prince Albert 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, last night I was privileged to 
attend the annual YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 
Banquet in Prince Albert. Today I’d like to congratulate all five 
outstanding award recipients and I would like to briefly mention 
their names and the area in which they’ve been honoured. 
 
Pauline Steele in the category of health, sports and fitness; 
Gabrielle Favreau for her contributions to the arts and culture; 
Randy Arnot was recognized in the category of business and 
professional; Ruth Griffiths was an honouree in the community 

enhancement category; and Farrah Mateen the recipient of the 
2000 SaskPower/Roberta Bondar Scholarship. 
 
I would like to take a little time to recognize the young woman 
of distinction, Farrah Mateen. Farrah is studying to become a 
neurosurgeon and has just finished her first year as a 
biochemistry major at the University of Saskatchewan. One of 
her goals is to help maintain universal medicare in the province 
in which it originated. Another is to see parity in earnings 
between men and women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she is a young person to watch. She is interested 
in politics — don’t be surprised if you hear her name in the 
future. 
 
I want to congratulate all of this year’s Women of Distinction 
recipients and wish them all of the best and continued success 
in their endeavours. And I also congratulate all the sponsors and 
volunteers who helped make this event a successful one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Construction Industry Union Legislation 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today my 
question is again for the Minister of Labour. 
 
Madam Minister, over the past few weeks we have received 
dozens of letters from construction workers, and these letters 
are opposed to your forced unionization policy. These letters all 
tell different stories, but they all have the same message — we 
deserve the right to choose. 
 
Madam Minister, thousands of construction workers in this 
province have chosen not to join a union. They’ve made the 
choice to work in an open shop, but that’s because that’s what’s 
best for them and their families. 
 
Madam Minister, why would you take that right away from 
them? Why would you force them to join a union against their 
will? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
mentioned several times that since 1944 it’s been a fundamental 
right for people to choose to become members of a union and to 
choose who represents them. 
 
Now in the instance of the construction industry, no one would 
become unionized who wasn’t part of a certification, a 
legitimate certification order, and no one would lose their job as 
a result of this. When their contract expired, they would then 
have a choice whether to be part of a union hiring hall or 
whether to be part of an independent contractor. But I just say 
that this is misinformation that the opposition is presenting. 
And I encourage people to be assured this is not the case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we hope that the minister 



May 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1091 

would care about workers in Saskatchewan. Madam Minister, 
some of these workers have chosen to work at an open shop for 
the past 10, even 20 years. These workers simply do not want to 
join a union. They’ve made a good living because of their skill 
in their chosen profession, not because of their seniority on a 
union hiring list. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you force them into a union against their will, 
they will go to the bottom rung of the hiring list — even though 
they may have 20 years of experience. One worker writes: 
 

If you go ahead with this, you will drive myself and other 
tradesmen from this province. 

 
Madam Minister, why are you taking these workers’ rights 
away? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member’s 
question shows how little he understands about the construction 
industry, because in fact seniority does not operate within the 
construction industry in the same format as within a constant 
workplace. 
 
When an employee is done a contract, they go back onto the list 
because they’re available for employment . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. I would ask all hon. 
members not to debate across the floor while a member is on 
their feet. Please, I ask for your co-operation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — So I repeat, Mr. Speaker, there is no 
such thing as the conventional view of seniority that the 
member opposite . . . And we might have some good 
discussions on competitiveness, job growth, economic 
development, jobs up by 10,000 — those are the kinds of things 
we should be discussing not a misinformation campaign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
all right for the minister to take shots at me in the Legislative 
Assembly, but she’s taking shots at the workers — the workers 
she’s supposed to be representing. 
 
Madam Minister, one of these workers writes: 
 

I do not deny there is a place for unions. However, living 
in a free country it is my right to choose. 
 

Another worker writes: 
 

Why am I not given the chance to vote if I want to be 
unionized? Do I live in a communist country? 
 

Another worker writes: 
 

I have planned for my family’s future and the changes 
being forced upon us will affect my family for the worst. 
 

Another worker writes: 
 

I feel your government is pushing this piece of legislation 
only to please a few prominent trade unions with little or 
no concern for the majority of workers who make their 
living through construction. 

 
Madam Minister, you are only listening to your union leader 
friends — not to the people who are working. You are living to 
the . . . listening to the people who are giving you money. Why 
aren’t you listening to construction workers who oppose forced 
unionization? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, the long-standing 
democratic arrangement that exists within the economic and 
social contract in this society exists in every province in 
Canada. And I find it particularly odd that the member opposite 
would choose to portray this as a unique and unusual 
circumstance. This is fundamental to the laws right across 
Canada. There’s nothing unusual about it and people always get 
to indicate their support before a union is certified in the 
workplace. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From the dozens 
of letters I have here, Madam Minister, this is one of the most 
touching responses. A 36-year-old worker writes: 
 

I am a 36-year-old, semi-skilled construction worker. To 
my shame, I have spent the greater part of my life drinking 
and doing drugs and living on welfare. Two years ago I 
quit all that and began to get my life back in order. It was 
not easy trying to find work. I worked odd jobs here and 
there, but nothing with a future. 
 
Finally, a big construction company hired me. This is what 
I’ve been looking for, an opportunity to get ahead, to 
become a valuable worker to have around. I need you to 
know that I am against our construction industry becoming 
unionized because I will lose my new-found job and 
opportunities that I am just now receiving from my 
company. 

 
Madam Minister, your legislation may cost this worker his job. 
Why are you taking away his right to choose? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, if I could speak through 
this Assembly, I’d like to commend the worker mentioned for 
the work he’s done in getting his life together. That’s very 
commendable. 
 
And I’d like to say that there is nothing in this legislation that 
will negatively impact that worker. That worker will be able to 
work to the end of any existing contract. They can become part 
of the hall, their name goes in rotation, and we have in some 
industries in the province, particularly the carpenters’ union, the 
ability for employers to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, please. The question was 
allowed to be asked in silence, and I would ask that all hon. 
members would allow the answer to be given in silence as well. 
I ask you please to co-operate. 



1092 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2000 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’d like to correct two pieces of 
misinformation. One is there is no standing union contract in 
the province that requires the use of union subcontractors. 
Certainly union . . . non-union subcontractors are . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, it will not. 
 
And the other thing is that there is no employee that will lose 
their job as a result of this if they wish to continue working in 
the construction sector because there is plenty of work for 
everyone. And the fact of the matter is they are not negatively 
impacted by this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Economic Conditions 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 
government isn’t listening to workers and they’re not listening 
to employers either. A recent survey by the North Saskatoon 
Business Association shows that one in 10 of their members is 
thinking about leaving this province. One in 10, Mr. Speaker, 
are thinking about leaving this province, and almost one in four 
are thinking about moving part of their operation out of the 
province. 
 
That’s a scathing indictment, Mr. Speaker, of this government’s 
economic policies. To the Minister of Economic Development: 
Madam Minister, in light of the high number of Saskatoon 
businesses looking to leave this province, will you admit that 
your economic policies are a failure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as usual the opposition 
is being fairly selective when it comes to the presentation of 
information. Because I tell the House that although the survey 
indicates 10 per cent of the businesses have considered leaving 
the province — considered, Mr. Speaker — five times as many 
say they’re considering expanding in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And things in the province are going well, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s why this year, in April, there are 
10,000 more people working in Saskatchewan today than there 
were a year ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And part of the reason for that, Mr. 
Speaker, is that we’re going to cut income taxes in this province 
by $430 million. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? They voted 
against the income tax cut. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have lots 
of different items to select from with this government in power, 
and every one that we choose, Mr. Speaker, is indeed accurate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government opposite keeps bragging about its 
budget. And what does the executive director of the NSBA 
(North Saskatoon Business Association) say? She says that if 

they had done their survey after the budget, it would have been 
even worse. She says businesses are upset about the NDP 
raising taxes. She says they are reacting negatively to the PST 
(provincial sales tax). She says they don’t like being tax 
collectors for this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Minister, how many more businesses have to leave this 
province before you understand the message? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again the opposition is 
being very selective in presentation of information. Because 
what the executive director of the NSBA actually said, Mr. 
Speaker, was that . . . and I’m quoting from The StarPhoenix. 
She said: 
 

There is no question it will benefit (that is the budget) all 
people in this province. It should broaden our economic 
base. . . Definitely, Mr. Cline has made some very positive 
steps and some very difficult choices and the government 
is to be highly commended. 
 

That’s what she said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And the result is, Mr. Speaker, that we 
have Doug Elliott from Sask Trends Monitor and the Royal 
Bank saying that we’re going to have impressive growth in the 
province this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had impressive growth in jobs the last year, 
and you know what we’re going to do this year, Mr. Speaker? 
We’re going to improve on that and do even better. And unlike 
the opposition, we and the people of the province are optimistic 
about the future of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
after this government being in power, any growth is great in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NSB also asked why businesses were thinking 
of leaving. The number one answer for leaving was high taxes. 
The number two reason for leaving is the NDP labour laws. 
And so what does this government, the NDP, do? They raise 
taxes and then they are going to bring in even worse labour 
laws. 
 
Madam Minister, Mr. Minister, when are you going to take the 
blinders off? When are you going to start listening to the people 
who create the jobs in this province? How many more 
businesses have to leave before you get the message that taxes 
are too high and the labour laws are too restrictive? 
 
Mr. Minister, will you cancel your $160 million PST tax grab 
and will you drop your plans to force unionization on the 
workers of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1093 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, unlike the opposition we do 
listen to people in the province. Now I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
the number one message we got from the business community 
preparing this year’s budget was that income taxes had to be 
cut. And you know what we did in the budget, Mr. Speaker? 
We presented a plan that represents the largest income tax cut in 
the province’s history, Mr. Speaker, and they voted against it. 
 
We said in the budget that income taxes should be cut by $430 
million over three years, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to eliminate 
the flat tax; we’re going to eliminate the debt-reduction surtax; 
we’re going to eliminate the high-income surtax. And we’re 
going to do it over the opposition of the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, but that’s what the people of the province want us to 
do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Living Sky Health District 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Health. Madam Minister, SUN (Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses) president, Rosalee Longmoore, recently stated 
in the Regina Leader-Post that the NDP has threatened to 
remove any health board that makes public its 2000 plans. 
According to the nurses’ union you threatened to replace the 
offending boards with a public administrator. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, it appears that you have a problem in 
the Living Sky Health District. According to one of the 
district’s board members, your plan for Living Sky is to close 
the Lanigan Hospital, then you plan to close the Watrous 
Hospital, then you’re going to wrap it up by closing the 
Wynyard Hospital. 
 
Madam Minister, is this the NDP’s plan for Living Sky Health 
District — to close down the hospitals in Watrous, Lanigan, and 
Wynyard? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As part of the 
process for developing health plans in the province, a number of 
districts have been consulting with their publics. The health 
plans are to be to the Department of Health by mid-May. At that 
time the Department of Health will review all of the health 
plans within a broader provincial context. And once the health 
plans are reviewed, we’ll determine whether or not those health 
plans will go forward and the health districts will have an 
opportunity to consult with their public on the health plans that 
are approved by the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question again for the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, 
Bernie Bishop is an elected member of the Living Sky Health 
District. This week, Mr. Bishop wrote a letter to the editor in 
the Lanigan Advisor. 
 
Mr. Bishop says the 2000-2001 district health plan was 
submitted to your office last week and he says a secret 
committee drafted the plan without input from a number of 

board members. Mr. Bishop says he cannot in good faith 
support your plan to close three hospitals in the Living Sky 
Health District. 
 
Why is the district’s plan concocted in secret? Why were some 
board members excluded from the process? And will you be 
approving the closure of hospitals in Lanigan, Watrous, and 
Wynyard as proposed by this secret deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I have had an opportunity 
to review the letter that Bernie Bishop wrote to the Lanigan 
Advisor and I just want to quote: 
 

In fairness to Lou Karpinski (and Lou is a member of the 
Department of Health), she advised me that the plan would 
have to be reviewed along with others from the 
surrounding health districts before any decision was made 
by the government and that I may be creating unnecessary 
panic if I went public. 
 

I want to assure the members, I want to assure the House that 
we have not seen all of the health plans from across the 
province. And once we have an opportunity to review the health 
plans of the health districts, health districts will have an 
opportunity to go forward and talk to the public. 
 
No decisions have been finalized, Mr. Speaker. In fact I have 
only seen one health plan that’s been presented to my 
department, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
continue to quote from the same letter. And he goes on to say: 
 

When I was elected by the people of Lanigan to the board, 
I made it very clear that I would do everything in my 
power to maintain the level of services offered, and if 
anything, improve them. 
 
Regrettably I have been unable to accomplish this (in the 
Living Sky) if the Living Sky (District) Health Plan . . . is 
adopted. Phase 1: . . . convert Nokomis Health Centre to 
the Puffer Special Care Home; close Lanigan Hospital; 
restructure Home Care . . . Phase 2: . . . convert Watrous 
Hospital to a Health Centre. Phase 3: . . . convert Wynyard 
Hospital to a Health Care Centre. 

 
Madam Minister, clearly this is in, in the plans for this health 
district. Will you approve the closure of these three hospitals if 
they’re submitted to your department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the member 
can’t hear. Obviously he can’t hear. I have made it very clear in 
this Assembly that we have not received all of the health plans 
from districts across the province, and that no decisions have 
been finalized. 
 
But I will say to the member this: that in this last budget we 
increased health spending by some $113 million, which 
represented a 5.1 per cent increase. This crowd over here would 



1094 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2000 

have frozen health spending in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are opposed to two-tier health care, Bill 11 in 
Alberta. This crowd in their campaign material said that they 
supported private surgical clinics. I want to assure the people of 
the province that our government is supportive of publicly 
funded, publicly administered health care, and this crowd over 
here is not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question again 
for the minister. Madam Minister, you’re threatening the 
elected health boards to a muzzle order if they talk about these 
budgets before your department stamps the approval on them. 
You’re not allowing them to discuss fully and completely with 
the people they represent, what they’re going to recommend 
until you’ve put your imprimatur on it. 
 
Madam Minister, will you lift the gag order on these health 
districts? Will you let them discuss their plans with the 
communities they serve? Or are you going to keep them under a 
cone of silence until you stamp an approval on the closures of 
hospitals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very strange —the 
member’s question and comments. Mr. Speaker, I have an ad 
from the Regina Leader-Post dated April 8, 2000 — Regina 
health district public input forum, public participation, public 
input. So, Mr. Speaker, this is not secret as the member says. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyday in this legislature these people get up, 
and they make false statements about everything, Mr. Speaker. 
They are simply misleading the public. They don’t have their 
facts straight. And, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly the people of this 
province are getting sick and tired listening to the negativity of 
the members opposite when they simply don’t seem to know 
what they’re talking about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the only thing the people of 
this province are getting sick and tired of is your wellness plan 
and the closure of facilities, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, you get out an article from The Leader-Post 
saying people are invited for their input. What I’m talking about 
are decisions that are being made . . . And district health boards 
are trying to listen to the people, but the decisions you’re 
forcing them to make are under a muzzle order and they cannot 
say anything until you give your stamp of approval. 
 
Will you allow them to tell people in their jurisdiction what 
you’re forcing them to do before you give your stamp of 
approval on it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, health districts across the 
province are talking to their public about what their plans may 
be for the next three years, Mr. Speaker. This is not unusual — 

this is not unusual. 
 
Health district plans will be presented to the province by May 
15, 2000. Once the Department of Health has had an 
opportunity to look at all of the health plans within a broader 
provincial context, those health plans that are approved initially 
will go back to the districts and they can consult with their 
public. And the public will have an opportunity to have huge 
input, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want again make the point, every day we heard it 
from the Leader of the Opposition in terms of labour law, we 
heard it on the member’s statement in terms of Carrot River; we 
hear today, every day, these people get up in the House and 
make statements that are not true, they’re not based on fact. 
And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, people are getting sick of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Funding of Film Festival 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Justice. Yesterday the minister stood in the House and reported 
that 11 films scheduled to be shown during the Queer City Film 
Festival had been sent to the BC (British Columbia) Film 
Classification Board for review. That was a very good move 
and we thank you for it. 
 
It is now being reported in the media that the government 
officials are saying that there are two of these movies which 
will not be shown. One of those was called S&M in the Hood 
which is reportedly being held up by Canada Customs. The 
second film called Hose which I referred to in the House last 
week . . . has supposedly been pulled from the festival. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you confirm the status of these movies and 
why they have been removed? And have you been notified of 
the classification status of the other movies that you sent to the 
board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the member is right about the two movies in question. 
One was pulled, in fact, by the director as I understand it, and 
the other, as she says, is being held by, I think, the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) in Calgary. So those two 
movies will not be shown, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My understanding is from the film classification board here in 
Saskatchewan that the other nine movies, Mr. Speaker, are 
being exempted from classification; therefore they will be 
shown at the festival this weekend. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
complies with the commitment I made yesterday that no movies 
would be shown at the festival unless they were within the 
bounds of the classification system and the Criminal Code. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I will be putting forward a 
motion this afternoon calling for the removal of government 
funding for this festival because of the pornographic screenings 
of this festival. 
 
I hope the Premier will allow the members on the government 



May 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1095 

side of the House to vote freely on this motion so they can 
represent their constituents. Because voting against our motion, 
Mr. Speaker, the members on the government side will be 
supporting the screening of the film, Lez B. Friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this film is reviewed, and I quote: 
 

As how a female biker gang torments straight people by 
kidnapping their children, selling them to lesbian couples, 
and making them into sex slaves. 
 

This is one of the films that you have exempted. This is a 
20-minute-long video scheduled to be shown this Thursday 
during the film festival. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you not call this pornography? I ask the 
government members if this is how they support spending 
taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you allow your members to vote freely on my 
motion this afternoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I should make one point 
absolutely clear. I think the member understands this fully, and 
I’m not quite sure why she persists in saying that the 
classification of films is my responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the classification of films, Mr. Speaker, is 
conducted by an independent board at arm’s length from the 
government, their criteria clearly set out in the legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And my understanding, Mr. Speaker, is that the board will 
dictate that these movies will be shown to people only over the 
age of 18. And, Mr. Speaker, there will be clear indications that 
checks on age will be required. And also, Mr. Speaker, that 
there will be a big sign outside informing those who might 
come what those movies are about. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let’s be quite clear — this is an independent 
board which makes these decisions, not the Department of 
Justice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But I should 
clarify, I do not rise for a ministerial statement. I rise to request 
leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll recognize the Hon. Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs on orders of the day for guest 
introduction. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 220 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 2000 (Votes of Confidence) 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of Bill 220, The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 2000. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 35  The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 35, The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 36  The Motor Carrier 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 36, The 
Motor Carrier Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 37  The Public Libraries 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 37, The 
Public Libraries Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Electronic Information 
and Documents Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill 38, The Electronic Information and Documents Act, 2000 
be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member for North Battleford has 
asked leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 
members will be aware, the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations) is meeting this week at the Regina Inn in a 
governance conference. And we have with us this afternoon two 
members who are in the city for that conference. They are Chief 
Delbert Britton from Peter Chapman Band, and Oliver Constant 
from the James Smith Cree Nation. And I would ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming them to the Assembly 
this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — I would like to ask leave for the introduction of 



1096 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2000 

guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of the House, I’d like to 
introduce a constituent of mine in your west gallery, Mr. Brett 
Quiring. Brett is a university student from Regina here and he is 
. . . I believe he is done university just in the last few days here 
and I think he’s enjoying some time off. 
 
Mr. Quiring is also my constituency association president and 
doing a wonderful job there. So I’d ask all the members to offer 
Brett a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 
Ruling on a Point of Order 

 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, last Friday the Minister of 
Education raised a point of order regarding the line of 
questioning that the Leader of Opposition had been pursuing. 
At the time I indicated I would reserve any decision until I had 
an opportunity to review the Hansard for oral question period, 
and I’m now prepared to rule on the matter. 
 
The rules of parliamentary debate place certain restrictions on 
what questions may appropriately be asked of ministers. This is 
not a new concern. I remind members of a statement I made on 
April 17 on this exact matter, and I will quote from that 
statement: 
 

. . . there have been repeated instances when questions 
have been addressed to the Leader of the Liberal Party in 
regards to that party’s political platform. Beauchesne’s, 6th 
Edition, in paragraph 409(6) states that “A question must 
be within the administrative competence of the 
Government”; and (then) further . . . 
 

Order. Order. 
 

and further in paragraph 410(17), that “Ministers may not 
be questioned with respect to (any) party responsibilities.” 
 
Comments regarding the political responsibilities of a 
Minister, or the Leader of the Opposition, or of (any other) 
member are properly matters of debate. As such, they may 
be raised during debate on relevant topics in bills, 
estimates and motions. During Question Period however, 
only questions touching upon the collective administrative 
responsibility of the Government or the current individual 
responsibilities of a Minister are properly (the) subject of 
oral questions. 

 
Friday’s question period illustrates the importance of how a 
question is phrased. For example, the first two questions asked 
by the Leader of the Opposition were out of order on the 
grounds that they questioned a minister on the administrative 
responsibilities of his political party organization. The third 
question, addressed to the Minister of Justice, questioning the 
application of The Election Act was in order. However, some of 

the preamble was unparliamentary. 
 
The difficulty that I, as Speaker, must resolve is determining 
whether a question, while it is being posed, is in order. In some 
instances, it is very clear where a member is heading and that 
the subject matter is inappropriate. In other instances, it is only 
after a member has completed asking his or her question that 
one is able to determine its procedural acceptability. In many 
instances, by the time the appropriateness of the question is 
determined, the minister has indicated his or her desire to 
respond. 
 
The questions become difficult to assess in situations where 
there has been legislation before the Assembly that governs 
political parties. Where such business is being considered, the 
practice of this Assembly is to allow questions on these 
particular policy issues. And I refer members to question period 
in June of 1996 where questions frequently dealt with issues 
related to political donations and to The Elections Act that was 
then before the Assembly. I note that this is not the case today. 
 
Our own precedents repeatedly illustrate that ministers are 
responsible only for their portfolios. The rationale outlined by 
the Speaker on December 5, 1991, when ruling on the 
admissibility of a written question applies to the case at hand. 
That statement provided as follows: 
 

“. . . Beauchesne’s, 6th Edition, paragraph 428(dd) states 
as follows: (and I quote) 

 
“A question . . . must not: 
 
(dd) deal with matters not officially connected with 
Government or Parliament, or which are of a private 
nature.” 
 
The political contributions and political activities of 
individual citizens is not a matter of administrative 
responsibility of any minister of the Assembly. 
 
If such matters have a relation to public affairs, then that is 
subject for debate and not appropriate in the form of a 
written question. Members cannot ask ministers to report 
on matters for which they have no official responsibility. 
 

Hon. members, further rulings on this point include those of 
December 10, 1991; July 17, 1992; June 6, 1996; April 20 and 
May 4, 1998; March 24 and 30, and April 26 of 1999. 
 
The main principle underlying the Chair’s application of 
parliamentary procedure is fairness. In this instant it would be 
patently unfair to require the members of only one side of the 
House to answer for the administration of their political parties. 
This is why question period is restricted to questions for which 
the government has administrative responsibility as the 
executive government. 
 
I therefore ask all hon. members to carefully consider how they 
choose to word their questions and their preambles to ensure 
that they address an issue of public policy or the minister’s 
administrative responsibility. An inappropriately worded 
preamble could prompt me as Speaker to intervene even though 
the question or answer to follow is procedurally acceptable. 



May 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1097 

And I just want to conclude with a comment on decorum. 
Earlier this year I made a lengthy statement on the practices that 
are traditionally followed in parliamentary institutions to ensure 
that the decorum in the debate and in the Chamber are befitting 
this Assembly. Unfortunately members on both sides continue 
to engage in disrespectful behaviour towards one another. In 
particular there have been several instances where aspersions 
have been cast upon the chair occupant or where the motives of 
hon. members have been impugned. 
 
I appreciate that the level of decorum has much, much 
improved since Friday. 
 
Members should realize that they are accountable for their 
actions and for their words, regardless of whether the member 
has been recognized to speak. It is the members who are 
expected to maintain a respectable level of decorum, and it is 
the responsibility of the Speaker to assist all members in 
maintaining this level. 
 
I ask all hon. members to seriously consider the loss of public 
respect for this Assembly that can result from their actions. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And with leave of the 
Assembly, I’d like to table the answers for questions 132 
through 135. 
 
The Speaker: — Written questions 132 to 135 inclusive have 
been tabled. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 5 — Government Funding of Programs 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
motion that I will propose when I am finished speaking today 
is: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial government to 
cancel all the funding it provides that is being used to 
promote pornography and that this funding be redirected to 
programs to combat the child sex trade. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this question actually boils down to a simple 
sentence. What are taxpayers’ dollars . . . why are taxpayers’ 
dollars going to promote pornography? 
 
We all understand and appreciate freedom of speech and 
freedom of expression. The film industry in our province has 
done a fantastic job. It creates jobs and it promotes economic 
development, but there has to be some limit to what this 
government will support. Pornography is degrading and 
demeaning, and studies have shown that it promotes violence 
towards women and children. 
 
How can SaskTel justify increasing their phone rates every year 
when they have money to fund pornography in this province? 
And then we have to ask even further — what is this 
government’s priorities anyway? This government claims that 

Saskatchewan is the best place in the world to live. Well how 
do they justify supporting an industry that promotes abuse 
against our children? 
 
We have seen in a BC case when the BC Supreme Court ruled 
in favour of a man possessed . . . having possession of child 
pornography and what a dangerous precedent this can set. 
 
Our office received a call from a young man not long ago who 
did most of the film footage from the RCMP musical ride. This 
is a historical event that celebrates the rich history of 
Saskatchewan. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? He could not 
receive any funding to complete his work. 
 
And yet at the same time, we’ve got funding for pornography. 
We are supporting pornography in this province. This doesn’t 
make any sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Everyone in this Assembly is very well aware of the growing 
child sex trade right here in our own province. A legislative 
committee has been struck to attempt to deal with this problem. 
But how hypocritical is this when this very government that is 
supporting this committee is also supporting the very industry 
that acts as a catalyst towards the abuse of children? Violence 
and abuse of any kind should not and cannot be tolerated in our 
society, and it is abhorrent that the members opposite are using 
taxpayers’ dollars to support this industry. 
 
The money that is being spent by this government on this 
industry would be better served to perhaps set up a safe house 
or help get those that are in the industry off the streets and into 
another life. 
 
(1430) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I quote the Minister of Culture 
and Housing last week when he said: this is not about 
pornography. 
 
He’s defending his government’s participation in pornography. 
He’s trying to say that it is not pornography, when the people, 
when the people that are actually putting on the festival call it 
hard-core pornography. They’re saying this is very hard-core, 
people do everything in it. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
actresses actually said, please don’t use my real name — my 
mother would kill me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what do we say about a government who’s saying 
it’s okay to spend money on this but let’s not use the actresses 
name because it was something that even a family member 
could not be supportive of. For almost two weeks the 
Saskatchewan Party has been questioning this government on 
their priorities. 
 
The names of the movies that are being . . . in this film festival 
are so graphic that they cannot be read into this Assembly’s 
minutes. Since the members opposite are so proud of their 
involvement perhaps they could read the names of these movies 
to their children. 
 
We’ve been receiving calls from constituents who are 



1098 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2000 

represented by the members opposite and they’re asking us why 
their MLAs are promoting pornography. These taxpayers assure 
us that come the next election the members opposite will not be 
around to promote anything. 
 
It is also noteworthy to mention that during this very important 
debate the NDP government made a desperate attempt to label 
the Saskatchewan Party as homophobic and promoting 
censorship. This has never been raised on this side of the House 
and the problem that we have is with the pornographic section 
of this festival. 
 
More recent events have shown that these movies may actually 
be illegal as shown . . . as of section 7 of The Film and Video 
Classification regulations. Actually, Mr. Minister, we have to 
wonder if this government is now hiding behind the BC 
regulations film board as well. We have movies that are held up 
at the border because they can’t come into the province. We’ve 
got them actually pulled from the festival, and yet we still have 
this government saying, it’s okay; we’re sure it’s fine — 
they’ve been exempted. 
 
Times have really changed, Mr. Speaker. It was not long ago 
that a person had to go out of their way to find hard-core 
pornography. But for the people of Saskatchewan all they have 
to do is go down the street to their local library and they can 
find it. 
 
There are parents all over Saskatchewan that are concerned that 
their children can access pornography way too readily 
especially since the advent of the Internet. It’s not very 
comforting for parents to know that, when they are trying to 
deter their children from watching this kind of demeaning 
material, that the government is actually spending money 
promoting it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly is 
debating the question whether government funding should be 
used to promote pornography. Mr. Speaker, there is no grey 
area here. There is no mixed messages at all. Mr. Speaker, there 
is not two sides to this story. There is no way to water down this 
issue. The question is simple: do you as government members 
believe taxpayers’ dollars should be used to promote and in 
some cases celebrate pornography. 
 
I’d like the members opposite to tell me that their constituents 
are proud of their decision to spend hard-earned taxpayers’ 
dollars on pornography. And tell me that truthfully. Have the 
majority of your constituents phoned you and said, way to go, 
member from Regina Qu’Appelle or member from Greystone, 
just continue to use my taxpayers’ dollars that way. I’m really 
proud of you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week the previous . . . last year, the previous 
Speaker came out to my constituency and made a statement that 
I’ll always remember. He said that democracy means the 
minority shall have their say, and the majority will have their 
way. Well, Mr. Speaker, I know what the majority of my 
constituents are saying. And I believe I know what the majority 
of the constituents from the members opposite are saying as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, constituents often tell us they vote not just for the 

party, but for the candidate. They want to know that their MLAs 
have the values and the ideals and priorities in life that the 
constituents can relate to. So yesterday and today in the House I 
asked the Premier and each of his caucus members if they were 
going to be allowed to vote their conscience on this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe an issue like this has to be an issue of 
conscience because that is the backbone of government. What 
government really is, is individual members with their voices 
combined to decide what is right or wrong. 
 
To each of you as government MLAs, can you say in your heart 
that supporting the promotion of pornography is right? Can you 
explain to your spouse and to your children and your own 
conscience that this is the right direction for any government to 
take, that this is going to enhance democracy, and that it’ll 
enhance the life of the ordinary taxpayer in Saskatchewan — 
ordinary people like you and I, members? Can you stand 
proudly in this House and say: yes I made a difference today; 
future generations will benefit from what I did today in the 
House? 
 
Saskatchewan is fighting for its rightful place in Canada and in 
the world. We as legislators are sending a message every time 
we vote on an issue in this House. We’re sending a message 
about the kind of people we are. Is this really the message we 
want to send out across Saskatchewan, across Canada, and 
across the world? That we will use our taxpayers’ dollars to 
promote pornography in Saskatchewan? Is this part of the 
foundation of the province that we are building here? That we 
can spend hard-earned taxpayers’ dollars on the most 
demeaning and degrading act known to man — sexual 
exploitation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not talking about sexual preference. I’m 
talking about pornography — gay or straight. Pornography is 
not a victimless crime. The society you and I as members of the 
legislature are shaping takes into account all of our actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite cannot in good conscience 
say, I’m not going to . . . that you’re going to not promote 
pornography and justify by saying just one small part of what 
this government is doing. Everything that you’re doing is 
building this government. Everything that you say is an 
indication of what your government stands for or doesn’t stand 
for. You cannot hide behind this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it tells our children . . . we are telling our children 
here in the House by our votes and by our actions what is right 
and wrong. And government has a responsibility to put those 
form to words. The fundamental beliefs in right and wrong is 
what shapes our justice system, and our justice system is what 
defines us as people. 
 
This is a huge issue, my friends. You cannot hide behind a 
Crown corporation or a board. You will be the one standing in 
the House today saying yea or nay. And you will have to live 
with yourself and the decision that you have made. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move this motion: 
 

That this Assembly urge the provincial government to 
cancel all of the funding it provides that is being used to 



May 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1099 

promote pornography, and this funding be redirected to 
programs to combat the child sex trade in this province. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to second the motion put forward by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to my colleagues in this Assembly it’s a great pleasure to 
introduce a gentleman in the east gallery. Mr. Speaker, he is Mr. 
Ernest Heapy, and he is the general manager for the South West 
Centre for Entrepreneurial Development located in Swift 
Current. 
 
The centre, Mr. Speaker, is doing some pioneering work in 
terms of extending entrepreneurial training to everyone, but 
especially to youth and to high school students. And Mr. Heapy 
himself has done great work and spoke at many functions about 
the efforts of the Swift Current centre. I had the pleasure of 
serving on that board of the centre, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a very 
worthwhile project that we wish much success to. 
 
So I’d just ask all hon. members to join with me in welcoming 
Mr. Heapy to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 5 — Government Funding of Programs 
(continued) 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker it is my 
pleasure to second the motion put forward by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there’s a person in this entire 
province or this entire country that would promote this sort of 
pornographic material at a time historically when we are trying 
so very desperately to save our children in this country. 
 
Everyone in this country understands and knows that there’s a 
heightened awareness now that many, many women and 
children have suffered from sexual exploitation in many forms 
and that it is very damaging to all in our country. It is damaging 
and it is a horrendous sort of activity going on here. Damaging 
in a way that our province and our country cannot go further 
ahead because we have damaged people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to just put forward some facts about 
pornography and how very damaging it is and the violence 
related to pornography. Child molesters often use pornography 
to seduce their prey, to lower the inhibitions of the victim, and 

to serve as an instruction manual. 
 
Of 36 serial sex murderers interviewed by the FBI (Federal 
Bureau of Investigation) in 1985, 81 per cent admitted using 
pornography. Eighty-seven per cent of girl-child molesters and 
77 per cent of boy-child molesters studied, admitted to regular 
use of hard core pornography. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there certainly was a statement from one of 
the promoters of the Queer Festival that this was hard core 
pornography going on there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we see those kind of statistics, how much 
does it take us yet to get it through our heads on how damaging 
this is, how destructive these kind of initiatives are in a world, 
in a world where we are trying to become citizens that are more 
interested in human dignity than we are in profiting. 
 
We are obviously in a sick society. And we obviously have a 
long way to go before we can heighten our awareness of civility 
and heighten our honour and our respect for women and 
children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have with me some excerpts written by children. 
Children who are witnessing to the damage that pornography 
has caused in their life, witnessing to sexual exploitation as a 
result of pornographic incidents that have added to their demise 
and their illness. 
 
And it is very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that in this world 
nowadays we have children that are trying to teach us just how 
very, very sick some of the adults are. Children who have gone 
through horrendous, horrendous sort of instances of abuse, 
sexual abuse, physical abuse, all kinds of abuse, and that have 
come through it somehow alive, that are now teaching us. And 
for goodness’ sake if we won’t listen to those of us who care 
about a civil and a decent society, maybe we should at least 
listen to our children. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the things I’m going to read here are not 
very pleasant. And I don’t do this for any other reason but to 
give voice to the children who are so against pornography. 
 
One eight-year-old witness, or rather not eight years old now, 
but when he was eight years old he wrote: 
 

When I was eight my father made me look at pictures that 
showed girls doing sexual things to men in books. I went 
along with him not knowing any better. He continued to 
rape me and use me for four years while using these books. 
 
Now at 16, I have found that I have a serious STD that has 
no cure. I have been with no one but my father. What will I 
tell my husband some day? I may die from this disease. 
Pornography has ruined my life. 
 

(1445) 
 
And another witness, Mr. Speaker, states: 
 

I am 13 years old. You could say that I am average 
teenager except for one fact. I am a victim of pornography. 
When I was very small my real dad sexually abused me 



1100 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2000 

while he was watching a pornographic video. I lost my 
innocence to my real dad when he chose to use me for his 
own self-fulfilling needs. 
 
The things he did to me happened while he was watching 
pornography. What did I do to deserve this? I go through 
times of depression, confusion, anorexia, and guilt. My 
mom says that it was not my fault, but still I wonder. 
Wasn’t I good enough or perfect enough? 
 
I am finding that there are many others like me. While 
people say there is no harm to pornography, I say they are 
wrong. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, just recently some of the 
members of this Assembly as well as others in Saskatchewan 
travelled to Edmonton to talk about and to discuss, through a 
conference, healing and healing methods for victims of sexual 
exploitation and prostitution. 
 
At that conference, Mr. Speaker, it was clear through one of the 
presentations, a pornography through the Internet and 
pornography through videos — pornography in any way it’s 
presented — how there is an absolute co-relation to the sexual 
exploitation of children. Mr. Speaker, there isn’t a person at that 
conference that didn’t agree with that. It is a known fact. 
Intelligent people can assume that; they know that. 
 
So what we have to ask this government is why does it take so 
much time to make a decision on pulling funding from an 
exhibition that is promoting something, especially at the same 
time that we in Saskatchewan who care about this issue so very 
dearly are trying so hard to try to find ways to heal the victims 
of sexual exploitation. 
 
It makes no sense to me that government would not 
immediately pull funding. And it makes no sense to me either 
why the Minister of Justice mentioned today that there are . . . 
some of the films have been exempt, exempt from 
classification. That is a very irresponsible way of dealing with 
this issue to make no decision, but rather to exempt this from 
classification. 
 
I guess the question in the end is, is this going to help our 
children? Is this going to help women who have endured 
virtually hundreds of years of sexual exploitation? I think not. I 
think a good decision — a good decision — and some moral 
fortitude to assist, to help, to honour and uphold women and 
children would be more in order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have one more story that I’m going to be reading 
from a victim of sexual exploitation — a victim who has 
lifelong harm, lifelong damage, who cannot function properly, 
who talks about healing. Healing is the discovery of what’s 
happened to you. Healing means that you come to understand 
what’s happened to you. But, Mr. Speaker, these women are 
debilitated all of their lives simply because they still have 
memories of what has happened to them. 
 

When I was six years old my great uncle started showing 
me pictures of men and women in all kinds of 
pornographic situations. As a child of divorced and busy 
parents, I was so eager for any kind of attention I could get 

— even this kind. My uncle started out teaching me to 
masturbate so I wouldn’t be physically damaged when he 
started to molest me. I only saw him every other week or 
so. But by the time I was seven when we, which means my 
mom, my grandmother, and I, moved in with him I knew 
everything that was in those magazines and how to do 
them. 

 
He started molesting me soon after we moved in, and of 
course he wanted to do everything that those people did. I 
just tried to pretend that I wasn’t there. This knowledge 
damaged me for most of life. 

 
We lived there for a year and I finally told a friend what 
was happening, and she convinced me it wasn’t my fault 
and that I should tell my father. Well my dad got the abuse 
stopped by threatening to go to court with it but then the 
. . . but then finally had to take over my custody because 
my mom didn’t believe me and let my uncle come over to 
the house again. 

 
Through my teenage years I abused alcohol and was very 
promiscuous. My view of myself was very warped. I 
married my husband at 17, and because of this degrading 
view of myself, I continued to abuse alcohol and started a 
long string of affairs. I felt I was nothing more than a 
hooker so I acted like one. 
 
Well to make a long story short, seven years ago I found I 
was pregnant and I didn’t know if it was my husband’s or 
the other man I was seeing at the time. I called my husband 
to ask him what to do. At that time we were only a 
signature away from divorce. This man who has seen me 
cheat and lie to him still didn’t want a divorce. He wanted 
to reconcile and raise the child together as a family. 

 
Well being responsible for someone other than myself, 
which would be my child, woke me up and I was 
determined to be a better parent to my child than mine 
were. 

 
And then she goes on talking about how her husband stood by 
her through her healing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is this whole area of sexual exploitation and 
how it really interferes with the wholesome life development of 
children is something that is of great magnitude and does 
encompass a great number of different events in people’s lives 
that have contributed to it. But surely, everyone knows and 
everyone should be supporting the removal of pornography in 
any form in our province, and certainly in our country. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I implore the members opposite, 
the Premier of the province, and the Minister of Justice to 
withdraw any funding that may be put forward to support 
pornography. And instead I implore the Premier to take that 
very funding and add it to any other funding that might come 
forward; to start with transition houses, with healing initiatives 
that will help the children of our province and the women of our 
province heal from many, many years of sexual exploitation. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1101 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
first of all start out by commending both the member for 
Humboldt and the member for Saskatoon Greystone for the 
work that they are doing to prevent the abuse and exploitation 
of children. 
 
In my former life, Mr. Speaker, when I was, as I often joke, 
gainfully employed, I was a clinical psychologist in Saskatoon 
and I saw many, many victims of childhood sexual abuse; many 
adult men and women who had been abused. 
 
I will say I appreciate the quotes that the member from 
Humboldt has read into the record, but in my clinical 
experience what was often the more triggering factor was the 
abuse of power. And yes, it is true that occasionally these adult 
abusers would use pornography to degrade and to entice their 
child victims into abhorrent activities. But that, Mr. Speaker, it 
seems to me, is a separate issue from the issue that we are 
debating in this House today. 
 
The issue we are debating today is whether or not there should 
be arm’s-length organizations that grant funding to community 
groups to promote discussions about extremely important and 
weighty matters in this society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 6,000 years ago, we had an arts 
community in this part of the world. Evidence can be seen in 
the petroglyphs south of Estevan, in the various shards of 
pottery and arrowheads, and in other artefacts preserved in our 
provincial museums. 
 
Those artists 6,000 years ago, and presumably their storytellers 
and singers, were supported by their community because they 
gave their community both means of expression and memory. 
They reflected the past, they imagined the future, they nudged 
the present — exactly the same as artists today do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today our human occupation on this bit of land we 
call Saskatchewan has expanded and become more diversified 
and perhaps more inclusive. We still have artists and artisans 
who reflect on our identity. They challenge our assumptions, 
they affirm our humanity, and they help us revel in our 
complexity as physical, spiritual, cultural, and sexual beings. 
 
And the community still supports the arts for exactly the same 
reasons. likely, as 6,000 years ago. And as has been the case 
since the beginning of time, we still have with us that segment 
of society, a small group, that believes our resources could be 
better spent elsewhere. 
 
There are those who believed, even on the first day, that we 
have seen all that we need to see, learned all that we need to 
learn, experienced all that anyone could possibly desire. And 
they’re still with us. 
 
Most people work on expanding our horizons, pushing the 
envelope; others put up stop signs. In other words, Mr. Speaker, 
here we go again: same song, different verse; same argument, 
different circumstances. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it gives me no pleasure to speak to this 
resolution because one would have thought that with all the 
very real problems facing this province, this nation, and this 

world that we would have, once and for all, put aside attempts 
to stifle the expressions of others, to find more reasons to divide 
us than to bring us together. 
 
But here we are debating a very complex issue in words of one 
syllable. It gives me no pleasure to point out, for openers, the 
obvious fact that the crusade by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena against a small festival with a minuscule 
budget has given that festival more publicity than it could have 
ever hoped to receive with a mere $500 from SaskTel. 
 
It gives me no pleasure to note that the several million dollars 
spent each year by the Departments of Social Services and 
Justice to combat the child sex trade dwarfs the $5,000 the Arts 
Board granted to the Queer City Film Festival. 
 
The member from Kelvington-Wadena knows that; her friend 
from Humboldt knows that we will stop child prostitution when 
we stop child poverty; and more importantly, when we learn to 
confront honestly and to treat whatever depravity there is in 
human nature which causes adults to prey on children. 
 
I take no pleasure in stating another obvious fact, that the Sask 
Party by printing the names of the supposed offending movies 
on its web site with a warning that children under 18 shouldn’t 
peek is dancing pretty close to encouraging some people to 
break the obscenity laws dealing with children. Having that 
warning up on the screen, Mr. Speaker, is like telling little 
Johnny not to stick the bean up his nose. 
 
And finally, and most importantly, Mr. Speaker, I take no 
pleasure in once again having to defend honourable men and 
women professionals — honourable men and women — who 
give of their time and expertise to serve on boards and 
commissions only to be attacked by narrow-minded partisans 
hiding behind their parliamentary immunity. 
 
So let me say as plainly as I can, Mr. Speaker, this caucus and 
this government and the New Democratic Party fully and firmly 
support arm’s-length funding for the arts and for other 
institutions. We boldly reaffirm our faith in the integrity of the 
board and the staff of the Saskatchewan Arts Board, and we 
support their right to make decisions based on their judgment 
without any interference from either the government or the 
opposition. 
 
(1500) 
 
In passing, Mr. Speaker, we often hear from that side the 
question — what would Tommy Douglas say if? That question 
doesn’t interest me. I don’t see any virtue in playing 
ventriloquist for the deceased. We know what Tommy Douglas 
said and we know what he did. What Tommy Douglas and his 
government did was establish the Arts Board and the principal 
of arm’s-length funding. 
 
He saw the member from Kelvington-Wadena coming down the 
pike 50 years ago. He put a stop to her deciding what we should 
be allowed to discuss. Smart man, Mr. Douglas. He created an 
independent body — the Saskatchewan Arts Board. 
 
I take no pleasure in this debate, Mr. Speaker, but I am more 
than willing to take part in this debate because, quite simply, the 



1102 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2000 

kind of moral imperialism being attempted by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena and her party has to be stopped. She says 
her concern is a concern over pornography and she claims that 
the government is, quote, “promoting pornography.” She is 
wrong. 
 
Her resolution is, firstly, nonsense because neither the 
government nor the Arts Board is supporting anything. The Arts 
Board has given a small grant to facilitate, among other things, 
a discussion on an issue that quite frankly needs to be 
discussed. 
 
Secondly, this is not about pornography. It is about censorship, 
scaremongering, and propaganda, pitting one group in society 
against a minority group in that same society. Censorship, plain 
and simple. Intolerance and hate propaganda at its most basic. 
We’ve been there before, Mr. Speaker, and we should not ever 
come close to that road again. 
 
A Canadian scholar, Stephen Lewis — not the NDP Stephen 
Lewis I hasten to add — said: 
 

A civilized society can never defend to excess the rights of 
its minorities. New generations must be made aware of the 
nightmares of the past and how they connect organically 
with the destructive (influences) impulses (rather) of the 
present. 

 
This attempt by the Saskatchewan Party in Regina, in the year 
2000, is directly connected to the destructive impulses of the 
past century. They weren’t stopped then; they were encouraged, 
and our parents still live with the consequences. 
 
This time though, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to stop this 
manifestation of this same impulse in its tracks. Censorship has 
no place in a civilized society. Propaganda has no place 
anywhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said earlier that we are today engaged . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Members, this is early 
in this debate and I wish to remind all members that you will 
have an opportunity to participate in this debate, but for the 
moment the hon. member from Saskatoon has the floor. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today as I said 
we’re engaged in an eternal debate — as least as old as Cain 
who didn’t like his brother’s creation. So, who’s on the side of 
the Saskatchewan Party? Who’s with them in trying to stifle 
artistic expression? In the words of the old Pete Seeger song, 
“Which side are they on?” 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Thank 
you. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you again. Well I asked rhetorically, 
which side are they on? Well, how about for openers, Mr. 
Speaker, the London of 1601 when the Puritans wanted to shut 
down the queer city cinema of the day because that Shakespeare 
guy was a freak who hung out with thieves and actors, and their 
place of business was a gathering place for prostitutes and 
pickpockets. 
 

They didn’t want a play about some Danish kid who questioned 
the meaning of life and who used some pretty graphic images to 
define his uncertainty. No. They already knew all that needed to 
be known in their flat-earth world, and they didn’t want to be 
troubled by anything beyond their narrow horizons. 
 
Now let’s skip ahead to 19th century Regina. You may have 
seen a piece in the Sunday Sun a while back commenting on an 
article in the 1889 Regina Leader — an article which said 
nudity was okay in Greek and European art of the past, but 
certainly not in 19th century Regina. The intention of the Greek 
and European artists of antiquity was to represent quote, “sheer 
beauty.” But the current Regina artists, the editorial said, were 
merely quote, “exciting desire with impure work.” Old is good, 
new is bad. As the Queen of Hearts in Alice in Wonderland 
said, “Jam today and jam tomorrow, but not jam today.” 
 
And we all know what the Victorians thought about desire, 
didn’t we? That’s why wealthy Victorians were known to have 
huge collections of pornography. A bit of hypocrisy amongst 
our ancestors? Perhaps. 
 
And in our own century and in our own country? Well Margaret 
Lawrence has been censored because she wrote a book which 
has some mildly graphic scenes between her heroine and her 
Metis lover. Novels without this little plot twist have been 
overlooked by the morale watchdogs of society. 
 
And how many of us in our own school days wanted to have a 
peek at Lady Chatterly’s Lover or the Tropic of Cancer just 
because they were banned on this continent but were allowed in 
France where everything is so sophisticated. I finally did get to 
read both those books and frankly, I was bored to death by both 
of them. Their reputation was enhanced far beyond their worth 
as art because some self-appointed arbiter said we needed to be 
protected. Some self-appointed censor decided, in advance, that 
those . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I said, some 
self-appointed arbiter said we needed to be protected from that 
self-appointed arbiter’s definition of pornography. In other 
words, Mr. Speaker, there are always thought police around. 
There are always Mr. and Mrs. Grundys who know better, 
whose knowledge should be everybody’s knowledge, whose 
morality they think is universal, whose tolerance is zero. 
 
The Canadian humourist, Stephen Leacock, said on receiving 
his Ph.D. (Doctor of Philosophy), quote, “Now my head is full 
and I don’t have to add another drop of knowledge for the rest 
of my life.” Well, that to me is the definition of self-righteous 
censorship. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the motion by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena is in good, historical company. And notice, 
by the way, that I didn’t even bother mentioning the countless 
times in history when the Bible — which those very few 
protestors down at the Regina Library yesterday claimed to 
speak for — has been banned. 
 
The motion from the member opposite uses the word 
pornography, without bothering to define the word I might add. 



May 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1103 

And I don’t blame the member, because quite frankly there is 
no generally acceptable definition of the term. Even the 
Criminal Code of Canada uses the word obscene in dealing with 
adults. 
 
Obscenity is defined as: 
 

the undue exploitation of sex, or of sex and any one or 
more of the following subjects, namely, crime, horror, 
cruelty and violence . . . 
 

That’s section 163 of the Criminal Code, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Members know that a great deal of legal ink has been dedicated 
to finding an acceptable definition of the word pornography. 
One very unsatisfactory attempt has been to use the term, 
community standards, and that takes us right back to square 
one. Who is to be given the responsibility for defining and 
upholding this concept, community standards, with respect to 
pornography? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question of what is pornography and what is 
its place, if at all, in society is at the heart of this debate and at 
the heart of the festival panel in discussion — a debate the 
opposition wants to stifle before it even begins. The member 
from Kelvington-Wadena is attempting to lead the public astray 
in her moral outrage. 
 
I would like to quote from the media release, May 8, 2000, of 
the Queer City Cinema. They state: 
 

Queer City Cinema is not a festival of pornography. Of 
over thirty hours of screenings spanning a six-day period, 
no more than three hours are devoted to erotica and to a 
debate on pornography. These three hours of programming 
do not involve a gratuitous showing of sexually explicit 
material, nor are they intended to promote pornography. 
Instead, they offer a rare forum for critical discussion and 
an opportunity for the gay and lesbian community and 
communities at large to view the work of national and 
international artists who have chosen to explore the notion 
of sexuality through their works. All (of) these screenings 
(they say in their media release) are restricted to audience 
members 18 years of age and over and none of the works 
contravene Canada’s Criminal Code. Ultimately, no one 
will view this material unless they choose to. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Queer City Film Festival is about to 
have a debate, a discussion about community and pornography. 
This is an important debate. It is a debate that sensible people 
and sensible governments have been grappling with for some 
time because we all know — and in this instance I will agree 
with the Saskatchewan Party — we all know that pornography 
exists, that some of it poses a problem with our sense of 
community, and that admittedly some of it, in extreme cases, 
threatens us. Admittedly. Actually it’s been said that even just 
the very sound of the word pornography makes it attractive to 
some. 
 
Sensible people and sensible governments have been grappling 
with the issue of pornography for some time. They have tried to 
promote community discussion of it. They have not been trying 
to stifle it. 

I would refer members to the former Mulroney government. 
Now I may be committing heresy by calling it a sensible 
government, but I think that they acted very sensibly in 
receiving in 1985 the Royal Commission on pornography and 
prostitution. 
 
I have more than a passing interest in that Royal Commission, 
Mr. Speaker, because I myself presented a brief to that 
commission, representing the Saskatoon Committee Against 
Pornography. I only point out that bit of bibliographical 
information to remind all members that no one here promotes 
pornography. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — But an awful lot of us want to understand it. 
 
That Royal Commission tried to come up with a workable 
definition for pornography. And they made several suggestions 
for changes to the Criminal Code — changes which I think the 
member from Humboldt would find acceptable. 
 
One suggestion did find its way into the code. A change dealing 
with child pornography. And it says simply — it’s section 163.1 
of the Criminal Code — it says that any depiction of sexuality 
using children under the age of 18 is punishable, by law, up to 
five years in prison. 
 
I agree with that, Mr. Speaker, and members on this side of the 
House agree with that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Now other attempts to define pornography are a 
bit more problematical and point to the incredible complexity of 
the subject we plunged into. 
 
The commission, in its final study, came up with a three-tiered 
definition of pornography, the levels having to do with the 
concept of victimization. Tier one, the commission said, 
involved children under 18 and should be forbidden, as is the 
case. And I totally agree with that. 
 
Tier two of their definition referred to sexual scenes involving 
violence or incest, and should be generally subject to 
prosecution unless an argument could be made for artistic merit. 
Back again to the old community standards argument. 
 
The third tier involves what the commission calls victimless 
pornography, scenes of a blatant sexual nature only. But even 
this very thorough study received some submissions that are 
questionable and need to be debated. That study in 1985 
involved heterosexual pornography. But there was a 
presentation by the Emergency Committee of Gay Cultural 
Workers Against Obscenity of Montreal . I want to just quote 
very briefly about their comments on gay pornography. 
 
They said, quote: “Heterosexual pornography is often said to 
victimize women as a gender group, women depicted as 
submissive and passive receptacles of violence by male 
producers for male consumers.” 



1104 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2000 

They then went on to suggest that, quote . . . This is very 
important, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I hope that members opposite 
will listen because it is the crux of the community debate that 
will occur this Saturday. 
 
They went on to say, quote: “The argument that women as a 
group are victimized by heterosexual pornography has no 
equivalent argument with relation to gay pornography: in this 
sense, gay pornography is (as they said) primarily a ‘victimless, 
cultural phenomena.’” 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have trouble with that position by 
the Gay Cultural Workers of Montreal. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I said, I 
have trouble with that position. Now I don’t know whether 
that’s because I, as a heterosexual woman, have a imprecise and 
incomplete understanding of the experiences of homosexual 
women or of homosexual men, or whether it is because I, as a 
feminist, believe that regardless of the sex of the people that’s 
involved in certain activities, if there is degradation, if there is 
violence, if there is power imbalance, whether or not they are 
the same age or the same sex, that that still is pornographic. 
 
That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a debate that is going to occur this 
Saturday in Regina, Saskatchewan. A debate, Mr. Speaker, that 
I would suggest is long overdue. 
 
In the heterosexual community we have for about 10 or 15 
years been comfortable with debating the notions of 
pornography, of grappling with the definition of it, of trying to 
understand the potentially horrific implications of it. It is time 
that we showed the courtesy and the respect to the homosexual 
community of Saskatchewan, and allowed them the same 
degree of comfort and tolerance to debate that within their own 
community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
By the way, Mr. Speaker, I should point out parenthetically that 
the commission, the Royal Commission, in 1995 suggested that 
there should be a new category of pornography added to the 
Criminal Code. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I wish to remind members that 
there will be an opportunity for hon. members to engage in this 
debate. We’re currently enjoying the third person, third member 
in the debate. Order. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I just wanted to 
go on and talk about the fact that while the Royal Commission 
on pornography and prostitution suggested a three-tier 
definition, something which has not been, unfortunately, 
completely enshrined in law, they also did suggest that there 
should be a new category added to the Criminal Code called 
violence without sex. We haven’t heard too much about that 
one lately, Mr. Speaker. Apparently killing is okay but erotica is 
not. 
 
Now I mentioned the commission and its 800-page report by 
very respected Canadian citizens as evidence of the complexity 
of this one subject in our very complex society. 
 

Now I have a question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why are we 
picking on the arts here? What does the opposition have against 
an industry that contributes more than $400 million a year to the 
Saskatchewan economy and that employs more than 18,000 
highly educated and motivated people. They’ll say they’re not 
against the arts, just this art or that art. If someone wants to 
paint an arrangement of flowers, that’s great. But if someone 
wants to look behind the surface to explore the dark side of 
human nature, well that’s an entirely different matter and that 
should be censored, they say. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we don’t need to get into a long discussion 
of the role and nature of art in our society. But the Speaker 
knows as a policeman, I know in my former role as a 
psychologist, the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
knows in his role as a minister of the cloth, we all know that 
human nature has many, many dark corners. 
 
We know that we can be simultaneously attracted and repelled, 
that extreme and contradictory impulses are never far from the 
surface, that every human being — every human being — is a 
ragtag collection of good and evil with a hand reaching to 
heaven and a foot mired in the dreck. 
 
That complexity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is often the subject of 
the artist to explore and report back on this terribly limited and 
wonderfully capable animal that is ourselves. We don’t always 
like where the artist goes but we should be grateful that 
someone has the courage to look inside human beings and 
inside our society. 
 
Paraphrasing the German playwright Bertolt Brecht, I want to 
emphasize that art is not a mirror to reflect society, rather it is a 
hammer to help shape society. Art and the issues it raises is not 
black and white. Art is not a series of do’s and don’ts. Just like 
religious faith is much more than a list of proscriptions, 
regulations, and condemnations, the same can be said of art. 
And, Mr. Speaker, why do we always pick on the arts when the 
subject of grants comes up? 
 
We receive reports from the Child Advocate. We don’t hear 
calls from the members opposite to immediately do away with 
the Office of the Child Advocate. We receive reports from the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. We don’t immediately hear 
them crying, do away with the independent, arms-length, 
quasi-judicial body called the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
Why is it that we’re always picking on the arts here? 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am personally a distance runner. 
That’s a solitary sport. I’m not a fan of team sports. I don’t even 
know or care, quite frankly, what the difference is between the 
Reds and the Red Sox. But I do acknowledge that others in this 
democracy think differently than I and that their interests should 
be supported. 
 
I personally don’t particularly see why money should go, for 
instance, to hockey organizations. But I fully support their right 
to apply for and receive arm’s-length funding based on the 
knowledge of those involved in sport and recreation. People do 
not want the government telling them what they can listen to, 
what they can watch, what they can read, or what they can view 
in either art or sport. That’s why our political process has 
always supported the integrity of independent action by the 



May 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1105 

Child Advocate, by the Ombudsman, by the Workers’ 
Compensation Board, by the Provincial Auditor, by the Arts 
Board. 
 
The opposition’s tactic on the funding of the Queer City 
Cinema 2000 calls into question the independence of all these 
boards. 
 
The opposition is constantly calling for independent inquiries 
on their cause of the day. But when they get one, they’re not 
happy. Just let me provide them with a little quote from Ralph 
Emerson, the American essayist. He said “. . . consistency is the 
hobgoblin of little minds . . .” I would suggest there’s an 
incredible number of hobgoblins over on the side opposite. 
 
I would like to remind members of what the previous minister 
of Culture, Carol Teichrob said the last time this issue came up 
in the House. She said, quote, “Freedom of expression is the 
cornerstone of democracy.” She was right then in opposing the 
question from the member of Rosthern; we are right today in 
opposing the motion from the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker . . . and, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to 
acknowledge right now before I even launch into the last part of 
my remarks that there will probably be incredible screams of 
outrage, howls and squeals coming from the side opposite, but 
I’m going to say what needs to be said. 
 
I want to be very plain spoken here. Why is the opposition once 
again picking on the gay community. The member from 
Kelvington-Wadena has said repeatedly that she is not 
homophobic, so we can accept her at her word. The member 
from Swift Current got up the other day and accused us of 
calling her a homophobe, which we didn’t. 
 
Is it just a coincidence, Mr. Speaker, that for the third time in 
this legislature the Sask Party, previously the Tory Party, has 
taken a stand against gays and lesbians. It is only a coincidence 
I guess, that those few people marching around the library are 
carrying signs that on the one hand parrot the Sask Party line 
about wasting their tax money, and on the other hand 
condemning the gay lifestyle as immoral and unbiblical. 
 
Just a coincidence that they have studiously and blatantly 
ignored the Arts Board statement that it is funding a festival 
devoted to identity and self-awareness in the gay community, 
and that a discussion of gay erotica takes up only a fraction of 
that festival’s program. The funding is for the entire event, not 
for any specific session or portion of the festival. 
 
The member from Kelvington-Wadena says she is not 
homophobic. She just refuses to allow the gay community a 
sense of community. They’re quite okay, she says, as long as 
they make movies about a boy and his dog and paint pictures 
about floral arrangements. You can be gay but you cannot 
explore the implications of being gay, according to that 
member’s world view. 
 
But she’s not homophobic, nor are her colleagues. It was just a 
coincidence that a few years ago the members from Moosomin 
and Kindersley, the opposition members, led an attack on the 
Human Rights Code because we dared to expand it to allow 
housing and work protection for those with alternate sexual 

preferences. 
 
They weren’t homophobic either. And it wasn’t their fault that 
their supporters outside the legislature were amongst the most 
flagrantly intolerant homophobes in our society. They were all 
for human rights then; they just didn’t want them to be 
enshrined in law. 
 
(1530) 
 
And of course the member from Rosthern is not a homophobe. 
He just didn’t want this same festival to receive any support 
four years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regardless of what they say, the Saskatchewan 
Party is scaremongering. They are pandering to the lowest 
element in society, and they know it. Their issue is not 
pornography; it is about catering to the fear of the different. 
 
As I said earlier, the world has been down this road many, 
many times before. We don’t need people in positions of public 
prominence to take us back down that same tedious blind alley. 
 
And the funny thing, Mr. Speaker, is that they already know 
that they’ve grabbed the wrong side of this issue, that their 
public support, such as it is, is that pitifully small group of 
demonstrators down at the library yesterday. 
 
Both Conrad Black dailies in this province have commented on 
the absurdity of their position. Letters to the editor, like the one 
today from Felipe Diaz, have pointed out that a mature 
discussion on sexuality is quite reasonable in our culture, a fact 
that the Saskatchewan Party is ignoring. 
 
I keep hearing how politically smart they are, Mr. Speaker. 
Boy, are they ever on the wrong side on this one. Who are they 
speaking to? Who is their constituency here? What, in sum, is 
their judgment of the intelligence level of Saskatchewan 
people? Do they really believe that the Saskatchewan voter 
needs the member from Kelvington-Wadena to protect them? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you. You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
am astonished at the naiveté, the political naiveté and the 
presumption from the Saskatchewan Party. At least, thank God, 
they’re not homophobic though. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all refer often to the Canadian mosaic. We 
revel in the fact that our Canadian society is made up of people 
from many cultures, many places. Our diversity makes us 
strong. 
 
As Carl Jung, a noted psychologist, once said, quote, everything 
that irritates us about ourselves . . . about others rather . . . 
“Everything that irritates us about others can lead to an 
understanding of ourselves.” 
 
Our mosaic, I believe is broad. It consists of Jews, Christians, 
Muslims, other beliefs, and non-believers. It consists of married 
couples, singles, and even colonies. It has young and old. It has 
gays and straights. Stifle one part of the mosaic — racial or 
otherwise — and you disrupt the mosaic. 



1106 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2000 

We have come a long way in this society towards eliminating 
racial discrimination — not far enough I will say, but we are at 
least making progress — but we have an awful long way to go 
in the other area: eliminating intolerance based on sexual 
orientation. 
 
And by the way, I would just like to add, parenthetically here, 
the opposition says that this is an issue of misusing taxpayers’ 
dollars. I’ve got news for them. I’ve got news for them, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, gay people are taxpayers as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over 30 businesses in Regina support this festival. 
If you read their program, you will see all the ads in that 
program. Over 30 businesses support this festival — 
restaurants, caterers, art galleries, glaziers, carpenters, and other 
artisans. And yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, SaskTel supports this 
festival. The Arts Board supports this festival. The city of 
Regina supports this festival. The University of Regina supports 
this festival. 
 
They all gave financial support without trying to tell the festival 
how to run its business because they understood, Mr. Speaker, 
that it is time that we had an intelligent, informed, rational, and 
sophisticated discussion about community and pornography 
within the homosexual community. 
 
Only the Saskatchewan Party is opposed. They’re marching 
smartly backwards towards intolerance, oppression, and . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re marching towards 
intolerance, oppression, and ignorance. I’ve got news for them. 
The rest of society, with the prodding and with the challenge 
and encouragement of all artists, is inching ahead towards that 
perfect place we all desire but that we know we will never reach 
— a community of harmony, love, diversity, and creativity. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I therefore move an amendment to the 
motion, seconded by the member for Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley: 
 

That we remove all words after “Assembly” and replace 
them with the following: 
 
reaffirm its support for the principle of arm’s-length 
funding. 
 

The motion then, Mr. Speaker, as amended, will read: 
 

That this Assembly reaffirms its support for the principle 
of arm’s-length funding. 
 

I am proud to move that motion. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — As I recognize the hon. member for 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, I wish to remind all members that 
the debate on the main motion and the amendment will proceed 
concurrently. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to second the amendment by the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast. I believe that her speech, her comments about this 

issue were right on point, were very, very important as we begin 
to try and get a sense of what is or is not appropriate for this 
government to fund. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no one on this side of the House, 
there is no one in this government who is in favour of 
exploitation of children. There is no one in this House, no one 
in this government who is in favour of pornography. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there is no one in this House — on this side of 
the House at least, and I suspect on the other side of the House 
— who is in favour, who is in favour, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 
any kind of pornography which would cause pain, suffering, or 
exploitation within the community. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have laws in this province. Our 
Attorney General, our Minister of Justice, has made very clear 
that those laws will be upheld. Those laws . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The mover 
of this amendment, the member from Saskatoon Southeast, 
spoke very clearly about the history of the arts and how the arts 
have pushed our edges always. Always they have pushed the 
community to think, to move, to understand more completely 
others. They have done that in areas of racism; they have done 
that in areas of sexism; they will continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I support having third party funding 
boards like our Saskatchewan Arts Board. I believe that they are 
doing a good job, and I disagree with the member from 
Kelvington and that motion that would censor our Arts Board 
and that calls for taking away the funding for this particular 
festival. 
 
So what are the issues here in this debate? Is it really about 
funding for this particular Queer City Cinema and the festival 
that is going on? Is that what it’s about? Or is it really, as the 
member speaking before me noted, about issues of sexual 
orientation? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Don’t go there, Mark. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — I can go there, I can speak about that because 
I have spent the last 20 years in ministry dealing with this issue. 
I have dealt, Mr. Speaker, with all kinds of homophobia. I have 
dealt with parents with children who are homosexual, who have 
been trying to the best of their ability to help their children find 
a deep and meaningful life. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, gays and lesbians in this country as in 
many other countries have faced persecution for centuries, 
persecution that has driven them deeply underground. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, driven underground, that society, that 
community has formed in ways that are very often different 
from the community that is non-homosexual. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that community is telling us in this festival 
and telling us in other ways that they are a part of our lives, that 
they are our children, that they are our parents, that they are 
community around us and that they need to be understood, and 
that they are a part of this community and this society. 



May 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1107 

Now one of the things that has to happen as they move from 
that underground society, where they were repressed, where 
they faced all kind of abuse, exploitation, beatings, killings by 
homophobes, these folks are trying to discover and discern what 
it means to be a part of mainstream society. 
 
It is absolutely vital in that process that they discuss what is 
pornography, what is acceptable to the community and what is 
not acceptable to the community? As the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast said . . . 
 
(1545) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’m sorry. Why is the hon. member 
for Rosthern on his feet? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Point of order. The speech, as it’s moving on 
at present, has absolutely nothing to do with either the motion 
or the amended motion as it was put forward. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The hon. member . . . I thank the hon. 
member for Rosthern for raising the point of order which . . . I 
was listening carefully to the short point of order and I want to 
feed it back to make sure that I understood what you said. 
 
The hon. member is stating the point of order that the speech 
we’re hearing is not on the motion or the amendment. I see the 
hon. member nodding and I thank you for that. 
 
Having listened very carefully to the debate thus far, I do not 
find the point of order well taken. I simply point out that we are 
engaged in a wide-ranging speech on the subject of arts, arts 
funding, pornography, and the very matters that the member 
was talking are in, in his method of entering the debate. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I believe that it 
is vital that the gay and lesbian community have opportunity to 
explore these issues. To explore them in a forum where they 
can debate, where they see this picture, they look at it and they 
say, is that what it is, is that pornography, or is that fit within a 
community standard? 
 
I can say very clearly from my experience within the church, 
and particularly in a church which is an affirming congregation, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there are those people who are well 
morally grounded, who have an opinion on this, who will 
probably speak out about this issue and who are opposed to 
pornography — people who are gay and lesbian. And those 
people need the opportunity within their community to help set 
standards. This festival provides that type of forum. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, those people are not people who would 
exploit children. Those people are fine, upstanding, Christian 
people who do what they can to seek justice and resist evil. 
Those people will be engaged in the debate and those people 
will make the case for what is right within community standards 
and what is wrong within community standards. 
 
I believe that the Arts Board is right and it is courageous in 
funding this kind of a festival and funding this kind of a debate 
as the community seeks to set its standards. As the hon. member 
from Saskatoon Southeast said very clearly, within the 
heterosexual community within this country, we have had the 

opportunity to have that debate. We have had that debate fully, 
we continue that debate, and we have standards that our federal 
government has set and we continue to try and set and amend 
those standards. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can’t say anything that 
would go against the Arts Board funding a festival like this that 
may help set those standards. I can only say that I am 
concerned, I am concerned that what we’re getting from across 
the floor is some vain attempt — a vain attempt — to set a 
righteous high road. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these folks across the way have no — no 
— vital ownership of what is righteous. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
want to say if we look at that whole issue of morality within the 
Bible — and I will refer to the Bible because it’s where I am 
grounded — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is very, very little in the 
Bible about sexual morality. There is a lot in the Bible about 
social and economic morality where these folks never want to 
go — never want to talk about. What is social justice? 
 
And when we’re talking about a sex trade we’re talking about 
children who are in that sex trade because of the poverty that 
they are raised in. And you folks need to pay attention to that 
and begin to do something — try and do something — to shore 
up those people on the bottom end. 
 
We want to talk about a morale high road and their history? We 
can do that. We can talk about the convictions, the criminal 
convictions, of people on the political right. And we can stack 
that up against the record on this side. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member for Rosthern on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, these are unacceptable, personal 
attacks on which there is no backing for the members on this 
side of the House whatsoever. And so, therefore, I suggest that 
that member just be cut short. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — A point of clarification on my behalf. 
You’re raising that as a point of order I assume? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Yes. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Fair enough. First off, I want to thank 
again the hon. member for Rosthern for raising a point of order. 
What we have is a debate, and what I’ve just seen, frankly, is a 
dispute between members. And . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well it’s an accusation . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. What we have is 
a dispute between members and members generally take care of 
disputes by giving speeches back and forth. 
 
Again, I thank the hon. member for raising the point of order, 
and I recognize the hon. member for Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 



1108 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2000 

Speaker, I talked about the issues of . . . just was talking about 
the issues of a moral high road and whether one of us has more 
of a right to that position. And I’ve got to say very clearly I 
raised the issue of criminal convictions and the history and, you 
know, what we faced in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was just 
talking about the proportion, the general proportions. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I know that there are people on that side of the 
House . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I have not to date named any member 
as I call for order, but the member understands that I’ve been 
reasonably generous thus far and I ask for the co-operation of 
all members in allowing the member for Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley to conclude . . . to continue his speech. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Where I 
was moving with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was looking at the 
proportion. What I was saying was that the people on the 
opposite side of the House do not own the moral high road. 
 
In fact, historically, again I will repeat, that they have shown 
very clearly that they’re proportionately many, many 
convictions, many, many problems dealing with moral issues, in 
fact not just with empty rhetoric. 
 
Now on the other side of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to 
note . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the hon. member for 
Cypress Hills on his feet? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. I find that the 
member’s statements are extremely offensive to me personally 
and to every member on this side. If he has an accusation to 
make against any of us, let him state his case. But this type of 
slanderous comment is unacceptable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I thank the . . . Order, order. I thank 
the hon. member for Cypress Hills for raising the point of order. 
 
What we have, I wish to remind members, is a debate that is . . . 
let me . . . Perhaps it will be useful to all hon. members if I were 
to read the main motion and the proposed amendment, which I 
will do. And in so I’m asking all members to reflect that this 
motion and amendment deals with a fairly wide range of issues. 
Order, order. The motion as proposed by the hon. member for 
Kelvington-Wadena, and seconded by the hon. member for 
Humboldt, reads: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial government to 
cancel all the funding it provides that is being used to 
promote pornography and that this funding be redirected to 
programs to combat the child sex trade. 
 

That’s the main motion. The amendment as moved by the hon. 

member for Saskatoon Southeast and seconded by the hon. 
member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley reads: 
 

That we remove all the words after “Assembly” and 
replace them with the following: 
 
“reaffirm its support for the principle of arm’s-length 
funding.” 

 
And I remind all members that members will mount their 
arguments around the motion and the amendment as best they 
can, and I urge that — order, order — and I urge that the debate 
continue on the main motion and the amendment. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll go 
directly to what my next sentence was to be, and that is that I 
recognize, as I have come to know, that there are fine people on 
that side of the Chamber as well who have high moral 
standards. 
 
I recognize that in the way that they see things, which it may 
well be quite different from the way that I see things, that they 
see that there is some moral wrong happening in this. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that is their right to see it. It is their right to 
protest it. But what I am saying is that their motion which 
would refer to us as if we were promoting porn is just . . . first 
of all, it’s ultra vires. It shouldn’t be allowed on that basis. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, secondly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we take personal umbrage to that kind of insinuation. 
However, we will still deal with the issue of third-party 
funding. We will still deal with the issue of what is behind all of 
this. And what I . . . what my contention is and why I support 
the amendment is that as this community moves to try and get 
their place, their standard within the community, they must look 
at the issues that have been a part of it. 
 
In an underground community, in an underground community, 
pornography is much more the norm. A lot of these folks have 
only been in the underground and what they are trying to do is 
trying to find, as a part of the whole community, what is 
acceptable. 
 
You heard the . . . if you were listening, the members opposite 
heard the references from the federal document. They will know 
that there are differences between heterosexual and homosexual 
explicit movies. And what these people are trying to do is trying 
to determine which is which. That’s the struggle. 
 
Now what I would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that if they 
are concerned, if they really want to be a part of the debate 
about what is and isn’t pornography, that they should go to the 
festival, that they should watch the movies, they should take 
part in the debate, and they should say what they think would be 
an acceptable standard. And I think that that is what this is 
about. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a history of funding the Arts 
Board that is sound. We have a history of providing that 
funding so that that part of our community can explore what is 
art, that they can develop what is art. And the arts have enriched 
us from the very beginning of time. 
 



May 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1109 

The standards change. We referred . . . a member from 
Saskatoon Southeast referred to the change from what is old art 
— the statues of naked men and women, the paintings of people 
making love that are old art. To do that now some might say is 
pornographic. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because the masters did it, did that make it 
art? Because new artists are doing it, does that make it 
pornography? Those issues have to be debated, understood, and 
standards set. 
 
That’s what the arts community does. They debate that. They 
make the decisions as they see them. And we can participate in 
those. If we’re old enough, we can go to the festival. We can 
participate in the debate there, if we’re old enough. There is a 
limit — 18 or over. 
 
We are following the law, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am convinced 
that we will continue to follow the law around this issue 
because this government does not, does not promote 
pornography and will not promote pornography. 
 
Given the number of very, very key issues that we have to face, 
this reminds me, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. These folks 
really engaging in this debate from the perspective of you’ve 
got to shut it down, you’ve got to not have the debate, you’ve 
got to not have public funding in there, these folks remind me 
of some characters in the Bible. 
 
They were called — and this very definitely is from a Christian 
perspective of these characters I have to say — they were called 
Pharisees. And the one that I follow talked about those 
Pharisees as being people who would strain at gnats while 
swallowing camels. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am convinced that that is what is 
happening right now. That we’ve got folks who are straining at 
gnats and swallowing camels on the opposite side of this 
Chamber. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, here is a festival that will help define what 
is pornographic and what is not. This is not a big raging issue 
like the members opposite are attempting to make it. This is a 
very simple part of the community trying to work out its 
identity in our times. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the same time it was raised earlier 
about child sex trade and child exploitation. Now there’s a 
camel. And there’s something that we do have to deal with and 
we will deal with and we will do our utmost to put an end to 
that. 
 
And we know that one of the root causes of that is poverty. And 
I am sure that when we get to trying to put good supports in so 
that the people will not be poor, not exploited, that the members 
opposite will stand up with us and try and put that legislation 
through. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s a camel. And 

they are willing to swallow that whole thing to let all of the 
social justice, the concern for the poor, the standards that we 
need to set for union, they’re willing to let all of that go while 
they strain away at this gnat. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can hardly believe it, the amount of time 
and energy that they’ve put into that while we have burning 
issues that need to be dealt with. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that the amendment says exactly 
what we need to say. I believe that that’s where we should be. 
And so I will now move adjournment on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 4:03 p.m. until 4:13 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 25 
 
Hagel Van Mulligen Melenchuk 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. We’ll allow the . . . I 
ask all members to allow the vote to be taken. Vote continues. 
 
Cline Atkinson Goulet 
Lautermilch Thomson Lorje 
Serby Nilson Crofford 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Higgins 
Yates Harper Axworthy 
Junor Kasperski Wartman 
Addley   
 

Nays — 19 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Draude Boyd 
Gantefoer Peters Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Weekes Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Allchurch 
Kwiatkowski   
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the hon. member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — To introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to my 
colleagues in the Assembly, a Mr. Thomas Dresing. He’s the 
export manager for the world for Lenz Moser. He’s visiting 
Canada today from Austria. 
 
Lenz Moser is the largest producer of Austrian wines with 



1110 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2000 

about 15 million bottles each year. Saskatchewan has been 
fortunate to have a long relationship, a long-standing 
relationship with the Moser family and we’re pleased to have 
Thomas join us in the Speaker’s gallery this afternoon. 
 
He’s joined today by Wally Fries, a Regina . . . the 
Saskatchewan agent for this winery. Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed a 
pleasure to be able to, hopefully, have a few moments to visit 
with them this afternoon before they must leave again. And I’d 
ask all members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming 
Thomas and Wally Fries with us this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Motion No. 6 — Community Management 
Boards in the North 

 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today, Mr. Speaker, to speak to this private members’ motion 
which reads: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to continue the 
initiative of working with northern communities to create 
community management boards which respond to the 
particular law enforcement needs of aboriginal and 
northern communities. 

 
I’m very pleased to speak to this motion, Mr. Speaker, because 
I believe this motion really addresses and really becomes . . . I 
want to speak to it in a sense of a celebration of inclusion. 
 
It’s a celebration showing that . . . our children and future 
generations in this province exactly what kind of a country we 
want to leave for them. And what kind of a province we want to 
leave for our children and our grandchildren. 
 
This memorandum of understanding gives us hope, Mr. 
Speaker, because it is set up in a way in co-operation with First 
Nations, the New North neighbours, the RCMP, and Sask 
Justice. And it sets up a memorandum where people in the 
North . . . there’s an agreement between the people in the North 
and the RCMP and Justice to work co-operatively on items of 
justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that it’s a celebration of inclusion because by 
not doing this, by not proceeding with actions of this type, we 
could be leading ourselves down a national pathway that we do 
not want. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just give you an example of what I mean. 
Last night on television watching the late news, I was delighted 
to see a clip where they had . . . they were showing 18 new 
RCMP cadets being inducted into the RCMP — new members 
and they were all from Saskatchewan. Many of them were of 
Aboriginal background, and they were all being placed in 
Saskatchewan. And they were there proudly with their families 
accepting their graduation, being praised by their instructors, 
being accepted into the RCMP. 
 
They have made it, Mr. Speaker. They will be respected and are 
respected by their own families, by their communities for 
having gone through the training. And they will be, through 
their work, promoting a respect for law and order and 

promoting the rule of law in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And it was done in the spirit which I would like to see 
our children and our grandchildren carry on in this province. 
 
And I want to contrast that clip, Mr. Speaker, that television 
clip with one that happened two weeks before that, or about a 
week before that. And on this case . . . on this particular clip, 
the newscaster showed two people at odds with each other. 
They were showing their hurt, Mr. Speaker. They were showing 
that the issue that divided them was very strong. And it was two 
women arguing with each other and laying blame on each other, 
and it had a lot of racial overtones, screaming and blaming, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And you could see that they were both hurting and neither of 
them were able to overcome their hurt. And when I saw this 
clip, Mr. Speaker, it was . . . it gave a person a chance to think 
and reflect about what kind of a society we want, what kind of a 
place we want to live in. And more than that maybe even, it 
spoke to the work that needed to be done towards keeping racial 
harmony in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it reminded me of perhaps the greatest challenge 
that faces me as a politician and perhaps I would say all of us as 
politicians over the long haul in this province and in this 
country. And that is that whatever we do, and if we . . . that we 
follow our democratic principles and make provision for those 
people who are weaker or who are fewer or who may have 
alternate lifestyles or have alternative points of view, and most 
importantly who are poorer, to also participate and have some 
control over their life. 
 
So I salute those 18 people that were inducted into the RCMP 
just yesterday here in Regina. And I wish them all the best, and 
I challenge . . . I know they will be challenged, Mr. Speaker, 
with the work that they have to do in keeping racial harmony, in 
keeping a respect for law and order in the communities in which 
they will be living. 
 
I thought furthermore, Mr. Speaker, how fortunate we are in 
this country to have several other examples where those 
preceding us, and those of only five or ten years ago, have made 
great strides in racial harmony, in promoting racial harmony, 
and promoting inclusion in this province. 
 
I speak of things like the land settlements which have been 
agreed upon, and which are now being administered, which are 
now being implemented. And this required a tremendous a lot 
of discussion and a tremendous amount of hard work and a 
tremendous amount of compromise between people who 
worked with the federal government, with the provincial 
government, and with the FSIN. And we came to an agreement 
— and it took well over 20 years after the negotiations started 
— but the agreements are now being implemented, and they are 
being implemented in a way that I am proud. 
 
And I must pay tribute to a former colleague who sat in this 
House, Bob Mitchell, who served as minister and put those . . . 
implemented those agreements, Mr. Speaker, with the advice of 
course of other MLAs and people he knew and the advice of 
cabinet. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, how different that is from what is happening 



May 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1111 

now in Zimbabwe, in Africa, where we’ve got hundreds of 
people, landless people, moving from shack villages and setting 
on land because they rightfully believe that they’ve been chased 
off of it. But there is nothing in place to include them and to 
work out a system where they can reclaim some of their land, or 
buy it back, or even work on it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I feel that this example that has been set here in 
Saskatchewan and other parts of Canada with our First Nations 
on things like land settlements and this MOU (memorandum of 
understanding) to which I am talking, are really . . . have 
showed great, great progress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have other examples which are . . . of which I 
am very proud here in Saskatchewan, much like this MOU. The 
casino agreement is an agreement which speaks to and 
addresses employment for First Nations people. It is an 
agreement which is allowing a lot of people to participate fully 
in the employment scene they wouldn’t otherwise . . . an 
opportunity they wouldn’t otherwise have. 
 
When I look at the forestry partnerships that are being signed 
right now in this last year and some are being worked on right 
now in Saskatchewan, I see the same thing — co-operation, 
compromise, but in the end, people of different backgrounds 
working together so that everybody can benefit from it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has happened also in the education field. 
SIAST Woodland Campus working together with Gabriel 
Dumont — not having completely separate institutions but 
integrating. Who’s to the benefit? Everybody’s to the benefit, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our community schools have done a lot in that respect as well. 
By bringing parents into the community schools, Mr. Speaker, 
we avoid the segregation that we see in other parts of the world 
which have caused great strife in other parts of the world. 
 
We all are relieved, Mr. Speaker, that we are no longer seeing 
planes and bombings going on in Kosovo. And we’re no longer 
hearing about Muslims beating up and killing orthodox Serbs, 
and vice versa. And we’re no longer seeing Albanians fighting 
against the Serbs in their own country, and vice versa. 
 
It is very instructive, however, Mr. Speaker, when we see those 
things, how important it is to set up structures within our 
province and within our country to combat that kind of 
tribalism that exists in certain parts of Europe and certainly 
exists in Africa. And it’s for that reason that I was more than 
willing and actually eager to move this particular motion, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I just want to spend a couple of minutes describing now what it 
is that these . . . that this agreement does, this memorandum of 
understanding, what the terms of the framework are. What I 
really like about it is that the language in it doesn’t say what 
you should do and what I should do or what they should do, but 
it all . . . it speaks about what we should do and what we should 
do together. 
 
It speaks to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, to the New 
North member municipalities, and Saskatchewan Justice to 
work together and to mutually agree on the following principles 

and activities, and I will read just but a few of them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Number one, the parties agree to work together to provide 
mutual support and assistance. That tells you, Mr. Speaker, that 
it is not Ottawa or Regina or somebody sending the RCMP into 
communities in the North and telling them how to run the show 
up in the North or any of these communities. It speaks about 
them working together. 
 
The New North member municipalities have agreed to establish 
community police boards, and by establishing these community 
police boards, these local boards are used then to advise on how 
justice should be administered in these areas. All parties have 
agreed to support the community police boards. And it is the 
job of the community police boards and the RCMP to establish 
mutually agreed goals for policing, and to do so each year. 
 
(1630) 
 
And this . . . the RCMP will account and report to the board and 
to the community in a mutually agreed upon format and 
timetable. So the RCMP who are working there then are not just 
responsible to their superiors in Regina or in Ottawa, but they 
are also responsible to the local communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is partly modelled after the way policing is 
done in many other towns and cities in Saskatchewan. In 
general terms, in many countries, many democratic countries, 
municipalities are given the authority — if they can afford to do 
it and have got the capabilities of doing it — they are given the 
authority to do the policing within their towns. And of course 
you know that all of the larger cities and many smaller centres 
in Saskatchewan have their own police forces. This models it to 
some extent, this memorandum of understanding. 
 
One of the items and one of the principles about this, Mr. 
Speaker, is that community police boards will be consulted 
regarding preferred RCMP staffing attributes. So when they are 
selecting their staff, again they’re to contact and consult with 
the community police board. 
 
By including the people from the community in the selection of 
the RCMP that are going to be policing them, they have much 
better chance of people complying with the wishes and with the 
directives and with the authority represented by the RCMP. 
 
It’s pretty hard to send somebody into a northern area and just 
have them take over without doing some training, Mr. Speaker. 
And in this, one of the principles in this MOU, one of the 
principles is that the community police boards and the RCMP 
will take part in joint training of the community police board 
members and the RCMP members. 
 
So there is a process in place for them to take into account local 
customs and local needs and put it into a training program so 
they can get . . . And usually it’s during a training program like 
this that you break the ice and get to know each other a bit 
because there is usually some type of socialization that takes 
place. 
 
It’s by doing that, Mr. Speaker, you not only enforce the law 
but you encourage a respect for law. Something very important 



1112 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2000 

in a democratic society. That any law that you implement, any 
law that you implement, does represent and is accepted by the 
majority of people. And usually that is the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But if you have a law implemented from outside, if you have a 
law implemented from the outside and then simply enforced 
without people understanding its purpose and believing in the 
law, that is when a society no longer stays civil. And you end 
up with either tribal wars or, Mr. Speaker, it could lead to 
revolutions as it does in many parts of the world, particularly 
and certainly in some parts of Africa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the principles here is that the RCMP will 
provide cross-cultural and socio-economic training for all 
northern RCMP staff and that community police boards will 
take an active role in fostering understanding of policing in the 
new northern member communities. 
 
Just one more thing, Mr. Speaker, that I want to mention, and 
that is that the funding for this agreement is jointly done by the 
federal government and the provincial government. I believe it 
to be a 52/48 per cent agreement. It’s a total cost in northern 
Saskatchewan for over $9 million for policing, but it’s an 
agreement which I think is very important. 
 
The RCMP probably have more contact as a social agency . . . 
As a social agency compared with other social agencies, the 
RCMP probably has more contact with Northerners than any 
other social agency. So to have an agreement as to the processes 
to be used is very, very important. 
 
So I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, then to move, seconded by 
the member from Cumberland: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to continue the 
initiative of working with northern communities to create 
community management boards which respond to the 
particular law enforcement needs of Aboriginal and 
northern communities. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to rise 
to second the motion wherein we continue to work with 
northern communities in regards to the development of 
community police boards. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to second this motion from 
the member from . . . with the member from P.A. (Prince 
Albert) Carlton because of the history-making nature of a year 
ago. 
 
In May last year, we had a memorandum of understanding 
between Saskatchewan Justice, the RCMP, and New North 
communities from northern Saskatchewan. I was told at that 
time that it was historic in the sense that it was the first one 
across Canada, that it was a leadership role being played by all 
parties concerned. So it was with great pride that I rise in my 
place to record this historic achievement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, being born and raised in northern Saskatchewan, I 
see a lot of the evolutionary development towards greater 
community control taking place, and especially as we are 

hitting this new century. 
 
In the 1970s we saw the development of control by Northerners 
in regards to education, school boards, as well as 
post-secondary institutions. We also saw the control by 
municipalities and the evolution to the options . . . (inaudible) 
. . . package and The Northern Municipalities Act. 
 
We also saw a little bit of a downward trend during the ’80s 
when there was a recentralization away from community 
approaches with the previous Devine government. And we saw 
everything recentralized back in Regina and a lot of the 
development and decision making coming from Regina and not 
rested . . . and not resting with the people of the North. 
 
As we enter the 1990s and we come back into government, we 
move back again to the time . . . move on to this concept in 
different areas. We saw that in the next major phase with health, 
and we saw the development of three health boards in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we also saw the most important aspect of the new century, 
which was self-determination in the area of economic 
development. We see the rise now in northern Saskatchewan of 
northern development board. We see the Northern Review 
Board in regards to economic development and also the 
CREDOs — the community regional economic development 
organizations. So we are seeing that development evolved over 
time in the many sectors. 
 
And of course in our parliamentary democracy, we had seen the 
evolution over history in regards to the important role of the 
principle of law and the aspects of the special role that it played. 
And in that sense I was very pleased as we were approaching 
the century that a decision on a community approach to policing 
would be taking place and that leadership to be taking place in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I see, reading literature internationally, whether in the United 
States where they have a lot of conflict in regards to the law, 
that they have moved away from the traditional model to the 
newer model of community-based policing. We see that as well 
in Europe, in Great Britain, the UK (United Kingdom). So 
we’re seeing that evolution take place all over the world. 
 
And so when we’re seeing the community policing coming into 
northern Saskatchewan last year as the memorandum of 
understanding brought into place, I was very proud as a 
Northerner to see that evolutionary development. 
 
People were also very pleased that there would be training. The 
training model involved the training of everyone concerned, 
because not only was it a training of the police force themselves 
in regards to policy creation at the community level and how 
not only do the police work in partnership with the community 
people, but dealing with cases of emergency and other things. 
 
But we saw also the training of police. I will talk about that a 
little bit later on in regards to what the proposals are on the 
training of police. 
 
We have looked at northern Saskatchewan over the past year 
and we did a survey and there was a special report that come 



May 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1113 

out under Social Services. And of course in Social Services a 
lot of the justice issues were brought into . . . were raised. 
 
The justice issues that were raised were very similar to what 
you will find anywhere. You know, people were concerned 
about quick response times. People were also concerned about 
local input and management and involvement of themselves in 
regards to police and justice issues. 
 
And people were talking about equity of service and, whether 
you were rural in Saskatchewan or whether you were in urban 
Saskatchewan or northern Saskatchewan, that you had equity of 
services. That indeed we should not be treated as differently 
except in regards to increased costs in the North as regards to 
policing. So there was also a concern that there would be 
federal input into the costs, as well as provincial input into the 
costs. So those types of issues were dealt with in regard to 
challenges raised. 
 
I notice also that there was solutions that were brought forth in 
the report, and here are some of them. 
 
People wanted to see the community approach integrated, an 
integrated approach between Social Services, Justice, 
Education, and so on, because they saw it not only as the 
immediate problem when the . . . when an issue of breaking the 
law occurred. They saw that as a development and an evolution 
in the educational system. So that people from the North talked 
about an integrated approach to the management of the justice 
issues. 
 
There was also a lot of talk about prevention and solutions in 
regards to crime prevention over the long run, and our people 
could co-operate with police at the local level to make sure that 
some of the issues relating to crime prevention were there and 
had control at the community level. 
 
There was also talk about making sure that we had a principle 
of inclusion. Not only do we have people from all over the 
world becoming police in our area, but also Aboriginal people 
being police as well. So the idea of Aboriginal people being 
trained properly in the police force was an important 
development. 
 
I would also say that cross-cultural sensitivity had to be there, 
and it was a strong thing raised for . . . both by the Dene people 
in northern Saskatchewan and by the Crees and also people 
recognizing the historical differences on law — you know as 
related to treaty rights and hunting and all those types of things. 
So that people would understand that while there were 
similarities for all people, that there was also unique, 
constitutional, and also treaty obligations that were there for 
people to respect. So those types of things were brought out, 
you know, by the people of the North. 
 
I would like to say on the culture and language issue . . . I’d like 
to reflect back a little bit on a story that I myself experienced 
directly. When I was growing up, of course, when we were 
looking at the police we were not very much different from 
many places. There was a lot of fear of police. And today I see 
the change taking place. People are looking a lot more, a lot 
more trustworthy . . . and the trust relationship with police is 
being evolved and evolved and being built. But in our time, 

when I was growing up, there was a little bit of a fear of police. 
 
And I remember when I started school, and I went to school, 
and this one time I was out doing a little bit too much hunting 
on the way to school — hunting some grouse. So we came to 
school a little bit late. And of course this must have happened 
about a couple of times or more maybe. And lo and behold, of 
course I couldn’t speak any English and all I could say was 
good morning, sister, because we were taught by the nuns at 
that time. 
 
And so we were . . . I was going to school and here was a little 
grade 1 character, and so my friend and I were going up and so 
we were late again. And all of a sudden the sister was writing a 
note on a piece of paper. So she came to us and she gave us this 
note of piece of paper, and she said to go to the police. Of 
course we knew the word police in English. 
 
And we had heard . . . and we were a little . . . I was worried 
about . . . I was a little grade 1 and we were supposed to go to 
the police. So the teacher gave us this note, and away I went 
down to the police. So I go to the police station. It’s only about 
a block away. And it was very interesting experience. Here we 
have two grade 1 young boys and we’re going in. 
 
(1645) 
 
And so we get in and we rattled the chain over at police . . . by 
the police station. And so we rattled it for a while and pretty 
soon somebody came out and it was the wife, you know, of a 
policeman that was there. So she came over and we waved this 
little paper. And so we gave her that piece of paper and we were 
ready to get the strap, you know, by the police. 
 
So we were standing around, little wee grade 1’s, and we 
figured it out. We said . . . she looked at us and she knew we 
were pretty scared. She said . . . she finally showed us the way. 
She said the problem . . . (inaudible) . . . and made us go back to 
the school. So we were pretty . . . we said wow, you know, here 
I am, I don’t have to go and see the police. 
 
So we were very pleased, and lo and behold on the way back 
we figured out, well shouldn’t we be crying if we walked into 
the classroom? So here we were, in regards to the situation we 
were saying, should we be crying? And lo and behold, we were 
supposed to be crying, and indeed we said, well, we should 
punch each other so we could cry. 
 
It was quite the story because here we were two little guys and 
we were trying to get into this authoritarian situation so that we 
could be disciplined by the police and the teacher was scaring 
us into it. But we went back and we sat down in our desks and 
we cried a little bit. But she never did say anything after that. I 
still don’t know to this day whether or not she went back to talk 
to the wife and to see what happened. But it was my experience 
with police. 
 
The other time on a cultural sense was this: I was asking about 
the word in Cree . . . we have a word in Cree, we say, 
simagunis. And the word simagunis is a special word, is a name 
that we give . . . we say to the police. I always wondered where 
the word came from. 
 



1114 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2000 

Now I talked to an elder when I was doing Cree classes at the 
university back in 1971, and I was teaching Cree at the 
university back in the mid . . . I mean we were teaching Cree in 
La Ronge at the school back in ’74. So I asked one of the elders 
where the word simagunis had come from. He thought that the 
word — Colin Charles — he said that the word simagun comes 
from . . . the word simagunis comes from simagun which means 
something of a sharp point. We know it’s not the knife because 
the word for knife is moogoman. By the way we call the 
Americans, Keechimoogoman, the great knives. 
 
It’s actually the keechi actually means great; Keechimoogoman 
is the great knives. And some people have of course translated 
it to the long knives. But the word that was very important was 
simagun. He said it was a sharp point. 
 
And I went to visit a place up in Manitoba. And there was on 
the place called South Indian Lake, they had some skulls that 
were washed ashore because of the hydro-electric power dam 
that was built there. And this person was telling me about sin 
agunuk simagunis, and he said these simaguns were also there. 
So I asked him right away because . . . I said what were they? 
And he said that they were spear points. 
 
So what it is, is that in olden times the police in the Cree 
traditional sense would have been the spear point protectors of 
the people. And that would have been the origin of the word. I 
haven’t seen it anywhere in the literature but from that 
experience that is probably what it was. It is probably . . . it is 
therefore quite an ancient institution in the pre-culture contrary 
to some modern views in regards to anthropological literature. 
 
I thought I want to say those stories because these were very 
important in regards to the issue of policing. And it has become 
modernized and we’re now calling on community-based 
policing. 
 
I would like to, as well, celebrate the achievements of the 
modern day police — the constables that were graduated the 
other day. Yesterday there was a host of First Nations and Metis 
grads. 
 
So I’d like to honour them by stating their names. We had a Cst. 
Chad McLeod from Nipawin who will be stationed at Red 
Earth. We also had Cst. Jonathan Iron from Canoe Lake who 
will be stationed in Southend. We also had Cst. Beau Fouquette 
from Prince Albert who will, of course, go back to Prince 
Albert; and Cst. Dale McArthur from White Bear going to 
Indian Head, and Cst. Grant Stebanuk from Battleford going to 
Carduff . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon me ? It was Dale 
McArthur. Yes. 
 
There will also be Cst. Shawna Poulin from Meadow Lake 
going to Pelican Narrows. Cst. Earl Keewatin from Starblanket 
going to Cut Knife. Cst. Lloyd Gerard from Cumberland House 
going to Blaine Lake. Cst. Elmer Russell from Regina going to 
Melfort. Cst. Ronald Umpherville from P.A. going to La 
Ronge. Cst. Doug Gardiner from Ile a la Crosse going to Sandy 
Bay. And Cst. Jeremy Trottier from Denare Beach going to 
Montreal Lake. 
 
Cst. Jennifer Barks from P.A. going to Punnichy. Cst. Colleen 
Skyrpan from Swift Current going to Maple Creek. Cst. Brian 

Kishayinew from Yellow Quill going to Cut Knife. Cst. Russell 
Clark from Preeceville going to Wadena. Cst. Gary Lariviere 
from Canoe Lake going to Spiritwood. And Cst. Dwayne Fleury 
from La Ronge going to Meadow Lake. 
 
I’d like to honour these people who are entering the police, 
which is challenging work. It is one of the more challenging 
jobs out there. I know that some politicians would like to think 
that their jobs are challenging, but I must say that indeed police 
work is a challenging work, well worthy of mention in our 
society. 
 
I’d like to also mention the work by Sgt. Tuffs from La Ronge, 
who has done a lot of work on community work in . . . right in 
the La Ronge area. And he’s done some positive feedback from 
the community itself. And as well Sgt. Cory Lerat, who is the 
liaison on community policing from the RCMP to the La Ronge 
communities. He’s a First Nations community from southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I might also state a few additional facts, Mr. Speaker. Right 
now in the North, as the member from Carlton has raised, 
there’s $9,026,000 on total budget. The provincial amount of 
that total budget is $5,646,000. The percentage that the 
province puts in at the provincial detachments is 70 per cent. 
The amount that we put in on First Nations detachments is 48 
per cent. So that there is a total amount of 9 million, as I 
mentioned before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I second the motion because this is indeed a very 
. . . not only progressive development for northern 
Saskatchewan but it is following on the footsteps of what we 
see in the international community. We are also seeing the 
development — as we talk about partnerships in business 
development, partnerships in regards to education, partnerships 
on cultural development — we are seeing partnerships with 
policing. And that’s extremely important for everybody in this 
province. 
 
The other thing is that we’re looking at issues of prevention and 
making sure that, as we’re doing the education system and also 
as we as parents raise our children, the important issue of 
prevention is always there. 
 
And also as we look at the development of boards, the evolution 
and the development of making sure that the proper policies are 
there; that indeed when we’re working together with police 
from the community level, as parents and also with the 
community leadership, that indeed the forums and the 
mechanisms for change are there. 
 
That indeed, in the final sense, I would say this as a 
Cree-speaking person — as well recognizing the different 
languages that have been spoken in this House — that the 
cultural part is very important. I know that when I was growing 
up and I saw that it wasn’t only one of learning to understand 
somebody in their language, but to respect the cultural tradition 
whether they’re from the Ukrainian community or from the 
German community or from the Mennonite community, or from 
the Cree and the Dene community. For me, it is important to 
recognize the cultural standards and having due respect, you 
know, for them as you are doing the importance of policing. 
 



May 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1115 

So, Mr. Speaker, as we’re looking at the development and we’re 
looking at the changes and we’re seeing this important 
development, I think that last May when we signed the MOU, 
that indeed, we will be able to see this not only as an historic 
first for northern Saskatchewan but an historic first across 
Canada. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with due respect to all the members of the 
House and due respect to this historic community policing 
agreement, I would like to move to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


