





























































Hansard: March 31, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 359 
 March 31, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of people in Saskatchewan 
who are adamantly opposed to forced amalgamation. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Middle Lake, Pilger, St. Benedict, Cabri, and also Humboldt, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also stand today 
with petitions for people requesting cellular coverage for 
Watson and area. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to ensure reliable cellular service to Watson 
and area by installing a cellular tower at Watson. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from the 
Watson-Englefeld area. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise as well on behalf of 
people in the Watson area concerned about the current cellular 
coverage. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to ensure reliable cellular service to Watson 
and area by installing a cellular tower at Watson. 

 
Signatures on this petition as you may expect, Mr. Speaker, are 
from the community of Watson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of people in Swift Current who are concerned 
about the Swift Current regional hospital. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist in the regeneration plant for the Swift 
Current hospital by providing approximately $7.54 million, 
thereby allowing the Swift Current District Health Board 
the opportunity to provide improved regional health care 
services. 

 

And the petition is signed by people in Swift Current and 
Stewart Valley, Mr. Speaker. And I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present a 
petition from the citizens of Blaine Lake with their concerns of 
lack of medical care in the town of Blaine Lake: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
overrule the Parkland Health Board to change its decision 
and allow the Blaine Lake Medical Clinic to have a 
permanent physician with consistent hours and days. 

 
From the citizens of Blaine Lake. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan 
concerned about the municipal amalgamation. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the government of 
Saskatchewan to reject proposals of any forced 
amalgamations of municipalities. 

 
This petition is signed by citizens of Guernsey, Southey, Cupar, 
Earl Grey, Weyburn, and Bulyea. 
 
I do so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province praying the Assembly to cause 
the government to halt any plans to proceed with the 
amalgamation of municipalities in Saskatchewan; and 
 
Of citizens of the province praying the Assembly to cause 
the government to ensure reliable cellular service to 
Watson and area; and 
 
Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to cause the 
government to provide funding for the Swift Current 
regional hospital; and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to not 
expand the provincial sales tax. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with 
pleasure this morning I introduce to you and ask all members to 
join me in welcoming Mr. Rod Gopher of Saulteaux First 
Nation in my constituency. 
 
I must say I am not sure that Rod is entirely enthusiastic about 
all aspects of our budget, but we remain close personal friends. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome Mr. Gopher. 



360 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2000 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
Assembly, the grade 6 class of Avonlea School and their 
teacher, Evelyn Sillers, and also escorted by Mr. Phil Neudorf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Sillers’ class is situated in your gallery. I ask 
that they stand and be recognized, and I’m sure that all 
members of this Assembly hope that they have an educational 
and enjoyable visit with us today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish 
to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, my mother, Clara Wiberg, who is seated up in your 
gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure that she’s here 
today; after all this is the woman who gave me life. And I 
appreciate that very much, Mother. 
 
Would the Assembly please welcome my mother. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you 
and to the rest of the House, I would like to introduce someone 
who is well known to most of us in here, in your gallery, Mr. 
Bernie Collins. 
 
Bernie as you know was the former Liberal MP (Member of 
Parliament) for the Souris-Moose Mountain constituency and is 
well known throughout the area regarding the fight against gun 
control. 
 
And I’ll ask everybody to welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, I too have some special guests 
in my gallery that I would like to introduce to you: Mr. Bruce 
Cheston who’s a voice from the past, a gentleman who from a 
long time ago had a great deal of involvement in the original 
crop insurance program here in this province; and with him are 
Kim and Kenny Craib from Ellon, Scotland, who are here to 
visit and watch our proceedings this morning. Please welcome 
them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

A Bike Trip for Cancer Research 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
recognize a remarkable young woman from my constituency, 
Renee Stuckel of Lake Lenore. 
 
Renee’s aunt, Arlene Meyer, was scheduled for a bone marrow 
transplant in Vancouver to treat her leukemia. However, she 
died in November of 1998 before she could have this operation. 

Renee decided to honour her aunt and in the fall of 1998 she 
made a commitment to bike 2,500 kilometres for cancer 
research. She would complete the journey for her aunt. 
 
The name she chose for her trip was, Finishing the Journey: a 
Bike Trip for Cancer Research. Renee spent many hours 
planning, promoting, and organizing her trip, and with the help 
and co-operation of volunteers, she organized a fund-raiser in 
Lake Lenore to kick off the journey. 
 
On August 3rd, 1999, Renee left Vancouver General Hospital. 
She biked through British Columbia, Alberta, and into 
Saskatchewan, arriving in Humboldt on September 3. She had 
maintained a gruelling pace of 100 kilometres per day. The 
support for her untiring efforts was overwhelming. In the end 
$32,534 was raised for cancer research. 
 
One person can make a difference — Renee Stuckel did. 
 
So we congratulate Renee Stuckel today, and certainly 
congratulate all the people around Lake Lenore and area who 
supported her so wholeheartedly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Jobs to Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As my colleague from 
Saskatoon Southeast said on Wednesday, I am delighted but not 
surprised with our vibrant economy — particularly in 
Saskatoon. She mentioned several examples, Mr. Speaker. Let 
me mention one more. 
 
DirecTEL of Minot, North Dakota is locating its newest call 
centre in Saskatoon. With this opening comes 225 new jobs. 
Two hundred and twenty-five jobs, Mr. Speaker, for the 
province that already has the lowest unemployment rate in 
Canada. Two hundred and twenty-five well-paying jobs with 
benefits. Two hundred and twenty-five jobs for Saskatchewan 
people who have no intention of moving to Alberta — jobs, 
jobs, jobs. 
 
Additionally, DirecTEL is so impressed they’re scouting other 
Saskatchewan locations for a second call centre. 
 
Why choose Saskatoon? Well, Mr. Speaker, Buzz Stitzer, CEO 
(chief executive officer) of DirecTEL said it was because of the 
quality of Saskatchewan’s labour force. He obviously didn’t 
consult Conrad Black. 
 
Also he said it was because of the commitment and fast action 
by the Saskatchewan and Saskatoon governments, and business 
agencies. These set us apart from the other 28 locations being 
considered. I would say that suggests we are competitive. 
 
This is more good news, Mr. Speaker — but we’re getting used 
to that. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Stephanie Miller Rink Wins Silver Medal 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 



March 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 361 

with great pleasure today that I rise before this Assembly to talk 
to you about accomplishments of a young lady from my 
constituency — a lady from Shellbrook-Spiritwood 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the recent world junior women’s curling 
championship in Germany, the Stephanie Miller rink captured a 
silver medal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whenever someone from Saskatchewan does well 
on the international stage, it fills us with a great sense of pride. 
For me, this is especially true in this case of Stephanie who 
grew up in the town of Shellbrook. Stephanie, along with her 
sister, Marliese Miller, as well as Stacy Helm and Amanda 
MacDonald, went to the world championships after winning the 
Canadian title in February in New Brunswick. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Stephanie is no stranger to the curling world. She 
also won the Saskatchewan junior women’s title in 1999 and 
again in . . . and 1997. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite my colleagues to join me 
today in congratulating Stephanie Miller and her team on 
winning the silver medal at the world junior curling 
championship. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College Powwow 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, we have in Regina a 
unique educational institution, the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College at the University of Regina, the only First 
Nations owned and operated post-secondary institution in North 
America. 
 
This week at SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated College) 
has been designated cultural week. Each day during this week 
has highlighted activities designed to promote understanding 
and appreciation of the values of First Nations culture. The goal 
of culture week is to, quote, “encourage understanding and 
respect among people.” 
 
Events have included a lecture by First Nations author Tomson 
Highway, pipe ceremonies and feasts, art exhibits, poetry and 
prose readings, drumming and dancing demonstrations, and 
several other events. 
 
To wrap up the week, SIFC will hold its annual powwow 
tomorrow and Sunday at Exhibition Park. Dancers and 
drummers of all ages from far and wide will be taking part in 
this very colourful and very loud event. The powwow is open to 
the public, and I encourage all of us to have a look and a listen. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I congratulate SIFC for a successful week. I 
assume, and I hope, this becomes an annual and an expanded 
event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Board Appointment 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a congratulatory 

message for one of my constituents, Mr. Speaker; and also a 
word of congratulations for the Liberal leader as well. 
 
Neil Collins, my Liberal opponent in the last election, has been 
appointed to the Board of SaskPower. Mr. Speaker, I suppose 
this is Mr. Collins reward for supporting this NDP (New 
Democratic Party) Liberal marriage. So congratulations to Mr. 
Collins for this patronage plum. 
 
But I also want to congratulate the Liberal leader. Mr. Speaker, 
for the last couple of weeks we have heard the leader of the 
so-called Liberal Party, or NDP-lite as they are now known, 
bragging to anyone who will listen about his influence in this 
coalition government. 
 
Well for sure the Liberal leader’s opposition to immediate tax 
relief for Saskatchewan citizens has been heard loud and clear 
by the government. The so-called historic tax cut has been 
turned into a huge tax increase, and the people of Saskatchewan 
have the Liberal leader to thank. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we can see that the member has influence in 
other areas of government as well. He has ably elbowed aside 
any number of NDP patronage appointments, including the 
former NDP member from Estevan, to find a taxpayer-funded 
job for one of the few provincial Liberal supporters left in this 
province. 
 
We tip our hat to the Liberal leader for his influence on this 
NDP patronage machine. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Alcatel Canada Wire Contract 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the House 
of some very exciting news coming out of the city of Weyburn. 
 
Alcatel Canada Wire has signed a new seven-year multi-million 
dollar contract with SaskPower. 
 
Alcatel which began operating in Weyburn in 1956 
manufactures underground, overhead, and secondary cables, 
overhead transmission conductors, control cable, and 
medium-voltage power cable. The Weyburn plant employs 110 
workers and runs at 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
 
Under the new contract, Mr. Speaker, Alcatel will continue to 
provide transmission and distribution cables to SaskPower until 
2006. The deal is worth an estimated 40 to $50 million. This 
agreement will also assist with a $20 million plant expansion 
that will in turn create an additional 60 jobs. 
 
SaskPower has a 44-year history with Alcatel and is one of its 
biggest customers in Saskatchewan. SaskPower recognizes the 
important role businesses such as Alcatel plays in the vitality 
and economic health of this province. Since 1991, SaskPower 
has purchased almost 1.6 billion in products and services from 
suppliers in Saskatchewan. 
 
By buying from companies in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
SaskPower contributes to Saskatchewan’s economy which 
improves the quality of life for all people in Saskatchewan. 



362 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Cowboys’ Association 
Person of the Year Award Recipient 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
recognize a person who has shown to be a fine example of rural 
people at work for their community. He has been recognized for 
this community spirit with the Committee Person of the Year 
award given by the Canadian Cowboys’ Association. Mr. Dale 
Whitford of Rose Valley has been chairman of the Rose Valley 
Rodeo Association since its inception in 1995. Its beginnings 
were in response to a need in the community. 
 
The Rose Valley sports day committee was challenged by the 
need for a fundraiser to keep the skating rink operational. Mr. 
Whitford was instrumental in setting up and researching the 
event. Other communities were less than optimistic as to the 
longevity of the venture and the committee was told that three 
years was all that could be expected. 
 
With the dedication and hard work of Mr. Whitford and other 
committee members, the Rose Valley Harvest Rodeo Roundup 
has been a successful community event for five years. Having 
attended this rodeo with its sold-out crowds and the experience 
excitement, it’s easy to see why the event was named Rodeo of 
the Year by the Manitoba Cowboys’ Association in 1998. 
 
Let us join in the enthusiastic praise of the event and 
congratulate Dale Whitford on his achievements in developing 
and sustaining this worthwhile event for the betterment of the 
community of Rose Valley. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Gas Tax Reduction 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Minister of Finance. Yesterday wasn’t a very good day for the 
Minister of Finance and for this budget. The realtors waded in 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and trashed the budget. They pointed 
out that for the average homeowner or in the case of people 
wanting to buy a home or sell a home this budget would 
increase taxes by about $400 on an average purchase. 
 
Not to make too fine a point on it, Mr. Speaker, but that is a tax 
hike, not a tax cut. The minister says though that this budget 
will be good for the real estate industry. No wonder you don’t 
want to cut gas taxes, Mr. Minister — you think high taxes are 
good. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s not too late. You can still take some action 
today. Use some of your $700 million slush fund, provide some 
much-needed and emergent tax relief at the pumps, and trigger 
some federal tax relief, Mr. Minister, at least on a temporary 
basis. Will you do that? Will you cut gas taxes today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to offer an 
apology to the members opposite with respect to something I 

said yesterday. Yesterday I pointed out that the member from 
Kindersley and the member from Moosomin campaigned in the 
1991 general election along with Grant Devine to harmonize the 
PST (provincial sales tax) with the GST (goods and services 
tax), but I neglected to mention that the member from 
Cannington also campaigned for that, Mr. Speaker. I don’t want 
the member from Cannington to feel left out. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the problem with the 
members opposite is that they have learned nothing from the 
past. Because two words come to mind when we listen to the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker, and those words are Grant 
Devine. 
 
We had this in the 1980s, a promise to do away with the gas 
tax. And what happened, Mr. Speaker? Well they did away with 
the gas tax. Next headline was, “Devine slashes major 
programs.” And finally at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, the 
gas tax went back on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know whether to 
laugh or cry, Mr. Speaker. This is all very interesting. It would 
seem if you took the minister’s logic to its own paranoid 
conclusion, that Grant Devine is somehow pulling the strings of 
the federal Liberal Minister of Finance, because that’s who 
started this whole discussion about a gas tax cut, Mr. Minister 
— it was the federal Liberal government. 
 
Maybe, Mr. Minister, if we looked hard enough, we could 
determine that Grant Devine is actually the power behind OPEC 
(Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries). Maybe he’s 
the reason that world oil prices are so high. He may even be 
controlling world wheat prices just to get back at all you guys, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re proposing a very reasonable 
and affordable measure to help taxpayers, where every $2 of tax 
savings for Saskatchewan people would only cost us 1. 
 
Why won’t you do that, Mr. Minister? Why won’t you cut the 
gas tax now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, in case the member opposite 
doesn’t know, gas taxes have not gone up in Saskatchewan 
since 1993. The increase in prices, Mr. Speaker, are going to the 
oil companies. 
 
And what this member is really saying is that the oil companies 
should get all of the money from the gas prices, the people of 
Saskatchewan should get none of the money, which money, Mr. 
Speaker, we need to repair the roads. 
 
And I want to say to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that 
the federal government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. All hon. members, please. I 
would ask for your co-operation to allow the question to be 



March 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 363 

heard and also, please, to allow the answer to be heard, for 
everyone’s benefit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite 
should explain to the people of the province why the federal 
government, which contributes nothing to the maintenance of 
the highway system in Saskatchewan, should be talking to us 
about cutting our taxes when, Mr. Speaker, we’re contributing 
$250 million of the tax revenue we take in to road construction 
and maintenance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we should be talking about is responsible, reasonable 
public policy that would say we should have federal money and 
provincial money going into our highway system as we are 
doing in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all know how good 
a job this government is doing about fixing the highways. The 
minister was talking about that in his answer. That’s pretty 
clear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about lessons from the past. I 
think the most important political lesson that all political parties 
should remember is that when governments grow fat and 
arrogant, they will be headed — destined — for an electoral 
horsewhipping of biblical proportion, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
lesson that they haven’t learned over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Minister, for months farm groups and 
members of this Assembly, all members — the Premier, the 
Deputy Premier, members of this side — banded together and 
struggled to get federal farm aid . . . federal money. It was like 
pulling teeth. 
 
Now overnight the federal Minister of Finance has put 
potentially millions of federal tax dollars on the table for 
Saskatchewan motorists, but you won’t meet them halfway. 
Taxpayers expect you to cut taxes now. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Party is proposing a $120 
million tax cut that would only cost you $60 million. You don’t 
need a provincial income tax review committee to tell you that 
that’s a pretty good tax cut. Why won’t you even consider the 
proposal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, two days ago I delivered a 
budget which represents the largest tax cut in Saskatchewan 
history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — On July 1 of this year, the Saskatchewan 
flat tax brought in by the Grant Devine government is going to 
be cut in half. On January 1, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be 
eliminated. 
 
And this kind of thinking, Mr. Speaker, leads us to this. I’m 

quoting from The Leader-Post, March 6, 1990, where the 
former leader of the members opposite, Mr. Devine, said this. 
He said: 
 

You know, when I was first elected Premier in 1982, I said 
Saskatchewan people would not have to pay provincial tax 
on gasoline at the pump as long as I was the Premier. 
Tonight I have to tell you that I can no longer deliver on 
that promise. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this kind of thinking did not add up in the 1980s; 
it does not add up today. It leads to deficit, it leads to debt, and 
it leads to mortgaging our children’s future. And we’re not 
going to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, everyone in 
Saskatchewan shuddered when you told reporters that you were 
the vision — you were the driving force behind Roy Romanow 
and the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know who should have been more worried 
— the NDP government or the people of Saskatchewan. After 
all, before the Education minister joined the NDP, he used his 
political vision first of all to destroy the Liberal caucus and then 
embarrass the Liberal Party with the most brutal provincial 
election campaign anybody had seen. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, the good doctor is bringing his same 
vision to his job as Education minister. Just ask the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association). Thanks to this 
guy’s so-called vision, school boards are saying they’re going 
to have to close schools and fire teachers and cut programs. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that your vision for education? Is your vision to 
close schools and fire teachers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly a 
very interesting preamble from the member opposite who has 
no list of accomplishments in a second-term career. But let’s 
just talk about Education for a minute here. 
 
This year, budget over budget, 7.2 per cent increase on the 
foundation operating grant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — This year an additional 5 million for 
capital projects — an increase of 20.7 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — New funding recognition for 
curriculum actualization — an increase of 25 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



364 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, the basic pupil rate 
increases by $262 so every division that has enrolment 
increases will get more money. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, maybe the member doesn’t 
remember that not every division has enrolment increases. 
 
Mr. Minister, the SSTA said that you’re not telling the truth. 
They said your government slashed 300 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Now just . . . All hon. 
members, order, please. I would ask members to please choose 
their words judiciously in requesting questions and in the 
responses, please. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The SSTA said that 
you were misleading people by exaggerating budget numbers. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And that’s a quote. 
 
Ms. Draude: — That’s a quote. 
 
The Speaker: — Well it still . . . It borders on language that 
may impute a member’s character. And I’d ask the hon. 
member to please choose the words again judiciously. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Okay. Mr. Minister, you spent budget day 
bragging that school boards were happy with your so-called 
vision for education. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, to quote the present of . . . president of the 
SSTA, quote: “nothing could be further from the truth.” School 
boards are saying your education budget forgets children. They 
say your vision is devastating education in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, what advice do you have to school divisions who 
are right now forced to close schools and fire teachers just so 
they can try and live within this budget that you’ve given? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems the 
only confusion on this budget is in the minds of the opposition. 
The fact of the matter is, the fact . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I once again would appeal to 
all hon. members to allow the questions to be heard and the 
responses to be heard as well, for everyone’s benefit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 
I’m pleased that now the members opposite will be able to 
listen to the answer. 
 
The budget . . . the budget-over-budget increases — $28.5 
million. The increase on the foundation operating grant for this 
year is $18.5 million, an increase of 4.7 per cent. 
 
So what per cent do you want to argue — the 4.7 or the 7.2? 
The 4.7 is three times the rate of inflation; the 7.2 is six times 
the rate of inflation. Significant increases for our schools. 
 
And with the capital projects that will be announced in the next 

two to three weeks, there will be significant improvements for 
the children in this province, and we are very proud of our 
education budget. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well during the 
provincial campaign the minister said that he was going to put 
$50 million into education — $50 million. What he actually put 
is one-third of that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the SSTA president, Gary Shaddock, raised 
some serious and legitimate concerns for school divisions. And 
you know what he said — the minister didn’t know what he 
was talking about. 
 
And Mr. Shaddock said that you . . . You said Mr. Shaddock 
didn’t understand your visionary leadership. That’s what you 
said. He said school divisions have had bad news for so long, 
they just don’t recognize good news when they see it. 
 
Mr. Minister, school divisions have no problem understanding 
that your government has turned your back on education. So 
what’s your advice to school boards when they have to close 
schools and fire teachers after you break just another election 
promise? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Speaker, after answering 
the first two questions, there seems to be still confusion in the 
minds of the opposition. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about improvements 
over the last several years with regard to education, certainly we 
can talk about funding issues. And this is a special year and I’ll 
try to explain to the members opposite why this is a special 
year, but I will go very slow. 
 
This is a transition year. We are moving — we are moving — 
from a calendar year to a fiscal year. Now let’s . . . I’m going to 
ask a question to the members opposite. In this particular 
calendar year, there is a three-month transition on the front end 
— amounts to an increase of close to 20 per cent over a fiscal 
quarter last year. The increase in the foundation operating grant 
this year has been worked out with the school trustees and they 
will receive 7 of the 10 equal payments this year. But they will 
get a bonus next year on the quarter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — School divisions are not worried about a 
transition period. The school divisions are worried that they 
didn’t get enough money to fund their school divisions right 
now. You’ve cut $380 million from the Education budget since 
1991. 
 
The president of the SSTA described what your vision is for 
education like this, and I quote: 
 

Some government comments would lead the public to 
believe school boards should be pleased with the budget. 
Nothing could be further from the truth. 
 

Mr. Minister, just in case you don’t get the gist of what the 



March 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 365 

school divisions are trying to say, I want you to hear what they 
said about the result of your vision, quote: 
 

That means school boards will be left with very tough 
decisions. Cutting programs, closing schools, or cutting 
staff is what faces many school boards in the future. Once 
again it’s the children in the classroom who will suffer. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education has failed the children 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, do you think school divisions 
just don’t understand, or will you admit that your so-called 
visionary leadership is what the problem is? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems that 
the members opposite are a little slow in getting the points this 
morning. In any situation where you’re a little slow in getting 
the message, I’ll just repeat the message for them: $28.5 million 
increase, an increase of 7.2 per cent in the foundation operating 
grant budget over budget; 18.5 million this calendar year, an 
increase of 4.7 per cent; 5 million extra dollars on capital, an 
increase of 20.7 per cent; increased funding on a per student 
basis to the tune of well over $200; and additional money for 
pre-kindergarten programs, community schools, community 
coordinators in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
A tremendous budget. Our children will not suffer; they will be 
enhanced by this budget. And the members opposite, what 
would they do for education? Not one penny — frozen. 
 

Closure of Court Houses 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Justice. Mr. Minister, just hours after the budget announcement 
on Wednesday the communities of Weyburn, Humboldt, and 
Assiniboia were informed their court houses would be closed. 
 
Mr. Minister, this news came as a sudden shock to these 
communities and the surrounding area. They’re upset because 
there was absolutely no consultation. They feel angry and they 
feel betrayed. 
 
Mr. Minister, these are busy court houses. On Tuesday this 
week, there were 19 cases on the court docket. Just two years 
ago, Weyburn Court of Queen’s Bench scheduling went from 
once every three weeks to biweekly because of the high 
caseload. Yet you say they’re closing because of a low 
caseload. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you today on behalf of the citizens of these 
three communities, will you reverse this decision and reopen 
these court houses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for her question and to indicate that none of these 
decisions are made gladly. We understand that this poses an 
extra burden on individuals and lawyers in those communities. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, government’s responsibility is to use tax 
dollars wisely, efficiently, and effectively. And sometimes this 

means difficult decisions, something the member opposite 
perhaps doesn’t understand. 
 
I suggest to her that she look at the context of this decision in 
the context of the budget as a whole, with major significant, 
extra commitments to rural Saskatchewan. Let me just mention 
the education tax deduction and the gas tax rebate as two, Mr. 
Speaker — $35 million alone. Not to mention the biggest tax 
break in Saskatchewan history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, the minister says 
this measure will save half a million dollars. That’s exactly the 
amount you increased your budget in your administration office 
by. You closed down court houses to spend more money on 
bureaucracy. Mr. Minister, the people of Saskatchewan believe 
it’s time you got your government and your department’s 
priorities straight. 
 
I also wonder why there is an increase of $4 million in your 
budget for court services. You are closing down the court house 
in three communities. I raised the issue of losing a judge in 
Weyburn during the election campaign. Judy Bradley said, I 
was fearmongering. Not even I could have imagined that you 
would close the entire court house. 
 
Mr. Minister, is there no limit to your government’s assault on 
rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
let me reiterate that none of these decisions are made easily. But 
as usage reduces in court houses and in government services we 
have to reassess the availability of those resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the savings of a quarter of a million dollars this 
year, a half a million dollars next year, will ensure that these 
resources can be better allocated to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan — including the member’s own . . . the 
member’s own constituents. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, more police officers, more help for 
legal aid, Mr. Speaker, and more facilities . . . more resources 
for courts whose business have increased. Let me say, Mr. 
Speaker, that the member should understand that these 
decisions have to be made on the basis of economic efficiency 
and common sense. 
 
Does she want us to go back to the days of her old 
Devine-buddy times, Mr. Speaker, when taxpayers’ money was 
spent without fear, without thought of the consequences? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Hon. members, before the next 
question is posed, just a reminder to direct your questions and 
comments through the Chair, rather than directly to the 
members opposite. I thank you for your co-operation. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — The people in Weyburn-Big Muddy pay taxes 
the same as everyone else in this province and they deserve to 
have the services in their community. 
 



366 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, the court house in Weyburn is a community 
landmark — such a proud symbol of the community that 
SaskTel, a government corporation, chose to put it on the cover 
of this year’s Estevan/Weyburn phone book. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is what you have done to the people of 
Weyburn — you have ripped the court house out of their 
community, and you . . . just like you’ve ripped the hospitals, 
and you’ve ripped the schools, and other essential services. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I appreciate, hon. 
members, the enthusiasm for this . . . Order, please. Order, 
please. Order. Order, order, please. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — The NDP take great joy in the demise of rural 
Saskatchewan. Well the people of rural Saskatchewan are sick 
and tired of having their hospitals, their schools, and their 
essential services ripped out of their communities. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people of Weyburn are not going to take this 
from your government. Today I am asking everyone in 
Weyburn to rip the front off of their phone book and send it to 
me to protest the way the NDP has ripped the court house out of 
our community. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you reverse this decision? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 
member’s Tory friends in the past — and she was very close to 
those Tories, Mr. Speaker — ripped the heart out of this 
province and we’ll still trying to pay for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 
member that provincial court services will remain in the three 
centres she talked about, Mr. Speaker, and those court days will 
be adequate to meet the demands of the citizens of that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll say that if those days which are presently 
allocated are not enough, then of course we will reassess it to 
see that those services are provided to meet the needs of the 
citizens of the three centres the member mentions, Mr. Speaker. 
So provincial court services are available and will continue to 
be available in those three centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to Queen’s Bench services it is 
simply the case, Mr. Speaker, that these three points are three of 
the lowest service points in the province. It is the case, Mr. 
Speaker, that the citizens are not using those services and they 
don’t need to be provided in the same way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, it is the NDP’s only answer to 
most questions is to blame someone else because they cannot 
give an answer, a straight answer, to the people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. There is absolutely no reason for this 
court house being closed. The lawyers in Weyburn are 
outraged, the community is outraged, and you are going to have 
to answer for it. 

Mr. Minister, will you reverse this decision? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the decision was made by 
careful analysis of the usage of the Weyburn court facilities, 
Mr. Speaker. And in order to use our resources efficiently and 
effectively, the decision was made that those resources did not 
warrant the continuation of those services up to date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the resources . . . the dollars that will be saved 
from this reallocation will be used to better the services of the 
people in Weyburn, Assiniboia, and Humboldt. The member 
knows that. More police, more legal aid, more things that the 
people of rural Saskatchewan need, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I am very happy, in fact the 
government is very happy to supply this answer, especially in 
the fact that it comes from the member from Cannington. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer is tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Cline, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 
Romanow that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Hermanson. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. It’s 
again a privilege to resume my reply to the budget speech. I 
believe I left off somewhere in the PST, and the expansion of 
the PST had taken me about 10 minutes to name all the items 
that the PST has been expanded to. And there have been a lot of 
different items. I believe I left off on pet food, of all the things. 
Isn’t that right, member from Yorkton, pet food? 
 
There’s also dry cleaning and vet fees and a number of other 
things. And that’s only what came into effect two nights ago. 
There are a number of other items that are going to be coming 
into effect July 1, which I don’t think the minister made quite as 
clear as what I think he should have made it clear. 
 
All professional fees, such as legal and accounting fees, 
architectural fees, consulting and engineering services, building 
services, advertising services, and employment services. The 
PST has done nothing but expand. 
 
This government, only about a month ago, had the nerve to 
raise SaskTel rates about 18 to 23 per cent. They also looked at 
SaskEnergy rates and they raised them 10 to 11 per cent. And 



March 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 367 

then have the gall to say that this is a historic tax cut. I don’t see 
how they can stand there and say that. 
 
If you look in the last six months of this NDP government, not 
only have they broadened the PST to collect a whole bunch 
more money, they’ve also increased services such as SaskTel 
and SaskEnergy. 
 
I was talking to a fellow, an older fellow that was talking about 
this PST expansion. And they talk about the income tax 
reduction, and that’s going to be in a couple of years. But with 
the health care system that we have got in this province that, as 
the minister explained herself, is on the ropes, the chances of 
some people making it to that tax cut aren’t very good. And all 
they can see themselves doing right now is putting more money 
out; more money out before they see any sort of tax cut in the 
future. And I think it’s a real shame. 
 
The other issue that comes to light on this PST expansion — 
not only on the expansion but also putting it on the First 
Nations people — was . . . I was talking to a drug store owner 
that is in the northern part of my constituency, and she was just 
absolutely outraged in the response that she got yesterday. 
There was no pre-work done with them. All of a sudden they’re 
the front line workers that have to do the dirty work of this 
provincial government. And they have had nothing but 
problems with it all day yesterday, and I’m sure it’s going to be 
going on for weeks and weeks to come. 
 
And it’s just the typical — keep it quiet. When we campaigned, 
we campaigned on that very issue — the PST on First Nations. 
These people said they’d never do it; never do it. And then their 
first budget, come in with something like that. 
 
Other issues that I wanted to address in this historic budget — I 
really hesitate to call it that — is the lack of funding for 
highways. I was talking to a number of the people in the 
highway construction industry — road builders themselves — 
and they really had to laugh that they’ve gone up to $250 
million. And the government is selling this budget on $250 
million into road construction. 
 
When they looked at their increased costs of the added PST, 
when they looked at the increased costs of fuel that they’re 
going to have to be paying in the upcoming construction season, 
they feel that the budget increase is going to amount to about 
five to ten kilometres of road, new road construction. That’s not 
enough for this province. That’s another group that’s upset with 
the budget. 
 
Health care. I’ll talk about health care for a . . . just a few 
minutes here. Health care. The budget did increase in health 
care, and that is great. But when you look at . . . I guess what I 
would like to say about health care, if the government and the 
minister would take that money and put it to front line workers. 
Or are they going to build more hospital operating rooms just to 
have them lie vacant because they don’t have enough front line 
workers? 
 
I really wish and ask the minister to take the money that they 
have put into health care and put it into front line services so we 
can use the facilities that we spent millions and millions and 
millions of dollars to expand to. And then leave them closed 

because we don’t have anybody to man them. 
 
Municipal Affairs has critic . . . when I first got, when I was 
first asked to be the urban Municipal Affairs critic, I thought, 
well this shouldn’t be too bad. What is going to be, what is 
going to be taking place in municipal affairs? 
 
Well after the budget, I’ve sure been getting a lot of phone calls. 
After the tax revolt meetings I’ve been to, a number of phone 
calls over that. One of the issues . . . I was looking through the 
budget, and in the Estimates on page no. 91, I see in the 
Estimates that policing costs restructuring assistance is, as what 
the opposition likes to say or as the government likes to say, 
zap, it’s frozen. Well unfortunately in this case, zap, it’s gone. 
There is no money for policing in this area. They’ve taken it 
away completely. And that’s going to affect rural residents 
hugely. 
 
You take to an RM (rural municipality) with roughly about a 
thousand people, it could be an increase in their mill — they’re 
going to have to find the money and make it up in the mill rate 
— of about $15,000 per RM. It’s huge. It’s not zap, it’s frozen; 
it’s zap, it’s gone. And that’s the way this government operates. 
 
The millennium fund of about $30 million a year over the next 
three years. They’ve talked about that and they have hung their 
hat on that, on what a great program it is. But again talking to 
municipalities and different organizations, by the time you 
weed that down into all the different areas that that $30 million 
has to cover, whether it’s school construction, whether it’s 
infrastructure, whether it’s whatever it might be that this money 
is supposed to go to, most RMs feel that it’s absolutely 
minimal. It’s not going to do them really one bit of good. 
 
Amalgamation. I have attended a number of meetings recently 
on municipal amalgamation, and it’s really interesting. I wish 
some of the people in government would attend a few of those 
because they’re hopping mad out there. They don’t want to see 
it. 
 
But unfortunately when this provincial government keeps 
forcing their hand and forcing their hand, it really becomes a 
forced amalgamation through government. We really feel it’s 
got to be from the bottom up. 
 
The other area I just want to touch on briefly is the fact of them 
patting their backs . . . selves on the back for the last seven 
years of balanced budget. Well when you take the $700,000 
they took out of the slush fund to balance this budget, they say 
they’re going to run a $400 million surplus. That means they’re 
taking 2 to 300 million out of that slush fund to balance the 
budget. To me that’s a far cry from balancing the budget. 
 
I remember a number of years ago as a farmer when the GRIP 
(gross revenue insurance program) was ripped up and they took 
all the money out of that to balance the budget. 
 
They keep talking on how wonderful they are on balancing the 
budget, but it’s always on the backs of . . . for one time it was 
farmers, now it’s through the liquor and gaming fund. That’s 
not what I call a balanced budget. 
 
I guess what concerns me most about this budget, Mr. Speaker, 



368 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2000 

is the fact that we know that people are leaving our province. 
We know that people are moving to Alberta; they’re moving to 
Manitoba, Ontario, down to the States, on a regular basis. I 
know of a number of people in my community, in my 
constituency, that are in the process of moving. 
 
It used to be we’d lose our young kids because the young kids 
are moving out of our province to find greener pastures. And 
there’s always going to be a certain amount of that. 
 
But unfortunately, what’s happening now is a lot of people that 
have lived their life in Saskatchewan, finding they can not make 
a go with the tax structure this government has imposed on 
them and they’re taking all their savings and moving out too. So 
it’s not just the young people we’re losing, we’re also losing a 
number of our retired people because they can’t handle the tax 
structure that this government places on them. And there’s 
nothing in this budget that I see will keep people in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last comment that I want to make is to the 
Minister of Finance. You know, I liken this budget to a bit of 
baseball game. You know, he was up to bat and he had the pitch 
coming in. It was called the budget and he missed that one 
completely. He struck out on the budget. 
 
We are offering him another pitch. Just a nice slow softball 
coming in, and I wish he could envision it. It’s called a tax cut 
on gasoline. And it’s coming in nice and slow. It’s coming in 
nice and slow and I wish he could envision it. I wish he could 
see making contact with that because, Mr. Speaker, it may not 
be a home run pitch but maybe it’s something that will keep us 
in the ball game for another inning or two, because right now 
we are not going to remain in the ball game. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great pleasure to 
support the amendment put forth by the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, the Leader of the Official Opposition. I thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wasn’t 
sure that I was going to get up and speak to the budget, but it’s 
so inspirational listening to everybody talk that I couldn’t resist 
the opportunity. 
 
I have a bit of a special advantage over some of my colleagues 
in addressing the budget because I do sit on Treasury Board and 
some of the important parts of a budget are the details. And 
certainly for myself, the details have a lot to do with how I feel 
about this budget. 
 
But there are four general themes, Mr. Speaker. One is tax 
relief. Another one is vastly increased opportunities for jobs and 
education. Another one is a balanced approach for both the 
economy and families, and more effective services. 
 
And I’m just going to spend a little time describing for you 
some of the detail because I know you may not have read 
through the entire budget yet to find these things. 

There’s many new opportunities in developing sectors of the 
economy. Now one of the things as Minister of Labour that I’m 
always concerned about is not just growth in jobs. It’s 
wonderful that we have the highest number of jobs in the 
history of the province, but what’s important is the quality of 
these jobs. And the kind of work that’s being done by the 
Minister of Economic Development and Minister of Agriculture 
is to develop those high quality jobs in developing sectors of 
our economy. 
 
For example in the environment, in the forestry sector, not only 
is there the tree planting going on for reforestation, but there’s a 
lot of work being done in CO2 capture to deal with the carbon 
issues in the environment. And one of the commitments in this 
budget has been to vastly increase the amount of money put 
towards reforestation and CO2 capture in the environment. And 
that’s going to create a lot of new jobs for northern people and 
other people in the forestry industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now our Department of Labour, we’ve gotten increased money 
because the industry has asked us to do more on occupational 
health and safety training so that we can make sure that these 
new forestry developments are very positive for everybody and 
that people have the education that they need to work safely in 
these industries. 
 
Another area is the development of high-tech research jobs in 
the province. Both at Innovation Place in Saskatoon and at the 
Research Park in Regina we’re seeing a substantial growth in 
high-technology jobs and research jobs that will certainly have 
that quality job we’re looking for and the high-income earner 
that will contribute to the provincial economy. And these things 
have been growing extremely rapidly in the past few years, and 
I’m pleased to be part of a government that has supported those 
developments in Saskatchewan. 
 
In the agricultural area there’s been a lot of talk about 
diversification. And actually just recently on the CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) discussion about oil 
prices. And I guess the approach that the members opposite are 
taking is one approach. But there’s other people talking about 
new fuels and certainly ethanol is an important part of rural 
diversification and an important part of some of the options for 
looking at alternative fuels of the future. And in this budget we 
do support the production and use of ethanol in the province, as 
well as food processing, new crop production, and agricultural 
research generally. 
 
(1100) 
 
So I think there’s a lot in the budget to build for the future in 
terms of high-quality, sustainable incomes in jobs in the rural 
areas, not merely being dependent on areas that have not done 
well in world markets, particularly with the European and US 
(United States) subsidies. 
 
The other one is the deep oil initiative where we’re recovering a 
lot more of the oil, even from existing mines, and able to . . . I 
was actually pretty pleased to find out that there’s a lot of oil in 
the Regina basin area. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And the hot air across the hall too. 
 



March 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And yes, that’ll complement the hot air 
across the way. 
 
But this deep oil initiative of course is important to us because 
the new fuels that are going along — they’ll be a few years in 
development and a few years before people’s vehicles and gas 
stations and whatnot adapt to the new fuels that are available — 
but certainly the deep oil initiative is an important one. 
 
There’s also, Mr. Speaker, new opportunities in 
communications and transportation. I’m sure most people by 
now are familiar with the LAND (Land Titles automated 
network development) project which is a high technology 
project for people with land use information, land titles, and the 
GIS (Geographic Information System) systems that people 
depend on very much today when they’re doing any kind of 
exploration or development work. 
 
And I think this new Crown is going to again boost up the high 
quality jobs in the high-tech sector in Saskatchewan, as well as 
providing people with the important information they need for 
development. 
 
The other one is technology-enhanced learning. Perhaps we 
might at some point have a computer on every desk in the 
legislature and then it would be possible to actually deliver 
some information to the members opposite, seeing as their ears 
don’t seem to work particularly well. 
 
The technology-enhanced learning — there are agricultural 
students at the university in Saskatoon who are receiving their 
education through distance education — many of the students 
with the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) and technical schools. There are engineering 
students who are in co-operative programs between Calgary and 
Saskatchewan that are receiving technology-enhanced learning. 
 
This is a big area for people to be able to do some extra learning 
without having to travel to a different destination to do that 
learning. And in an era when people have to be retrained several 
times during their lifetime, there’s no question that the ability to 
do that from your workplace or your home is a big advantage 
over having to pull up stakes and move to Toronto or someplace 
else to take a specialized course. 
 
So I was glad to see the commitment, extra commitment to 
technology-enhanced learning in this budget. 
 
In highways, the twinning of the Yellowhead, that’s been an 
outstanding commitment and that’s proceeding along. 
 
So I think there’s a number of things to be pleased about in the 
communications and transportation area. 
 
In the learning area, we heard the Minister of Education during 
question period speaking to some of these matters but there’s 
the additional new capital fund on top of the already increased 
fund to the capital base. And that’s of course the fund that we’re 
having in honour of the centenary. And this is going to give a 
much increased opportunity for a lot of school districts to do 
some of the capital work they need to do, and again in the K to 
12 system, distance education. 
 

But a particularly important one for myself and my constituents 
is the community schools and the community education 
component, because a lot of the people in parts of my 
constituency require additional support at home and in school in 
order to have a successful educational experience. So I’m 
pleased to see the work there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other one that’s very important too, just a block from my 
office — in fact not even a whole block — is the Saskatchewan 
Independent Living organization, and I’m sure that they were 
very pleased to hear the announcement about the increased 
educational opportunities for the disabled. 
 
When somebody is born into a society, and whether that be a 
disabled individual, an Aboriginal individual, an immigrant or 
refugee — any of the people who typically are not well 
included in our society — sometimes it’s necessary for special 
initiatives to occur to make sure that everybody has the 
opportunity for full citizenship. 
 
And I just want to say that I think that these increased 
educational opportunities for the disabled are half of the 
equation. The other half of the equation is making sure the 
opportunities are there for them once they finish their 
education. And that’s something that all of us have to work on 
is making sure that we don’t relegate somebody to the back row 
merely because they have some kind of a disability. 
 
And finally, of course, in the education area the tax credit for 
post-secondary graduates. I think that they’ll be very pleased 
with having that reward at the end of their course of studies. 
 
Another area that’s been important is the working for safe and 
healthy communities. And of course this budget saw an increase 
to legal aid as well as the additional money in alternative 
measures and in policing. So I certainly know that that will be 
important to the legal aid community to have that extra 
assistance. 
 
I lived for many years, as you know, Mr. Speaker, in the North, 
and sewer and water of course is one of the key issues for health 
in the North. There’s a lot of illnesses connected with polluted 
drinking water and potable water for cooking and other uses. 
And certainly in this budget again we’ll see improvements to 
sewer and water for the North. 
 
And as well the centenary capital fund will provide that extra $5 
million for capital projects in the North. So I think the people of 
the North have a lot to be happy about in this budget as far as 
the kind of basic services that we take for granted here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In the area of health care there is 
improved support for health care providers. And we’re in a 
difficult situation in Canada where not only is the financial 
ability to respond to health care a challenge for everyone, but 
also very high expectations that people have of the health care 
system. But I believe that we’ve got a lot of good people 
working in the system and I believe that we will get this worked 
out. 
 
And I believe we’ll get the attention of Ottawa. And I wouldn’t 



370 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2000 

be at all surprised if in the next federal budget we see some 
response from Mr. Chrétien and Mr. Rock in the health care 
area. I’m certainly counting on them to come through for 
Canada on the issue of health care. 
 
For early childhood services, again that’s considered to be one 
of the most important hallmarks of our government, the early 
childhood intervention programs which we’ve again increased 
support to. 
 
In the Department of Labour, we are commencing this year with 
further work on our balancing work and family initiatives so 
that people can go to work and still be able to meet their family 
obligations, and not have to feel constantly torn between home 
and work. 
 
And we’re hoping to work closely with employers on being 
successful on these kinds of initiatives, because of course you 
can’t do it without an employer who’s interested in working 
that out. But I think most progressive employers would agree 
that to have happy employees who aren’t distracted by worries 
from home creates a much better workplace and a more 
productive workplace. 
 
As well, there’s increased funding to daycare in this budget. 
Every year we’ve attempted to make improvements to the 
daycare envelope in Saskatchewan, and there’s another 500,000 
again going into improvements to day care. And, as a 
grandmother who has part-time care of my granddaughter, I’ve 
certainly started paying a little more attention to daycare again 
than I did for a few years, and I’m very pleased with the 
arrangements that we have. But I do think this is an important 
area that we need to look even further at in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — As you know, part of this budget 
finances the labour standards review that will be coming up this 
year. And having labour law keep pace with modern changes in 
the workplace is very important, because the whole idea of 
labour law is to give people basic protection in their working 
lives. 
 
It’s not unlike fire laws, or health laws, or any kind of laws that 
provide some basic standard for society. So when we go 
through the labour standards review, we’ll have to think about 
the changes there’s been in the workplace and how we can give 
people that basic protection in the workplace of today. And I 
know that the members opposite will no doubt want to be 
supportive of that kind of thinking. 
 
The other aspect I want to speak to just a minute is the 
cost-effective government services, but also the government 
accountability project that’s taking place through the Finance 
department. 
 
Often, I think, when people pay taxes and some of this cry for 
tax cuts, some of it is because there has been a growing tax 
burden over the years, but part of it is because people become 
unsure what they’re purchasing with their tax dollars. 
 
And I think this accountability project will be very important 
for setting out some guidelines as to what people are trying to 

achieve in the different departments, what progress they’ve 
made in the past year in achieving those things. And certainly I 
look forward to having those measurable standards within our 
departments. 
 
And obviously some things are difficult to measure but I think 
we can get to a point where we have a better idea about the 
effectiveness and people will then perhaps be a little more 
satisfied that the dollars that they part with are being spent 
wisely and in the best interests of the public at large. So I’m 
very supportive of this project. 
 
The other thing I want to mention is this fund that’s been 
created in this budget which is targeted to be 5 per cent of 
budget. And I do find it passing strange that the members across 
the way would object to this because any responsible family, 
any responsible municipality, any responsible institution, would 
try to set aside at least 5 per cent of their budget to deal with 
urgent or emergent matters; and I think that’s only financially 
wise and responsible to do that and I certainly have a hard time 
understanding why they would be opposed to that. 
 
The other thing I want to mention is when they’re raising 
concerns about taxes raised, taxes lowered, the fact of the 
matter is when we designed our tax package, we took all of that 
into account. When we give you the figures of the tax savings, 
that’s deducting the increased PST from the total tax cut and 
what you get at the end is the total saving that you’re going to 
have. 
 
So for a single-income family which is two adults, two children, 
at a taxable income of 37,000, they will save $1,351. For a 
two-income family, two adults and two children with an 
employment income of 80,000, their net saving after the PST, 
after the income tax cuts, will be 1,312. For a single senior, of 
which there’s certainly many in my constituency, with a taxable 
income of 20,000, their net savings will be $540. For a single, 
part-time student, their net savings will be 228; and of course 
for students every little bit helps, there’s no question. 
 
So those are the net savings. This is after the PST, after the tax 
cut. And certainly it averages out to the thousand dollars a year 
promised in the election. But for individuals who have larger 
families, obviously the savings will be greater than that. 
 
I guess the last thing I want to say is there’s two things that 
contributed the most to the reprehensible debt that was left 
behind by the previous government. And I know people get 
tired of hearing about it, but when you sit in Finance and realize 
that it’s going to take many, many years yet before this burden 
is lifted from Saskatchewan — maybe a couple of more 
generations — you do have to take very seriously the 
repercussions of irresponsible financial management. 
 
And the fact of the matter is there was two things that 
contributed largely to that debt, that were policies of that 
government. One was the home repair program, and the other 
one was the gas tax program. And so here we have a group 
today that’s proposing the same foolishness with the gas tax 
that got us into so much trouble before, and that Devine 
couldn’t sustain and had to put that tax back on. So I please ask 
the members opposite to learn from the past. And I speak 
against the amendment and for the budget. 



March 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 371 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s good to have an 
opportunity to respond to the budget and some of the things that 
were in it and some of the things that weren’t or aren’t in there, 
as well as to some of the comments that the NDP democratic 
socialists over there have been spewing forth over the last day 
or two. 
 
And I guess they’re hoping that the people that are watching are 
ignorant. They’re not. And that’s why, in the last election, the 
NDP over there received less than the most votes in this 
province. And that’s a bit of arrogance that they thought they 
had caught on to the day after the election. They seem to have 
forgotten a whole lot about that. 
 
Anyway, this is an interesting budget. It’s an interesting budget 
because it reminds me a whole lot of figure skating. And 
unfortunately in my home when figure skating is on, the 
television gets turned to that. And I’m not a fan of it but my 
spouse is so I do get to see it from time to time. And you will 
see the skaters skating around the arena getting ready to do a 
quad or something of that sort. And they get to their particular 
location, and they’re up and they’re high and they come down 
and it’s been just beautiful, and then they fall on their tush. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s exactly what’s happened with 
this particular budget. 
 
(1115) 
 
There was a lot of lead-up to it. It had some good directions as 
they started down. And when we look at the thing at the end of 
the time, what are the final results for the taxpayers of this 
particular province? It was a total failure. They fell on their 
face. We’ve given them a few chances to recover, and I’ll say a 
bit about that later on, but they’re lying on the ice shivering. 
 
It’s a cold, cold day in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, from this 
particular budget that’s been sent down to us. It hasn’t been 
pretty in any stretch of the imagination. 
 
And let’s deal with these issues that were in the budget as they 
sort of came up. 
 
First of all, we’ve had in the last number of months two major 
increases in utility rates. Major increases in utility rates that the 
cabinet from this NDP democratic socialist government, Mr. 
Speaker, voted to maintain. 
 
They had the opportunity, they had the opportunity to say no, 
we’re not going to put that tax on the people of Saskatchewan 
because, Mr. Speaker, it is a tax. Because when you check the 
books you see that there’s money. The profit that those Crowns 
made, this government takes to run the government. So it’s a 
tax. They got the money from the people; they didn’t print it. 
They might have wanted to, but they didn’t. 
 
Those particular utility rate increases equal $41 million. 
They’ve already started taking those, a couple of weeks before 
the budget came down. They’ve already started to collect those. 
So there’s a tax increase that’s been going part way through this 

winter, fully in place on budget day — $41 million. 
 
Yes, but then we heard the Minister of Finance get up on budget 
day and say how they’ve paid attention and there is going to be 
a tax cut. That particular tax cut, Mr. Speaker, comes out to 
about $43 million. Awfully close to the grab they just took out 
of the utilities. Very, very close to it. So at the end of the day, 
just balancing those two things off, they’re virtually equal — 
virtually equal. 
 
So what have the people of Saskatchewan gained from this 
particular government dealing with just those two issues? 
Essentially, nothing. 
 
I think if you figure it out, we figure it out . . . and we’ve got the 
member from Yorkton saying, what kind of math? It’s very 
easy math. We’re not down to even three-digit numbers yet, Mr. 
Speaker, and the member from Yorkton is confused. No wonder 
he got confused when the numbers got a little larger. 
 
So we look at that and we see that with the best news possible it 
could amount to about $2 a month per person in Saskatchewan 
— that’s if absolutely everything turns out right — $2 per 
person. And they call that a major tax cut of historic 
proportions. 
 
You’d think that Charlton Heston or someone had come in here 
and delivered that, of the grandeur that was built around this 
particular budget that was supposed to save the people of 
Saskatchewan so much money. 
 
So we’ve got about $2 a month per person in Saskatchewan — 
from only that particular part, only that particular part. Then 
along comes another part that we have to pay some very 
definite attention to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We had this government, just like that skater that skates around 
the arena a few times to get ready for the jump, well they sent 
around the Vicq commission to go ahead and sort of get ready 
for the big jump. Well the Vicq commission came up and said 
yes, there has to be a major tax cut in this particular province. 
 
This government knew that, Mr. Speaker, because the Sask 
Party campaigned on tax cuts in the last election and we got 
more votes than they did. We’ll get more votes next time. And 
some of those people back there that are squeaking away in the 
back rows will be gone next time, because this was not a tax 
cut. This was not an answer to what the people of Saskatchewan 
said they wanted. It wasn’t. 
 
So they sent around the Vicq commission to get this whole 
thing ready. Vicq commission says, major tax cut needed in 
income tax. So they granted a . . . they went down that road a 
fair distance. I’ll give them credit for that. And then they said, 
oh, but so help us. We are democratic socialists. We can’t cut 
tax. We’ve got to get it back some place. So the socialists over 
there got it back. 
 
The Vicq commission said, cut the sales tax and expand it. 
Well, we didn’t agree with that because there’s some taxing that 
takes place there. This group of New Democrats said, heaven 
help us if we’re going to cut the sales tax. We’re going to leave 
it where it is, and now we’re going to expand it. 



372 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2000 

Now if that isn’t cherry-picking. They picked the biggest, the 
ripest one. Something everyone’s got to do. It’s a consumption 
tax. We’ve got to stay alive; we have to spend the money. 
Every home has to do that. Okay, let’s tax them on that. When 
they’ve got to spend the money, let’s get them where they can’t 
avoid it in any way, shape, or form. So they taxed it on them — 
$155 million out of the pockets of Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
So now what have we got at the end of the day? What do we 
have? We had that close balance that was created between the 
utility tax grab and the income tax thing that they said they 
were going to give to us, and did to some extent. Then comes 
along the sales tax and they take $155 million more from the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I hope the people that are watching out there pay close 
attention to that when they start paying some of these extra 
costs that they will be paying, that they will be paying. They’ll 
be going out and getting their income tax done — there will be 
fees on that. They’ll want to do some building repair — there 
will be fees on that. They’ve even got goofy things like when 
employers want to have their employees fix their own building, 
they’re going to have to pay income . . . or pay a sales tax on 
that amount. Hard to believe. 
 
An employer says to his employee, well today it’s a little quiet; 
I’d rather not lay you off for the day or send you home; why 
don’t you just paint that wall out there? Oh, but the socialists 
say we’ve got to tax the guy for that. We’ve got to tax him for 
that. That’s fine thinking, that’s fine thinking. The only place 
we’ll get it is through people over there. They’re the only ones 
that will dream up something like that. So at the end of the day 
this is a tax grab. 
 
Now the budget has other components to it, and that is the 
various areas in the particular budget in the province. What kind 
of money is going to come down for that. 
 
Well I think this has been a government that traditionally has 
said our key areas of concern are always health and education. 
Well let’s look at those, and let’s not get it from the politicians 
over on that side who have been busy, you know, going around 
the rink getting ready for this jump. Let’s see the people who 
are going to be receiving that particular help. 
 
Health boards have been running in the red in the last numbers 
of years — we know that — to the extent that this government’s 
had to step in and just fire the lot of them. They said, we’re 
going to take over and try and run it. Well that’s going to be a 
scary scene on its own. 
 
The amount of money they’re putting into it is not even going 
to cover the amount that these particular hospital boards have 
been running in the red. So hospitals in essence will have 
lineups that are longer than they are right now. And they’ve 
already been doing the most bizarre things in health. 
 
I had a call from a lady in Saskatoon about a week ago. She fell 
in her home and had to be taken to Royal University Hospital 
by ambulance. There was no bed there for her, so they had her 
on a cot out in the hallway for about half a day and said, we 
have no room for you. So they shipped her off to another 
hospital by ambulance, but charged her for the ambulance. 

Where else but in Saskatchewan with an NDP government, sir, 
would that ever happen? 
 
So she ends up at home eventually with a stack of ambulance 
bills set out by this government’s policy as she’s shipped from 
one hospital to another. It’s bizarre — it’s bizarre. That’s just a 
very simple example of the sickness that exists in the health 
care system that this government has created. 
 
Let’s look at education, and it’s been interesting. Over the years 
the SSTA has always been very quiet and very gentle when it 
comes to budgets. They’ve always kind of hunkered down and 
said, well let’s go home and see if we can somehow manage to 
live within the less money that the NDP has given. 
 
And so what have they done — what have they done? Well, sir, 
they’ve refused to fix windows. They’ve said, well we’ll have 
longer bus routes. We’ll have longer bus routes. And you know, 
sir, as you can tell that already most scores, you know, out of 
2.5 the people over there are giving me 2.3, 2.4 out of 2.5. So, 
sir, I feel I’m quite well on this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — There’s a saying that comes over from that 
side very often that if you throw a stone, you hear a yelp, you 
know what you hit. Well they’re not yelping but they’re writing 
it on big sheets of paper, sir, and so I must feel that we’re on the 
right track here. 
 
Okay, so what would school boards do? They would go home 
and they’d lengthen the bus routes, might have to cut one and 
have a driver cover it all. They’d say we can’t fix those 
windows today; can’t fix them this year; we can’t do the roof; 
we can’t do this; we can’t do that. They’ve done that year after 
year after year. On top of which they’ve had to go back home 
and raise the property taxes. 
 
This year, this year the cuts to education, by the time all the 
chickens come home to roost, are so large that the SSTA has 
come out strongly and said, this is a disastrous budget for 
education. They talk about having school lunches. Tell if their 
budget carries out the way it’s been going there won’t be any 
Dick and Jane books for the kids to read out of. They may have 
a lunch but there won’t be any textbooks. They’ve totally 
decimated the education budget of this particular province. 
 
Now what was interesting is that the Minister of Education, Mr. 
Speaker, in talking about how good a budget he thought this 
was in education. He’s talking about the budget and he talks 
about the tax relief that’s given to farmland. And yes, there is 
some relief to farmland, and it’s very welcome. And you 
deserve some credit for that, the people on the NDP side. 
 
Now, now that you’ve applauded, all four of you have 
applauded yourselves on that one, what did the Minister of 
Education say was good about that? He said, now what’s good 
about that is the boards of education will have some place to get 
some more money. So what he basically said is this budget cut 
the education dollars. Now the school boards can go home and 
rip it back out of the pockets of the property owners again. 
 
Just shuffle it around. Call it a shell game, call it looking for the 



March 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

little pea, call it smoke and mirrors. Whatever it is, it’s a bad 
game and it’s hurting Saskatchewan at all levels. It’s hurting 
Saskatchewan at all levels. 
 
It’s been interesting, Mr. Speaker, over the past two days as 
we’ve had discussion on the budget, particularly when we’ve 
asked the questions in question period. About all that particular 
government side, the NDP side, Mr. Speaker, can come up with 
is going back through history. 
 
We haven’t had an answer to, why did you do this. We haven’t 
had an answer to, will you take this opportunity presented to us 
by the federal government of matching a cut on the cost of 
gasoline. When the Minister of Finance was asked about that, 
he didn’t say yes, he didn’t say no. He went back through the 
annals of history and tried to get the answer out of that. He took 
his time to answer, but he didn’t answer the question. We still 
don’t know whether he will or he won’t. 
 
The federal government puts cold, hard cash on the table and 
says to the provinces, if you will match this to give some relief 
on the cost of . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. I apologize to the 
hon. member for Rosthern, but I invite . . . there’s two particular 
members that are engaging in a rather boisterous conversation 
and I would urge those two members to take that conversation 
outside. I’m sure it’s a very interesting conversation but it is 
disruptive. 
 
Order, order. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure I 
needed that help; I thought I was doing quite fine. I received 
good marks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I would suggest though, that you might have 
some validity in the concern about people taking this outside. 
I’m sure the people back at Yorkton would like to hear their 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and see what he 
has to say on some of the tax moves that were made out here. 
So that was . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I just wish to remind all 
the members, particularly in this case the member for Rosthern, 
it’s inappropriate to make comment on any ruling from the 
Chair. The Chair will make a rule and then you just carry on 
with your speech. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The budget is 
hitting all sorts of people in very hard ways. Right after the 
budget came out, Mr. Speaker, I had a call from a person in my 
constituency that runs a greenhouse — I think virtually every 
community in my constituency has a greenhouse; some of them 
even have two or three — and saying that what’s happened in 
the last number of months from this government is really more 
than he can essentially handle. 
 
Because utility rate increases hit them very hard — hit them 
very hard. Especially the cost of heating. And so that was one 
that he had a very difficult time to be able to see how he’d be 

able to financially deal with it. 
 
(1130) 
 
Then along comes this tax increase. So now he’s had to pay tax 
on the things that he’s purchased, the sales tax. Now he’s 
supposed to collect it from the people that he’s selling it to, 
raising the cost of his product, in essence, reducing the sales 
that he’s going to have, putting some very serious hardship on 
his particular business. And he’s not sure whether he will be 
able to stay in business. 
 
It’s those kinds of stories that are coming from throughout my 
constituency. I talked to my constituency assistant this morning. 
Phone calls are coming in. Not one of them, Mr. Speaker, not 
one of them in favour of this budget, in spite of the number of 
turns the NDP did around this arena before they tried to do their 
quad and fell flat on their face. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one or two more things about the budget. Seven 
hundred million dollars from a government that not long ago 
said they had no money for people in need. They had no money 
to help those people who were suffering. They had no money 
for those people who were going to lose their farms. They just 
had no money. And bingo — $700 million — they found it. It 
would be amazing to know where it was. Hopefully they dug it 
out of Tommy Douglas House, but we couldn’t be so lucky. 
 
Seven hundred million dollars. And after having found that, 
they’re prepared to turn down the offer from the federal 
government to say, we will match you dollar for dollar on a 
savings that you want to put in the cost of gasoline for all the 
people of Saskatchewan driving our roads and our streets and 
our highways. And this minister’s not prepared to take them up 
on that. Just to see the money on the table, and he’s prepared to 
walk away from it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we just had a number of questions asked in 
question period about the closing of some court houses. An 
absolute shame. These court houses are busy. What was the best 
answer that the Minister of Justice had for it? 
 
He said, well we just cut the bottom few feet off the bottom 
legs. The question wasn’t, these are not being used. He just 
said, these are the least used. What a ludicrous answer, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In any situation where you have more than one, where you have 
more than one organization, more than one building, one will be 
the least used. So is it, well we’ll just chop the three that were 
used the least? 
 
It would be very much as if the minister from Social Services 
went to get a haircut, and his barber said, well, sir, in the 
process now for the next number of hours, I will only cut off the 
longest hair. And he works his way around his little head and he 
keeps cutting off the longest hair. And after about an hour or so, 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services would be bald. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly how the 
people of those three communities feel today. For absolutely no 



374 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2000 

valid reason whatsoever, they’ve had taken out of their 
communities those particular three court houses. 
 
And what’s interesting is, that comes from a government that 
made a promise about a year or so ago, that they put 200 more 
peace officers on the roads and streets of this particular 
province. They haven’t done that. They haven’t done that. 
 
So maybe I guess the logic that the socialists have over there, is 
let’s make sure we don’t catch the crooks, then we can close 
down the court houses because we have no need for them. 
That’s fine socialist logic over there. And if people sort of 
wonder and raise their eyebrows at that bit of an idea, it’s 
exactly what they’re doing. 
 
They refuse to give the resources to the law officers that are 
needed. And then they say well, there isn’t much use for the 
court houses. Well the crooks are out on the street, they’re not 
in the court houses and the jails where they ought to be. That’s 
the logic of this government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting going through this budget. 
Like I said, it came off as a very interesting budget. It had some 
good directions. It started off well and it fell flat on its face. 
And I think we’re going to see from the general public that has 
demanded some substantial tax cuts from this government over 
the past while, what they’re going to tell this government about 
this particular budget. And for that particular reason, Mr. 
Speaker, I cannot support this budget but I will be supporting 
the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise today to personally respond to the province’s 
first budget of the 21st century. It’s also a pleasure to say I’m 
back again to participate in this first session of the 24th 
legislature. And it’s nice to be back here with many familiar 
faces in the House and I’m looking forward to once again 
working with them and the new members that are here today as 
well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know you will also know how hard our 
Speaker has been working to present himself to this legislature 
in a fair and impartial manner, and to allow all of us on both 
sides of the House the opportunity to meet with him and to 
voice any concerns we might have or to raise issues that might 
help to make the House run more smoothly. 
 
And I congratulate him and want to say that that also adds to the 
processes here that work well for the province of Saskatchewan. 
It increases the responsibility to a democratic process. And I’m 
sure that all of us are very thankful that the House is run in such 
an efficient manner. 
 
And you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the chair also lend that air 
with your years of experience in this House. And I congratulate 
you as well. 
 
Before I respond directly to the hon. member’s balanced budget 
for this year, I would like to take a few moments also to say a 
few words to the people who helped me get here, and the 
members of the constituency who now provide support to me. I 

wasn’t able to respond to the Throne Speech, and it’s traditional 
that we might be able to do that then, so I want to take a few 
moments to tell people about Wascana Plains. 
 
I am now the MLA for Regina Wascana Plains for the third 
term in government and I’m pleased to represent them once 
again. I’ve developed many strong liaisons with the local 
governments there, with the people who are providing services 
there, and with the strong, hard-working people of my 
constituency. And I want to thank them for making it possible 
for me to be here and address you today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Since 1991 I’ve had many 
opportunities to meet with people and to talk with them either at 
their kitchen tables, at meetings about their schools, at social 
events, and this spring, as a long-standing tradition that I’ve had 
in the constituency, to arrange four public consultation meetings 
to allow people a chance to come out and receive copies of 
things such as the Vicq report, the Garcea report, and other 
reports that they’ll be able to read and respond and consult with 
government on, issues that are extremely important to them as 
they affect them in their daily lives. 
 
It’s through this valuable discussion that I learned what their 
concerns were, what their plans are for themselves and for their 
children’s future. And it’s through this input then I’m able to 
take that back and play my role in putting together a budget — 
another balanced budget — because they voiced that as an 
extreme concern to them, that we do not want to see a return to 
people who don’t know how to balance a budget. 
 
They feel that’s the key to shaping the opportunity for solid 
growth and for the opportunities that will present themselves to 
their children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege of having both an urban and 
rural riding. Many of my constituents live on farms and villages 
in and around Balgonie, Pilot Butte, and White City, just to 
name a few. 
 
Those that live in the city are actively involved in the 
community as well, Mr. Speaker. They maintain small or 
medium-sized businesses, and many of them hold strong 
professional qualities. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, Wascana Plains is a vibrant and growing 
constituency. It provides a fine example of community spirit 
that is the creation of many things that we see positive in our 
area. 
 
Most recently I’d say one that’s very exciting is the 
multi-purpose educational facility that combines the 
opportunities for public school students, separate school 
students, combined with city educational opportunities and 
community opportunities to come together in a strong new 
facility for Southeast Regina. 
 
So close to a year ago I had the pleasure of announcing to 
Southeast Regina the educational community complex with the 
Hon. Minister of Education at that time, the member from 
Yorkton. As a former teacher and a parent, I’m proud that we 



March 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 375 

have the opportunity to hold one of the very few state-of-the-art 
educational complexes in this province. 
 
Throughout the communities that I visited, I also noted that 
there are many opportunities for our students in the area of 
distance education. They’re now working on computers; they’re 
working through new curriculums; they’re being resourced in 
the way that the Minister of Education outlined today in his 
responses. 
 
Saskatchewan’s a place where not only students can benefit 
from more opportunities, but so will their teachers, the parents, 
and their entire communities. The partners that made this 
particular project possible deserve congratulations for the 
co-operative approach they’ve taken to developing this 
wonderful facility. 
 
And I can say that they’re part of a school district in the urban 
area that works together co-operatively in many approaches to 
education, integration of services, and other strong components 
that make education work for us. 
 
Buffalo Plains School Division is also one that has taken the 
opportunity to work with their surrounding divisions to do the 
same kinds of things. And I’m looking forward to what the 
SSTA and the school divisions can do in the future to bring 
together their divisions to provide better services to the students 
and more opportunities in those ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new school is also not very far away from 
Regina’s knowledge corridor where thousands of students and 
teachers will benefit from the new facilities being developed 
there. In addition to the knowledge corridor, there’s an endless 
stream of opportunities that’ll be developed at the University of 
Regina, opportunities that will be further enhanced by 
additional funding announced in this week’s budget. 
 
Announcements such as $18.5 million more for school boards, 
$29.2 million more for capital projects for K to 12 which would 
provide for about another hundred and twelve schools to be 
upgraded and refurbished. The people working in the schools 
have told me those projects are very necessary and needed and 
they’re very thankful for those dollars that are now allocated in 
this balanced budget. 
 
It also means that there are a number of post-secondary 
education students who will benefit from the $27 million that is 
set aside in this budget for post-secondary education, up 6 per 
cent. 
 
They will also benefit from the research dollars that are set 
aside in the new innovation and science fund, and that can 
attract up to a pool of an additional hundred million dollars in 
research funding over the next four years. Exciting, exciting 
opportunities for growth in this province when we talk about 
research and development and innovation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the establishment of the new innovation 
and science fund also provides opportunities for Regina. This 
money will also enhance the two new facilities at the Regina 
research park, dedicated to petroleum and information 
technology research. 
 

My constituents know well the issues challenging them as they 
develop their family life, raise their children, and prepare them 
for the new millennium. That’s exactly what education dollars 
do and there are more education dollars than ever before in this 
budget. There’s more monies for innovation and research. 
 
Another concern for my constituents, Mr. Speaker, and I have 
to say a very strong one, is the tax system. They wanted to see 
one that was fairer, much more simplified in its application, and 
very competitive. They agreed with the proposal that we would 
put forward, that we would de-link from the federal income tax 
rules, so we could develop a system that allows for us to set our 
course and our direction. And so we have provided that 
opportunity. 
 
At the end of last year we said to the federal government we 
would be taking that opportunity they’d presented to de-link 
from their system, and we are now presenting to the 
Saskatchewan people a system that does indeed allow us to set 
our own course. I stand before you today happy to announce 
that we’ve established such a system for here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — As a matter of fact, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, a constituent of mine was instrumental in doing some 
of the background work for the development of this system. 
Charlie Baldock was a member of the Vicq committee, along 
with Shelley Brown and Jack Vicq. And I’d like to personally 
thank Charlie for the hours and hours of work, the effort and 
dedication he put forward to give us one kind of a view and 
snapshot of what that might look like. 
 
We took that background and information out to people. We 
heard from them. We made the adjustments that were needed to 
develop a system of taxation that will be competitive, that will 
be providing the valuable support to families that they need, and 
that will be certainly fair to all Saskatchewan people. 
 
When fully implemented, the tax rates in this province will be 
significantly reduced. When fully implemented a family of four 
will receive about a thousand dollar tax benefit. And we will 
know that 70 per cent of Saskatchewan taxpayers will pay 
income that’s comparable to the tax rates that are paid to 
residents of Alberta. 
 
Now that doesn’t always seem fair to make a comparison there, 
but we are neighbours, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we need to 
look at how we can become more competitive in the new global 
economy. 
 
The key here, Mr. Speaker, is that the tax system will remove 
55,000 low-income residents in this province off the tax rolls 
altogether. People who crept into the tax system during the 
’80s, and now we say we can develop a system the 
Saskatchewan way that not only provides the tax credits, that 
provides for the refunds, those kinds of things to support 
low-income people, but will take those people off the rolls, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



376 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2000 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — The tax reform announced this week 
will be sustainable and funded from new growth and new 
revenue in our economy. It will be managed through a balanced 
approach that recognizes the competitive tax rates, but also that 
this province asked for and says that we want good public 
services as well. 
 
This balanced approach allowed us to invest in important public 
services and reduce taxes every year. We’ve already reduced 
taxes in targeted ways every year since we balanced our budget 
in 1994 and ’95. 
 
What does this say to my children? It says that we will also in 
this budget look at reducing debt from 70 per cent of the gross 
domestic product — 70 per cent. That’s what we were looking 
at for our children to inherit — nothing but debt. Two, a debt 
that now is going to be looking at more like 38 per cent of the 
gross domestic product, and by the end of four years, 31 per 
cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — That’s the kind of thing we want to say 
we are leaving for our children — less debt. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess through the years depends 
where you serve and what your perspectives look like from 
where that service begins. And it may have a slight impact on 
how your sense of humour changes, but I did pick up over the 
last few weeks a humorous story I wanted to share with you 
about a little dog that was the mascot of the neighbourhood bar, 
the neighbourhood pub. 
 
And little Scotty, when the patrons would come in, would wag 
his tail and he’d help them to feel . . . or uplift their spirits and 
feel more cheerful about their impact in life. And over the years 
Scotty was getting older. One day he passed away and everyone 
was quite broken up about losing their little mascot, Scotty. 
 
The bar owner determined that everyone was so familiar with 
that wagging tail that as a memorial to the little dog, they would 
take that tail and they would frame it and hang it above the bar. 
And that made everyone feel like there was a memorial to this 
little dog. 
 
Well Scotty went up to heaven. St. Peter said, no, Scotty, sorry, 
we don’t allow dogs in here without a tail; we’d like you to go 
back and collect it. He says, well, you know, it’s going to be 
hard because many people see that as a memorial to me and I’ve 
left it behind, you see. And St. Peter says, no, you’ll have to go 
back and get it. 
 
Well Scotty came back down. Sometime after midnight he’s 
rummaging around in the little neighbourhood pub and looking 
for his tail. The owner came by and looked in the door and he 
said, well there it is, the spirit of my little dog, Scotty. And he 
said, Scotty, what are you doing here? He said, well St. Peter 
won’t let me into heaven without my tail so I’m looking for my 
tail. Oh, I’m sorry, Scotty, we’re not allowed to re-tail spirits 
after midnight. 
 
Your humour changes. You know, Mr. Speaker, you pick up 
maybe a little bit of a different perspective, but a strong sense of 

responsibility remains not only to that bar owner but also to 
myself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I contrast that with the noise that the members opposite are 
making about the new Fiscal Stabilization Fund. As you would 
know, the joke comes for the work I do with Liquor and 
Gaming Authority, but this was the old Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority reserve. 
 
And what was that, Mr. Speaker? No more or no less than 
something that the cities, the municipalities do, set aside some 
money in reserve. 
 
For us we look to that and we said, you can’t rely on that being 
any stable fund over the years because you don’t know how 
much you will receive in that fund. It’s based on people’s habits 
and attitudes and what they’re doing to put money into that 
fund. So you don’t want to use it in any year and say you can 
rely on this. But we did use it as a reserve fund. 
 
Good management. We had a reserve there. We knew if there 
were times that were more difficult — the economy here is very 
volatile; everyone knows that — we could rely on that fund. So 
like a municipality would say, we have a snow removal fund; 
one year there’s not a lot of snow, the next year you know what 
Saskatchewan can be like. 
 
In the same way we have a hard time predicting what forest 
fires will be in our northern areas and we have to protect our 
forests, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
One year we heard from the members opposite saying there’s a 
nursing shortage. People told us that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 
used that fund for additional nurses in this province, over 200 
additional nurses. 
 
We know the volatility of the farming economy, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and we set aside monies for the farm income in the 
times that they’re in crisis. It’s been used for many things, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But one thing it hasn’t been used for is to 
spend that dollar over and over and over again; to spend $1 
billion more each year than you have coming in. That’s one 
thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not been used for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — How can the members opposite stand 
and say they’re against a fund that’s designed to strengthen our 
capacity to respond to emergencies, to respond to the 
unpredictable fiscal pressures on this province’s finances? 
Because they don’t really care. They just go out and borrow 
when things get tough. 
 
Another priority that my constituents talk about a lot is how 
health care will be provided into the future. They like this 
government’s support of what this government’s past and 
ancestors developed, is publicly funded, publicly administered 
health care. 
 
Now the only reason I can see that the members opposite attack 
reforming that system to make it responsive to today’s needs, to 
make it to the point that we can afford the new technologies and 
we can treat people in this province, is that they don’t really 



March 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 377 

believe in a publicly funded, publicly administered system, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
They say, well, if we get spending too much and the system 
collapses, we’ll privatize it anyway, and we’ll look like a 
shadow of the American health system. This is very 
troublesome to every resident in this province because certainly 
that means that we’re one health problem away from poverty. 
 
The way they would approach health care is we’re one health 
problem away from either seeking to try and get private insurers 
to cover that, which we know, Mr. Speaker, many times they 
don’t cover, or we’re without coverage at all. That’s not the 
system of the future. For us, it’s a system that adjusts to the 
changing needs that we have in this province. 
 
And I’m proud to stand behind a budget that not only last year 
committed $195 million more to the health budget, but also this 
year establishes an additional $63 million to base funding for 
health care, and sets aside $150 million health transition fund to 
talk about the system of the future for this province that will 
keep it in the realms of medicare. 
 
In the past two years I’m proud to be able to stand here and say 
to the people of Saskatchewan we’ve increased health spending 
by 17 per cent in this province. That’s all in the face of the 
kinds of things we’ve looked at federally, and the 
disappointment we had in this federal budget, that didn’t see 
much more dollars injected into the system, many more dollars. 
 
What it did see was a federal government that at one time 
pulled out $6 billion in one year, put that for health care and 
education over four years, about $2.5 billion. What does that 
mean for Saskatchewan in health care? About three days to fund 
our system. 
 
Where at one time the federal government provided 50-50 
dollars to the health system to support medicare in the country, 
we now see them giving this province 13 cents on the dollar. 
It’s no wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need a health transition 
fund to help us get to a system that can be sustainable, that’s 
publicly supported and publicly administered. 
 
One thing I know when I’m driving throughout the rural part of 
my constituency is that my rural constituents work very hard to 
adjust to the changes that are happening in the area of 
agriculture in this province. We look at the removal of the 
transportation subsidy, we look at the changes in the support 
that the federal government is willing to provide to a province 
that feeds the rest of this country very reasonably with a fine, 
fine product. 
 
The rural residents work very hard and I know that they are 
glad in this budget that we’re supporting their efforts. They 
participate in area transportation committee work that they’re 
very pleased to be a part of. And I know that the Department of 
Highways finds their input extremely valuable. And we know 
that this year this budget will invest a further $250 million to 
prepare our Highways and Transportation network for the 
challenges of the future. 
 
Another way we’re trying to support and provide additional 
supports to agriculture in the province is retroactive to January 

1 of this year, the cap on farm fuel rebate program will be 
eliminated. This is also on top of . . . And I heard on the 
television, people talking about their use of diesel fuel. This 
province does not tax diesel fuel for farm purposes so this is 
already on top of that program. And the province will reimburse 
farmers with the property tax rebate program. 
 
Now some people can say that’s not very much. But other 
people told me that any amount that you can support rural 
Saskatchewan is greatly appreciated. 
 
All of this on top of about $300 per capita, per man, woman, 
and child, that we put toward agricultural programs, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That’s more than any other jurisdiction, not only in 
Canada, but any other jurisdiction in the world, we support with 
tax dollars from urban and rural people in this province to go to 
a strong industry here — agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wanted to first outline to you all of the reasons 
why optimistically I support a budget that provides for growth 
and opportunity for the future, not only for my two grown 
children but for the rest of this province. 
 
But I have to tell you for all of those positive reasons, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there’s also the compelling reasons that the 
members opposite provide to me, especially during the last 
number of days when they’ve had their response to the budget. 
 
Their responses are very, very worrisome, and should be 
worrisome to every taxpayer in this province, but also to 
children of any age in this province who are looking for a future 
here. Why is it worrisome? Because it’s right-wing voodoo 
economics. 
 
It’s the kind of economics that says, you want money today, 
here, have it out of this pocket. You need money over here, 
have more out of this pocket. Where will we get it? We take it 
out of our children’s pockets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not the way to do a budget. The people of 
this province know that they don’t want the members opposite 
preparing a budget like that for their future. 
 
But let’s look at . . . and what I would contemplate their budget 
might look like if they were presenting it based on the responses 
they’ve provided so far. They campaigned on a 20 per cent tax 
reduction now — 20 per cent across the board. No reform of the 
system, no tax credits for low-income people, no removal of the 
debt-reduction tax or the flat tax — just 20 per cent across the 
board and let’s do it now. 
 
Well what does that mean? Let’s see, that means if you’re an 
income earner of about $35,000 and you pay on average $3,600 
in provincial income tax, your benefit is about $720 today. If 
you make about a hundred thousand dollars, your taxable 
income’s about $8,000, you receive a benefit of $1,600. 
 
(1200) 
 
That’s the kind of economics we’re talking about here. More for 
low-income earners to pay, more for other people to pay, and 
breaks at the higher income bracket level. So there’s no 
progressivity in their system and there’s no looking after those 



378 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2000 

people who are greatest in need in our province. 
 
What do their own economists say about this scheme? What do 
they say that a 20 per cent tax reduction across the board right 
now means? Well they like to quote WEFA, so I quote WEFA 
and say: 
 

Their own economists say that their scheme means job 
losses, higher unemployment, and program cuts. 

 
Well that’s what their budget would look like. 
 
But wait a minute, they’re also talking about reducing gas tax. 
Well we’ve heard that before. We’ve heard that before — take 
the money out of the roads; leave the roads in disrepair; put the 
money back on the roads, too late to do anything about it; sell 
out the Highways equipment, and say that somehow, someone 
else will look after that for them. 
 
It just doesn’t add up. And that’s why we say that kind of a tax 
cut scheme is very scary to the people of this province. 
 
Well let’s look at fiscal responsibility and, I talked about 
earlier, stabilization and reserves. They just don’t care about 
having a reserve. They don’t care about fiscal responsibility 
because they’ve got examples of how this works in the past. 
You just borrow about a billion dollars a year, you use your 
Crowns to get more and more into debt on that hand, and you 
use your health boards and other people who want to deliver 
services to get more and more in debt on that hand. Debts, 
debts, and debts and debts — piled up by the time we got here 
to try and straighten things out. 
 
Let’s see, we’re going to give a major tax break that means loss 
of jobs; means higher unemployment; means cutting of some 
services. But somehow in the same breath, they're going to 
spend $600 million more and assume the education tax at the 
provincial level. 
 
They’re going to find $700 million more for farm programming 
even if the federal government doesn’t come in and support 
them. 
 
They’re going to spend more money for schools, more money 
on school capital. Wonderful. At the same time, they’re not 
going to take it out of the Education budget because they’re 
going to freeze that. They’re going to find it somewhere. 
 
More money for health care. More money for the health budget, 
but it’s not going to come out of their health budget because 
they’ve said that they’re just going to maintain that at a level for 
five years while they do an audit. So there’s not money to cover 
that. 
 
More money for highways. They don’t know where they’re 
going to get that money from, but it’s going to come from 
somewhere. 
 
Where does this thinking come from? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Friday is generally a 
more boisterous day than other days, and this Friday is no 
exception. But I do ask the co-operation of all hon. members in 

lowering . . . I ask the co-operation of all hon. members in 
lowering the level of volume and allowing the member for 
Regina Wascana Plains to continue. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, 
the thinking comes from what we’ve seen in the past. It doesn’t 
think to the future. 
 
What it does, it thinks about taking money out of the pockets of 
our children tomorrow to give and respond to everything today. 
It’s not a balanced approach. It’s not an approach that keeps the 
books balanced; that sees us paying down the debt for the next 
generation and future generations. It doesn’t come from 
thinking about expanding programs and services if you’re going 
to maintain health care and education the way they are while we 
wait for some kind of audit results. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, where does this leave our children? Those 
economics leave our children to pick up where they left off — 
bills, bills, bills. That’s not the Saskatchewan way. My 
grandparents taught me the Saskatchewan way is to think 
beyond your years — sometimes even lean years. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Now I just wish to remind all 
hon. members that this is the budget speech. A certain amount 
of time is set aside, and all hon. members will have an 
opportunity to rise and enter this debate. For the moment the 
member for Regina Wascana Plains has the floor. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
is not the Saskatchewan way. This is their way. I don’t cut 
money today to have my children pay the bills for the future, 
and neither should they when they assume a responsible chair in 
this Assembly. 
 
Now we could also talk about well, once you get to that point 
there are some desperate measures you can use. Desperate 
measures like let’s just sell off the assets and that will cover 
some of it, but there won’t be any income coming in to help 
offset that in the future. We know what that’s like. We could 
desperately borrow, like they did in the past, from every place 
they could find money to borrow from. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s not what our forefathers taught us, 
our foremothers taught us, when they said let’s look to the 
future. Well this budget does that. This budget provides the 
biggest tax break in the history of this province, but it also 
reforms the tax system to be fairer. It supports families. It 
supports our low-income people. It takes people off the tax rolls 
that don’t belong there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This budget provides more money for education, more money 
for research and development, more money for students to stay 
home here in Saskatchewan, with an income tax break if they 
find a job here after they graduate and were going to be a part of 
the Saskatchewan economy. It provides more opportunity for 
more people to be involved in a wonderful growing economy in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I want to close as I began 
by thanking the constituents that have provided for me 



March 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 379 

information to use in providing a voice to the input to this 
budget. I want to thank my caucus colleagues and cabinet 
colleagues who have spent countless, countless hours in 
preparing a budget for growth and opportunity, a positive 
direction into the future that will provide for growth, equality, 
opportunity — the virtues that I learned in this province from 
my past generations, and ones that I want to pass on to the 
future generations to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many, many more reasons why I stand 
very proudly in my place to support the motion before us. There 
are many reasons why the worrisome, scary part of voodoo 
economics allows me to say I strongly reject the amendment 
that’s been placed before us. 
 
I’m pleased to be a part of a future-looking, forward-looking 
budget in the province of Saskatchewan, a course for the next 
years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise in my place today to address this budget speech on 
behalf of the people of Cannington and the 62 per cent of the 
people in Saskatchewan who voted against that government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Because clearly, Mr. Speaker, a 
significant portion of those 62 per cent are not being serviced 
by the coalition. They are opposed to what happened at the time 
of the election, and they continue to be opposed to that 
coalition, Mr. Speaker, and that particular government. 
 
If there is a way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of describing this budget 
very succinctly by the people of Saskatchewan, it would be a 
severe disappointment. And I choose my words carefully, Mr. 
Speaker, because a good many people across this province 
would use a lot more vitriolic terms to describe this budget. But 
because we’re in a parliamentary institution, I cannot use those 
words, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So severe disappointment is the 
kindest words I can use. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the expectation across this province was 
that there would be tax cuts in this budget. But what we got the 
day of the budget speech was tax increases. 
 
Now the member from Regina Wascana Plains was talking 
about her little dog, Scotty. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know 
what happened to Scotty. The reason he died was because the 
owners couldn’t afford to feed him any more because there was 
a 6 per cent tax on his dog food now. And every other pet, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, across this province faces the same difficulty. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of this province, there are a 
significant number who will no longer be paying taxes. That is 
true. The reason is though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is they move to 
Alberta or they’re living on minimum wage, because the only 
new jobs in this province are minimum wage jobs. The good, 
high paying jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are leaving for Alberta, 
because those jobs were expecting those tax cuts to happen and 
they didn’t happen in this budget speech. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — There is one thing that this government 
is famous for, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Promises. They tax now, 
and promise relief in the future. Promises. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just trust us. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, that’s the term they like to use. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re from the government; trust us. Well, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no trust left with the people of 
Saskatchewan for this particular government and that’s why 
they received 38 per cent of the vote in the last election. 
 
When you look at the numbers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since 1992 
to today, the tax revenues being brought in by this province in 
the 1992 budget were $4.4 billion. Today, the minister’s budget 
will bring in almost $6.4 billion — a $2 billion increase in 
taxation by this government. 
 
And what have we received, what have we received for that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well what we have got are fewer 
hospitals, less service, fewer schools. Now they’re closing the 
court houses around this province. And our highways are in 
terrible shape. We have no money, we have no money to help 
out farmers when they’re in desperate need, but we do have 
money to create a fancy slush fund. We do have money to 
create a fancy slush fund. 
 
The member over there from Yorkton wants to talk about the 
debt. Perhaps he should talk about the six plus billion dollars 
that Allan Blakeney and the Premier of this province left. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Debt, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at 24 per 
cent. That’s what debt is all about. 
 
When you look at this budget increase, that extra $2 billion, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, was only in tax revenues. There are significant 
increases in every other fee in this province. Every utility fee 
has gone up and we don’t get the service, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
As one of the critics for highways, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I pay 
particular attention to the budget as it relates to highways. And 
there is an increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the highways 
budget. It’s up to $250 million. The first time in four years that 
the government has matched their commitment they made to 
put in $2.5 billion over ten years, $250 million a year. The very 
first time they’ve matched it. 
 
And do you know what though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that entire 
increase will be eaten up by the additional costs imposed by this 
government. There will not be another inch of pavement laid, 
there will not be another mile of road built because of the 
increases. And the fact is in all likelihood it will diminish 
because the price of asphalt is up, the price of fuel is up, the 
utilities are up — everything that this government has their little 
fingers on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is going up. And there will not 
be any additional highway construction because of this 
government’s actions. 
 



380 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2000 

(1215) 
 
The government is saying, oh if we cut the gas tax as we have 
been suggesting, Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Finance for the 
federal government has said he will put money in. He will put 
up to, we hope, $60 million on a 5 cent reduction in the fuel tax. 
The minister says, well if we do that where are we going to get 
the money? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s own budget says he’s going to 
collect $347 million in fuel taxes; he’s only spending 250 but he 
hasn’t even included the licence fees, $112 million for licensing 
fees. When you lump them together, the fuel tax and the 
licensing fees, he is only putting 44 per cent of that money into 
the Highways budget — not even talking about how much road 
he’s building — 44 per cent into the Highways budget. So 
there’s a lot of room there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a lot of room 
to cut and still provide every nickel that he already is to 
Highways. But it’s question of priorities and clearly that’s not 
one of his priorities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
When I listen to the members opposite, I get a clear vision of 
where they’re going and what they’re talking about. And I 
would . . . I think it could be clearly stated, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that what the members opposite have is a rear-view 
vision. Their whole windscreen is covered over and they’re 
only looking at the rear-view mirror, because all they want to 
talk about is the 1982 election — 18 years ago, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I really wonder though why they want to talk about the 1982 
election, because they took a severe thumping — a severe 
thumping. But I guess they expected if they could re-fight that 
one, they might have a chance this time. I think that’s what 
they’re hoping. If we can refight the 1982 election, maybe we 
can win it this time. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they couldn’t win it in 1982 and 
they wouldn’t win it in 2000 if they fought it all over again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — There are a lot of similarities though, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. The government is claiming they’re doing 
well. The Crown corporations are claiming they’re doing well, 
just as they claimed in 1982. But the thing that’s sad, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is the similarity to how the people are doing. 
 
In 1982 the people were losing their homes. They were losing 
their businesses. They were losing their farms. And the 
government didn’t care. Because the government and the family 
of Crown corporations was doing well. 
 
And what’s the situation like today? People are leaving this 
province. People are losing their homes; they’re losing their 
farms. And the government doesn’t care. That’s why, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the NDP lost in 1982. And if the election was 
refought today, they would lose again. 
 
The member from Coronation Park talked about the longest 
period of growth — the longest period of growth. Well let’s 
take a look, since we’re in the rear-view mirror of this 
government, at the history of Saskatchewan. 

In the late 1929 — 1920s, Mr. Deputy Speaker — there was a 
million people, a million people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And where are we at today? After Tommy 
Douglas getting elected in 1944 and governing for most of that 
period of time since, we’re still a million people. Our 
neighbouring provinces have grown. Canada has grown. And 
Saskatchewan has been stagnant under the CCF-NDP 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) ever since 1944. 
 
So if you have virtually no growth in that entire period, even a 
little bit of growth is a significant change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And that’s what you’re looking at. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a vision for this province. We 
have a vision to build this province, to create an environment in 
which people and businesses want to live here, want to reside in 
this province, want to raise and keep their children in this 
province, which hasn’t been happening. 
 
We believe that the way to do that is to cut taxes now. Not 
increase taxes now as this government has done, but indeed cut 
the taxes right now and that will keep people in this province. It 
will bring and keep businesses in this province because they can 
have some growth. 
 
But the members opposite, as I said earlier, have no vision. And 
that’s why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because there is no view for 
the future over there. They don’t believe in taxing children 
tomorrow because they have no future; they believe in taxing 
children today — and that is exactly what is happening. 
 
The taxes are being applied on the families of this province 
today and there is no tax relief. We do need tax relief and this 
NDP government has missed that mark very badly. They could 
indeed provide fuel tax relief that would help everyone in this 
province. 
 
When the persons living in Regina want to go on a little trip at 
Easter, they are going to pay significantly at the gas pumps to 
do so. When they want to go on holidays this summer, when the 
people at IPSCO get their annual holidays, it’s going to be 
extremely expensive. 
 
So what are they going to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re 
going to look at the map and say: where is the nearest exit from 
Saskatchewan; will one tank of gas get me there? And that’s 
what they’re going to do. They’re going to head for that point in 
whatever direction it might be because they’re not going to pay 
for gas here. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to take the federal 
government’s offer and help in reducing the taxes and utilizing 
their money. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment. I will 
not be supporting this budget because this budget does not have 
a view for the future. It’s locked into the past and into taxation 
today. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very proud today to 
stand before this Assembly speaking about the government’s 
seventh balanced budget. A budget that looks to the future. It’s 
not locked in the past. It’s not full of promises of what they 



March 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

might do if they ever become government but are the promises 
of this government for the future. 
 
It’s a sound foundation for the future. It’s a foundation for my 
children and your children. It’s about hope and opportunity for 
our children. It’s not about Alberta envy. Our children don’t 
need to hear about how it’s much better in Alberta because the 
more you tell your children it’s better in Alberta, the more 
likely they are to leave. 
 
We should be talking about the good things of our province. We 
should talk about our proud tradition as a province and we 
should . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was trying to say, 
we should be telling our children about the great opportunity 
within our province, about our great tradition, and about how 
Saskatchewan people have always come together to overcome 
our obstacles. Not about how it’s better to go somewhere else, 
not how it’s better in any other province of this country. This is 
their home and we should talk proudly about our home. 
 
And this government believes very strongly in our province. 
We don’t envy Alberta. We look at our province for the 
solution to our problems. We put a platform forward in this 
budget that talks about fiscal responsibility and good 
government. 
 
We came from a situation in 1991 where deficits were the name 
of the game and you know what that’s about over in the . . . 
members opposite know what that’s about. You played a role in 
that. 
 
Today, today our children have seen not one, not two, not three, 
but seven consecutive balanced budgets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — My children in elementary school can understand 
that that’s good government. They don’t need to be told that it’s 
bad. My son can understand that when we formed government 
in 1991 for the first time, debt was at 71 per cent of the gross 
domestic product — pathetic. Today it is at 38 per cent and by 
2003 it should reach 31 per cent. That’s progress. 
 
We’ve dealt with the debt of this province. We’re not talking 
about doom and gloom. If that’s all we talk about, that’s what 
people believe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about a number of things, including 
the new Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
complained when there was a fund in the liquor and gaming. 
They complain now about the new Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
But I’d like to talk to them a little bit . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Now earlier in the debate it 
was quite possible for me to announce that all members would 

have an opportunity to engage in the debate. Now we have a 
situation where some members who have engaged in the debate 
want to re-enter the debate. 
 
I urge all hon. members to say what you want when you’re in 
the debate, and in another year there will be another budget 
debate and then you can say it during the debate. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to return to the 
point of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
As the members opposite should know — and if they don’t, I’d 
like to just point out a few things to them — our economy is 
relatively volatile. A good portion of our revenue comes from 
resources, and they can go up and down from year to year. 
 
Also we receive a portion of our revenue from transfer 
payments from the federal government. One year it could be at 
a million dollars . . . or a billion dollars, pardon me; the next 
year it could be at $800 million. It’s very volatile — $200 
million. In cases it’s been as much as $500 million in a single 
year. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this government wants to make sure that we 
protect those essential core public services year after year, 
regardless of those flexibilities or the flex . . . dropping and 
flexibilities within the income. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite understand that or 
they should. So I don’t know how they can criticize a fund that 
is there to stabilize our economy, to stabilize our budgetary 
resources, and to stabilize and provide those services that we 
need year after year in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about some good things that 
have happened in this province. Oil drilling is up 31 per cent — 
31 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Now does that sound like a province that’s in 
doom and gloom? Not to me. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sounds like prosperity to me. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Sounds like prosperity to me as well, Mr. 
Speaker. Gas drilling up 63 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, does that sound like a province 
that’s doom and gloom. Mr. Speaker, clearly, clearly, the 
members opposite are having difficulty with the fact that we 
have a plan. It’s a plan that people like. And, in fact, it’s a plan 
that they like but they can’t admit it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a couple of minutes about 
the next element of our plan — a sustainable, effective health 
system. And I’d like to start by pointing out to the members 
opposite, a few minutes ago when the issue was raised about an 
unfortunate individual in the city of Saskatoon that had to go to 
a hospital, University Hospital, and was later transferred to 
another hospital. And that they had received an ambulance bill. 



382 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2000 

(1230) 
 
I would ask the member to pass on to that individual that they 
should pass on the specific circumstances to the Associate 
Minister of Health because there are no transfer fees between 
hospitals in the city of Saskatoon for ambulatory care. And if 
you would have known that, you could have helped the 
individual. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what I’d like to say to the members 
opposite, that if they would pass that information on, I’m sure 
the Associate Minister of Health would deal with the issue. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about the good things in 
medicare. Over the last two years this government has increased 
health spending by 17 per cent — 17 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 17 
per cent. The rate of inflation over that same two-year period 
hasn’t hit 4 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Thirteen per cent over the 
rate of inflation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we have continued to put money 
into health care. We’ve continued to fund it. And despite a 
national crisis in health care, this government is determined to 
deliver the best possible health care system in the country with 
an . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — We built medicare in this province. An 
NDP-CCF government built medicare and this government will 
continue to defend medicare. It is our issue; it is our concern; 
and we will not, we will not let medicare and health services 
deteriorate. This province will have the best medical system 
available in the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — On top of the 17 per cent over the last two years, 
this year there’ll be $63 million added to the base in health care 
— $63 million. 
 
And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, we are putting $150 million 
into a health transition fund — a fund to help health districts 
deal with the issues they face in their local communities and to 
make the health system responsive to the modern needs of our 
communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — So, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, they 
don’t have a vision for health care. In their last election 
platform, they talked about no increases to health care — no 
increases. And it astonishes me, Mr. Speaker, absolutely 
astonishes me that the members opposite will criticize, year 
after year, new and additional money to health care. 
 
We haven’t heard a plan of what they’d do. They talk about an 
audit. They talk about an audit. They don’t say what their audit 
would do; they don’t say what it should do. They don’t know, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

Now unfortunately for the people of this province, health care 
will never be what some people would like it to be; nor will 
many other services. But the members opposite say time and 
time again: spend more money, spend more money, cut taxes, 
spend more money. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to tell them that there is only $1 in 
this province that comes to government and inevitably it comes 
out of taxpayers’ pockets. So you can’t get more money back 
and demand spending in every single area and expect it to 
balance out. 
 
Now my children in elementary school, that’s simple math. 
They can understand that. We’re hoping, we’re hoping that you 
understand that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about economic growth 
and social policy in our province, the third element of our 
platform. Economic growth and new opportunities, Mr. 
Speaker. And we as a government realize that economic 
growth, strong economic growth is the foundation for a strong 
social policy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about some very good things 
that have occurred in this province in the last number of years. 
In the past five years, 6,000 welfare recipients have come off 
the welfare rolls. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — They’ve come off the welfare rolls because we 
put initiatives like the . . . we put initiatives forward like the 
student employment supplement to allow people to go back to 
school, learn new skills, and work their way off welfare. That’s 
good for the people of Saskatchewan. It’s good for the people 
of . . . it’s good for the individuals and it’s good for their 
children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the only province in Canada that saw a 
decrease in child poverty. That’s something we should all be 
proud of regardless what side of the House we sit on. Our 
children are living better today than they were in the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — It’s important that we in fact support our 
families, and we understand it on this side of the House. And a 
few minutes ago I heard a member opposite talking about the 
only jobs that were created were at minimum wage and people 
couldn’t live on that. Are you suggesting supporting a minimum 
wage increase? Is that what I’m hearing? A support for a 
minimum wage increase? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a minute about education and 
training. This year saw an increase for K to 12 spending. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there are groups out there that say that it 
isn’t sufficient but there’s only a limited number of dollars. You 
have to set priorities. You have to govern. That’s a 
responsibility we have on this side of the House. We have to 
meet everybody’s needs. That’s something that you don’t have 
to do on that side of the House. 
 



March 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 383 

Capital funding is there to complete 115 school projects — 115 
school projects this year. There’s increased funding for 
universities, regional colleges, and SIAST. That’s all good news 
for the students of this country. There’s capital spending for 
projects in post-secondary education, universities, SIAST. 
There’s increased capacity for registered nurses and licensed 
practical nurses. Mr. Speaker, this is a good news budget for 
education — a very good news budget for education. 
 
I’d like to speak for a minute about research and development. 
In this province we take research and development very, very 
seriously. We believe in a high-tech economy; it’s the economy 
for the 21st century and we want to be active participants in that 
economy. We are putting $10 million a year into an innovation 
and science fund which could generate up to $100 million in 
this province — $100 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a minute about 
agriculture. We listened, we listened to the farmers in this 
province when they asked for a rebate on their fuel tax. And, 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget there’s a gas rebate on fuel . . . a 
farm-used fuel tax. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we heard loud and clear the farmers in rural 
Saskatchewan talking about the difficulty with property taxes, 
and this government provided a rebate of $25 million this year 
and $25 million next year, Mr. Speaker. That’s good for the 
farming economy; it’s good for this province; and it’s good for 
their children in rural Saskatchewan and it’s good for my 
children in the city because a strong, vibrant farm economy is 
good for this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the illusions of the opposition are 
just that — illusions. 
 
I’d like to talk a little bit about northern development and First 
Nations. This budget is looking to help the people of northern 
Saskatchewan. We look to our northern neighbours, to our 
Aboriginal friends and partners, as a welcome contribution to 
our society, not as a negative contribution; that they’ll be 
partners in the growth of this province in the future. And a 
strong, vibrant economy requires the inclusion, not the 
exclusion, of our Aboriginal partners. 
 
My colleagues that live and represent those northern 
communities will speak in a great deal more detail. I’m going to 
talk about a couple of things that are important. 
 
The new forestry management project and development plan is 
crucial for the employment of Aboriginal people in the North. 
It’s crucial for our development, and it’s crucial for those 
communities in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about highways and transportation. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this government is putting $250 million into 
the Department of Highways and Transportation, the highest 
ever contribution or investment in our highway structure. And, 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that is good for this province. It’s 
good for our children because it’s an investment in the future. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to keeping a 
strong highways infrastructure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, this budget also deals with the 
centenary capital fund, a fund that is designed to help improve 
our aging infrastructure. Unlike the members opposite, we see 
this as a very positive fund. 
 
It will put $5 million this year into municipal infrastructure. 
Five million additional dollars into highways and 
transportation, railroads, and environmental cleanup. Five 
million a year into capital investment in universities, SIAST, 
and regional colleges. Five million a year more for school 
projects. Five million a year more for social housing to help 
those least fortunate in our society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — And $5 million a year more for upgrading our 
parks and heritage properties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that provides opportunity both 
today and tomorrow for our citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I now would like to 
talk about the final platform in our budget — a new taxation 
system. Mr. Speaker, this is an item that we had in our platform. 
We took it out. We talked to the people of Saskatchewan, and 
we made a promise. And whether the members opposite like it 
or not, we were elected the government and we are delivering 
on our taxation promise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — We are delivering our taxation promise. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it was a taxation promise the people of this province 
told us they wanted, and it’s one we’re going to deliver on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about tax reform. As 
we’ve stated many, many times, tax reductions must be 
sustainable and funded from new revenues. We can’t take away 
from those least fortunate in our society for a tax cut, and this 
government will not do that. Any tax reduction must be 
matched by investment and priority public services. That 
occurred in this budget and it will occur in every subsequent 
budget. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, most of all it must be fair, it must be 
progressive, it must put lower income people in a better 
financial situation. And this tax break does that, Mr. Speaker. It 
does it for the people of Saskatchewan of both low income and 
middle incomes. 
 
Official, Mr. Speaker, and at the end of this, every single 
taxpayer in this province will pay less income tax this year. 
This year, Mr. Speaker, every single Saskatchewan resident that 
pays taxes will pay lower income taxes this year. 
 
Effective January 1, 2001, we’ll be completely eliminating the 



384 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2000 

flat tax, the debt-reduction surtax, and the high-income surtax. 
But more than that, Mr. Speaker, effective July 1 this year, the 
flat tax will be cut in half to 1 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 1 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, something that the opposition has a great deal of 
difficulty dealing with is that, when fully fazed in, 70 per cent 
of Saskatchewan taxpayers will pay the same level of taxation 
as their famed, ideological province, Alberta. 
 
(1245) 
 
Saskatchewan lower- and middle-income people in 
Saskatchewan will pay the same tax as their counterparts in 
Alberta. Just one more time, to make it very clear. Seventy per 
cent of all Saskatchewan taxpayers will pay the same tax rate 
equal to residents of Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — I hope you can understand it. It’s extremely 
simple. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every single adult resident will receive a basic tax 
credit of $8,000 — Mr. Speaker, we’re trying to help the people 
of this province — a spousal or equivalent deduction of $8,000; 
and every child will receive a credit of $2,500, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, we’re trying to help families; and I hope that you 
can appreciate we’re trying to help families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On top of that, Mr. Speaker, the seniors in our society will also 
get a $1,000 supplement, Mr. Speaker, because we are 
committed to helping those senior citizens in our community to 
deal with those increased expenses in health care as they age in 
our population. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Add it up for them, Kevin. How much is 
that for seniors? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Seniors, Mr. Speaker — $9,000 for seniors. Mr. 
Speaker — $9,000 for a single senior. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — And, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the most important, 
the most important issue, the most important issue, Mr. 
Speaker, is that 55,000 — can you hear that? — 55,000 
low-income earners, the least fortunate of our society, will 
come off the income tax rolls completely. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — This government believes in living up to its 
commitment of helping those who need it most. And we’re 
doing that in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re not interested in making the wealthy wealthier. We’re 
interested in helping those that most need it. But, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re also giving every single citizen that pays income tax in 
this province a tax break. But those that need it most are going 
to get it first, and those that need it most are going to benefit the 
most. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, on top of that, this government is 
going to eliminate bracket creep. We’re going to eliminate 
bracket creep. We’re going to get rid of the creep, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, that is good for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re not about talking about it; we’re about 
doing it. And we have a plan. We’ve announced it, and the 
taxpayers of this province will see it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a little bit about the sales 
tax. Mr. Speaker, this government has even furthered its 
commitment to low-income people because we don’t want an 
expansion in sales tax to hurt those most vulnerable in our 
society, those who need it the most. We have a social 
conscience. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a refundable sales tax credit. And, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s going to help middle- and low-income 
people in this province; $32 million will be refunded to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers each and every year. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thirty-two million dollars refunded to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, they talk about how 
poor this budget is. The members opposite . . . I don’t know if 
they’ve read the budget. I don’t know if they’ve read the 
budget. 
 
They should read the cover, Mr. Speaker. The budget says A 
Plan for Growth and Opportunity. It’s not called the book of 
doom and gloom. It’s called A Plan for Growth and 
Opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Now, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well unfortunately somebody said, rip the cover off and send it 
over for him. I’m a strong believer in not defacing government 
property, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — The taxpayers of Saskatchewan paid for this 
book and I respect it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about what this 
government inherited. Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about 
$15 billion in debt. It’s a shame. It’s a shame that that debt was 
put on my children and probably on my children’s children 
before we’ll be able to pay it off. Mr. Speaker, at the very least, 
at the very least my children and their children will have to pay 
this debt off. 
 
Now the members opposite, the members opposite may not 
want to hear this. Reality is reality, whether they like it or not. 
Reality is reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the NDP government came to power in 
1991, they were paying more than $800 million a year on the 
debt — $860 million to be precise — $860 million. Mr. 



March 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 385 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that’s just about $3 million a day. 
 
Can you imagine for a second, can you dream about what you 
could do with $3 million a day? What could we do to help with 
the health care system? What could we do with child poverty? 
What could we do with education? How many improvements 
could we make to our fundamental basic services? How much 
could we do to help support our infrastructure? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if we had that money, we’d have a 
much different province today. But unfortunately this 
government was handicapped with a debt. Every single citizen 
of this province was handicapped with that debt. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what bothers me most, what bothers me 
most is the members opposite think it’s funny. A debt created 
by a right-wing government, that some of the members opposite 
represented, and they think it’s funny. They don’t look to the 
future, Mr. Speaker; they look to the present only. 
 
And we heard this again, Mr. Speaker. They talk about not 
putting any money in a fiscal fund to deal with the instability of 
our economy. They don’t want to do that, Mr. Speaker. They 
want to spend every dollar, everyday. 
 
And then they talk about wanting to expand all, all our services 
— I’ve heard it from . . . from municipal government 
infrastructure, education, health care. They’d spend more 
money everywhere, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know where they’d go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today they talk about nothing is enough. But yet 
their plan spoke lots about nothing. It said nothing about 
education, nothing about health care, and nothing about the 
future for our children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a 
couple of minutes and talk about the future. Our children need 
the opportunity to dream. We need to have an economy that’s 
vibrant, that looks to the future, and is going to deal with the 
needs of our province, provide employment for our children — 
meaningful employment for our children — based on a 
high-tech economy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, to talk about our children 
moving to Alberta just encourages them and tells them 
everything is better there. The grass is greener somewhere else. 
Mr. Speaker, our children learn from us. And, Mr. Speaker, if 
we talk about the good things in our province, they’d 
understand them; not about the negative, negative things about 
our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of key things that are indicators of 
a very, very bright future for this province. Our credit ratings 
are A across the board — right across the board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — I can remember meeting with members of the 
government when I was not elected, talking about the dire 
straits this province was in. Where we all had to look in making 
some concessions to get our province out of a very grievous 

situation. We did that as a province, Mr. Speaker, and today the 
Canadian Bond Rating Service rates us an A plus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — An A plus, Mr. Speaker. That’s a bright future 
for this province. The Dominion Bond Rating Service rates us 
an A, Mr. Speaker — an A. The Fitch IBCA, an A plus, Mr. 
Speaker — A plus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Moody’s Investors Services an A 2. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — And Standard and Poor’s an A. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, that’s a straight A student. That’s a 
straight A student. The province of Saskatchewan rated by 
outside agencies in our fiscal responsibility is all A’s. All A’s, 
Mr. Speaker. All A’s. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, if they ever 
went to grade school and I’m sure they did — A’s — our 
students like A’s; our kids are good when they get A’s, aren’t 
they? Well we got all A’s and I think you should appreciate 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the future. The future, Mr. 
Speaker, is what this government’s looking towards. We’re not 
looking at the short-term; we’re looking towards the future. 
And that means, Mr. Speaker, that we have to look beyond the 
immediate needs. We have to build an infrastructure that meets 
the needs not just of today, but of 20 years from today. And, 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s going to continue to move 
down that path, and this budget is about that. 
 
Just a few examples — the centenary fund for infrastructure. 
And, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, this fund looks to building 
the infrastructure for the future. 
 
The hundred and fifty million dollar health transition fund, Mr. 
Speaker, is about looking to the future — it’s about looking to 
the future, Mr. Speaker. It’s to provide for a transition for health 
districts to build the infrastructure required for a new health 
care system, to get the equipment required for the needs of the 
future. We’re not about living in the past, Mr. Speaker; we’re 
about moving forward into the future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talk about how 
everything is so bad, all the doom and the gloom in this 
province. Well, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, I think they need, 
they need to look at things through clear glasses instead of those 
coloured glasses they’re often looking through. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we need to look to the future and this party 
is going to look to the future. This government’s looking to the 
future and our coalition partners are looking to the future with 



386 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2000 

us. And, Mr. Speaker, this budget is about the ability to dream, 
to look into the future, and to provide just as an NDP-CCF 
government did when it invented health care. 
 
It’s about reinventing health care and defining what that should 
be for the 21st century, and putting it in place so the citizens of 
this province have the absolute best health care system that can 
be provided with the money available in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s not about talking about 
all the negative things. It’s about looking at a problem and 
looking for a solution. Throwing stones is easy, Mr. Speaker. 
Easiest game in the world. 
 
When you don’t have any accountability, you don’t have any 
responsibility. You don’t have the responsibility of looking at 
where money should be spent. You don’t have to tell people no. 
Because you’re not in control. That’s easy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in the real world somebody needs to be 
accountable, and that’s this government. Now, Mr. Speaker, this 
is about the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, it now being the hour of 1 
p.m., prior to adjourning the House I want to wish you all a 
very positive, beneficial weekend in your constituencies with 
your families and I look forward to you returning with the same 
enthusiasm when the House reconvenes. 
 
The House now stands adjourned until 1:30 p.m. Monday. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:01 p.m. 
 



 

 


