





























































Hansard: May 05, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1033 
 May 5, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to present 
petitions. I’m reading the prayer and this petition does with the 
fuel tax: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present comes signed by the 
individuals or people from the good community of Govan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of the citizens concerned 
about forced municipal amalgamation, and the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this is signed by folks in Melfort, Kinistino, and Beatty. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on 
the issue of municipal consolidation. These are all petitioners 
from the RM (rural municipality) of Saskatchewan Landing in 
my constituency, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And as I said, it’s signed by the residents of the RM of 
Saskatchewan Landing. 
 
I so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
for citizens who are opposed to forced municipal amalgamation, 
and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 

And it’s signed by residents of Govan, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I present a petition with 
citizens concerned about the high price of fuel, and the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners are from Chaplin, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present this morning that deals with the reserve account 
confiscation, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve account. 
 

And the petitioners come from Govan and Bengough. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition today regarding the high cost of fuel. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the petitioners that have signed this are from the good town 
of Spiritwood and Shell Lake. 
 
I so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with enforced 
amalgamation, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the community 
of Moose Jaw. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 



1034 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2000 

a petition to reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Carrot River, 
Arborfield, Nipawin, and Ridgedale, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — The following petitions have been reviewed and 
pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province petitioning the 
Assembly on the following matters: 
 

To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To provide funding for the Swift Current Regional 
Hospital; 
 
To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and to the 
members of the Assembly, I would like your indulgence for a 
moment to introduce a group here that has filled the galleries. 
 
And some of you may be aware that I recently proclaimed April 
30 to May 6, School Safety Patrol Week in our province. I, 
myself, was a school safety patroller way back when and I 
found that that experience taught me a great deal about some of 
the skills needed to prosper in our society. Those being 
leadership, responsibility, and commitment to the well-being of 
others. 
 
I would ask all members of the Assembly to please welcome the 
school patrollers who are here visiting today. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
Legislative Assembly, three very special guests who are seated 
in your gallery. 
 
Mr. James Lee, vice-general manager for Everlight Travel from 
T’aipei. Mr. Charles Wang, Canadian manager for Everlight 
Travel from T’aipei. Mr. Henry Yau, senior supervisor from 
TPI Canada, from Richmond, B.C. (British Columbia). 
 
Mr. Speaker, Everlight Travel is the major tour company for 

Taiwanese tourists into Canada. In total the company handles 
international travel arrangements for approximately 10,000 
Taiwanese tourists annually. 
 
We’re pleased to inform you and all members that Everlight 
Travel has placed the province of Saskatchewan in their 2000 
travel itinerary. TPI Canada will be handling all the ground 
arrangements for Everlight Travel in Canada. 
 
Mr. Ted Hornung, from Tourism Saskatchewan, who is also 
seated in your gallery, will escort the party on a tour of some 
fascinating Saskatchewan destinations — Wanuskewin, 
Manitou Springs Resort, and the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) depot, to name a few. 
 
We’re very pleased that they are visiting our province. We 
welcome many more Taiwanese tourists as they choose a 
Saskatchewan holiday. And I would ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming our guests from Taiwan. Ni Hao. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to introduce to you and through to the members of this 
Assembly, the safety patrollers who are gathered here today. 
 
And I would like to beg the indulgence so that we can get to 
know a little bit about who each other is in this House. And so 
I’m going to read through the names of the communities from 
where these safety patrollers come. And as I read the name of 
the community, I would also ask the member representing that 
area, from either side of the House, to stand. I would ask the 
safety patrollers from that area and their chaperones to stand. 
 
There are 177 patrollers here, 27 chaperones, and two others 
under the guidance of Louise Houldsworth and Maureen 
Murray. So welcome to all of you. 
 
And we have safety patrollers here from Carrot River. Carrot 
River students stand, please. There we go. And you can be 
seated then. 
 
Estevan. Hudson Bay. Kindersley. Lanigan. Maidstone. Over 
on this side, Milt . . . Oops. Martensville. Moose Jaw. Nipawin. 
North Battleford. Prince Albert. Rosetown. Regina. Saskatoon. 
St. Walburg. Turtleford. Unity. Warman. Watrous. And 
Weyburn. 
 
Let’s welcome these safety patrollers to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with my colleague from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley in 
welcoming the 177 patrollers and 29 chaperones here today on 
the occasion of their 10th school safety patrol jamboree being 
held this week. 
 
School safety patrollers from across the province, as we know, 
come together for this jamboree once a year. This is a 
particularly special occasion as it’s the 10th anniversary. These 
are students who are recognized for their contributions 
throughout the year as safety patrollers in their home 



May 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1035 

communities. Various activities are planned for them this week 
in Regina. 
 
Safety patrollers help make our schools a safer place, especially 
for fellow students. Safety patrollers help fellow students cross 
the street safely as they go to and from school. 
 
And I would like particularly to recognize the large contingent 
of safety patrollers from Carrot River Valley and welcome them 
all here today. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
bring to the attention of the Assembly three guests in your 
gallery from the riding . . . one from the riding of 
Rosetown-Biggar and two from Regina — the famous 
grandmother who was working on the farm crisis, Carol 
Skelton, from Harris, Saskatchewan. 
 
And she is a good grandmother. Today she’s with two of her 
granddaughters from Regina — Wendy and Tenille. She is here 
for the music festival. And I just think that that commitment to 
family is great and we should give them a good welcome to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 
and through you to the other members of the Assembly . . . 
Although I welcome all the safety patrollers here today, there is 
one that’s particularly near and dear to my heart. She calls me 
mom although I’m not, by blood, her mother. She spent many, 
many hours with you. She’s sitting up here. If you would stand, 
Alyssa Knaus. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to the members of this 
Assembly a constituent of mine. Rod Thompson is in the east 
gallery and he is here today with the safety patrollers. Rod is a 
constable with the Estevan city police and he is also my 
nephew, so that makes this a little more special. And Rod also 
has a brown belt in karate and he is a champion kick boxer. So 
we had better all watch ourselves today. 
 
While I’m standing, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to welcome the 
safety patrollers from Estevan as well as from the other areas of 
the province. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming Rod and the other 
members. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this 
opportunity to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the House a very special individual who is part of the 
delegation but who is involved in her community in a very 
strong way — a lady by the name of Theresa Rederburg-de 

Both. She is a social worker with the Hudson Bay School 
Division, a very dedicated individual who works very, very 
hard in the interests of children in the Hudson Bay School 
Division. And I’d like to ask all members to join me in 
welcoming her today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is one of the 
safety patrollers that I would like to introduce in particular. A 
young man who through family has a long-standing relationship 
with this Assembly — two grandfathers who have been 
members of this Assembly and cabinet ministers — Riley 
Snyder. Riley, if you would stand please — grandson of 
Gordon Snyder and the former Eiling Kramer — Riley Snyder. 
 
Thank you and welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Statistics Canada Employment Numbers 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s Friday, and we 
all know that Friday means more good news. Today’s good 
news, Mr. Speaker, is brought to you by Statistics Canada and it 
concerns the number of people working in our province. I am 
very pleased to advise the Assembly that today there are nearly 
10,000 more people working than there were a year ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — And fully 95 per cent of those new jobs, Mr. 
Speaker, were full-time jobs. Those new jobs are in 
manufacturing, they were in construction, they were in 
transportation, in warehousing, in the utilities, in finance, in 
insurance, in real estate — let me take a breath — in leasing, in 
the service industry, and other primary industries. Not only are 
there more people working but I am very happy to tell you that 
there are 8,700 fewer unemployed people today than there were 
a year ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, that is a significant number 
because it tells you that it drops down our unemployment rate 
by nearly a full 2 points to 5.4 per cent. I’d be very remiss, Mr. 
Speaker, if I did not note that my home city of Regina has the 
second lowest unemployment rate in the nation, and 
Saskatoon’s not too far behind. Please let’s celebrate this good 
news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Waste Minimization Award Ceremony in Weyburn 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
Waste Reduction Council and Tetra Pak Canada sponsored 
Saskatchewan’s fourth waste minimization award ceremony in 
Weyburn recently. And I’m pleased to advise the hon. members 
of this House that the town of Maple Creek, and Maple Creek 
and District Opportunities Inc. were the recipients of the 



1036 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2000 

partnership award at those particular ceremonies. 
 
Now that award recognizes projects or programs that 
demonstrate the benefits of co-operation and was presented 
specifically in recognition of their combined efforts in reducing 
waste in the municipal landfill. 
 
This project has recycled more than 216 million metric tonnes 
. . . I’m sorry, 216 metric tonnes of waste — there isn’t that 
much waste in the southwest — during the past year and more 
than double the previous year’s totals. Now since that project 
began in 1996, more than 537 tonnes have been diverted from 
the landfill site. 
 
Maple Creek Opportunities Incorporation provides the 
recycling facilities, with the town of Maple Creek doing the 
collection, and this partnership provides a win/win situation for 
everyone involved. It’s a prime example of the innovative spirit 
that thrives in southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
The town of Maple Creek benefits from having a greatly 
reduced amount of material going to their landfill site, and the 
Opportunities Incorporation receives a manageable workload 
for its staff and the comfort of financial stability. The business 
community in Maple Creek receives regular pickup of 
recyclable materials, and everybody wins. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Matters Raised During Question Period 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, or 
as the Leader of the Opposition so eloquently says when he 
stumbles to his feet to question the Premier about his future 
employment opportunities — well, well, well, well, well. 
 
The MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from the bat 
cave has given us all another lesson in how facts should never 
interfere with a good line. And once again, he has lowered the 
bar on his own and his party’s credibility. He’s the limbo 
dancer of the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First we had the rabid bats in the hospital, terrifying the people 
of Regina by having bats assist at the birth of every child in 
southern Saskatchewan. Turns out one bat had been seen once, 
and that rabid bats in Regina are rare as Tories without a rap 
sheet. But never mind, Mr. Speaker, the headline is all that 
counts. 
 
Bats may be blind, Mr. Speaker, but at least they get where 
they’re going, and their squeaking has a purpose. 
 
Then yesterday we had the bat boy announcing the death of the 
oil and gas industry, Mr. Speaker, complete with supporting 
cast. The only problem, of course, as described in today’s The 
Leader-Post is that the facts were wrong — too bad. 
 
Of course he had a good teacher in his leader who was 
completely wrong in his questions about AIDA (Agricultural 
Income Disaster Assistance) a few days ago. But then, Mr. 
Speaker, bats fly in flocks. Holy misrepresentation, Batman. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Women of Distinction Awards 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 
opposition I would like to congratulate all the nominees for the 
YWCA Women of Distinction Awards. And I would especially 
like to congratulate the winners. 
 
All of these women are to be congratulated for the energy and 
dedication they bring to their individual fields and for the 
distinction and contribution that they have each made to their 
home communities and to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join the member opposite, as last night I also had the pleasure of 
attending the 18th annual YWCA Women of Distinction 
Awards in Regina. 
 
And this event is held to pay tribute to women from across 
southern Saskatchewan who give of themselves and enrich our 
community. And you know, I wouldn’t have wanted to be on 
the selection panel last night, Mr. Speaker, because these were 
outstanding, outstanding people that were nominated. 
 
And because their names will be familiar to so many, I want to 
briefly mention the categories: Dr. Roberta McKay in health 
and wellness; Jean L. Okimasis in arts and culture; Susan 
Barbara Barber in business, labour and professions; Doris 
Sheldon, co-founder of SOFIA House, in community and 
humanitarian service; Georgina McKillop Daniel of Avonlea in 
contribution to a rural community; Shawna L. Argue in science 
and technology; Betty Lou Dean in sports and recreation — she 
used to be my manager when I worked at Massey Road pool. 
Kim Delesoy was named young woman of distinction. Jean E. 
Thomas received the 2000 Women of Distinction Lifetime 
Achievement Award for her 40 years of working with Scouts in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’d just like to thank the YWCA for all the time and effort 
they put into the gala, it’s a hugely successful event; and the 
talent, energy and leadership of these women. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Application of the Provincial Sales Tax 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sometimes, if the 
opposition is effective, the system can work and the Legislative 
Assembly can actually take care of the people’s agenda. 
 
Since the provincial budget, many of us who represent oil- and 
gas-related industries in this province, and they’re all on this 
side of the House, I might point out . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — . . . have been trying to get details from this 
government on how its taxation policy would affect 



May 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1037 

Saskatchewan business people in this industry and their 
employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition MLAs and the businesses 
themselves were unable to get answers. Road bans had come 
off. Decisions needed to be made. And one business would get 
one answer from these government members and another 
business would get another. 
 
So yesterday we were pleased to ask some questions in this 
Legislative Assembly that actually got the right answer and got 
the correct answer for the businesses in this area. 
 
In fact, Sage Well Services, Sage Well Services, who were 
represented here yesterday in the gallery, had already sent their 
invoices out for April and had charged the PST (provincial sales 
tax) based on this forthcoming government. They’d already 
charged the PST. 
 
As it turns out, because of the efforts of this opposition, they 
were able to send out another fax that said they didn’t have to 
charge the PST. 
 
We take a great deal of pride in being able to achieve that on 
behalf of the people of this province. It’s good practice for the 
soon and coming day when we’ll be the provincial government 
here in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Memorial Day in the Netherlands 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, 55 years ago this 
month Canadian troops completed the liberation of the 
Netherlands from the Nazi occupation that had lasted since 
1940. More than 7,600 Canadians lost their lives during this 
particular struggle of World War II, leaving what Canadian poet 
and soldier Earle Birney called, quote, “the grief of the old and 
the tombs of the young.” 
 
Veterans Affairs Canada informs us that yesterday, May 4, was 
the 55th National Memorial Day in the Netherlands — a day to 
celebrate that liberation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the warm bonds of friendship between the people 
of Canada and the Netherlands, which developed out of the 
anguish of war, still endures today. In recognition of that 
friendship, and to keep the memory of the achievements and 
sacrifices of the men and women who served for Canada, 
veterans and family members are currently on an official 
pilgrimage overseas between May 1 and 10. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have more than a passing interest in this 
pilgrimage. My family were among those liberated from 
oppression, a very dangerous oppression, given their wartime 
activities. And growing up in wartime Holland, I learned of my 
family’s gratitude to Canada. Fifty-five years after the fact, I 
join my family in expressing gratitude to Canada. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Government Funding of Film Festival 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan 
has a Film and Video Classification Act that governs the 
exhibition and distribution of films in this province. One of the 
films to be shown at the Queer City Film Festival is in direct 
contravention of section (7) of these regulations. Section (7) 
says if a film contains scenes depicting urination or defecation 
for sexual gratification, it will not be approved. 
 
This is exactly the topic of the film Hose, which is one of the 
films to be screened as a part of your taxpayer-funded film 
festival. This film would not be allowed in any Saskatchewan 
theatres, yet is part of your government’s funded porn festival. 
 
Mr. Premier, how can you continue to support a festival which 
will be screening a porn film that directly contravenes your very 
own Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’ll take a moment this morning to reflect 
on some of the words that have been written by the editorial 
boards across the province in the two larger centres. And I want 
to share this with the member opposite. 
 
And it’s time to tell the opposition politicians to drop their 
tiresome posturing and granting decisions made by 
Saskatchewan’s Arts Board over their lifetime. And then the 
editorial from the Regina paper says this, the quality of political 
debate in this province is less important today: 

 
. . . than health, education, and agriculture — issues the 
Saskatchewan Party has virtually ignored since it started 
obsessing over this silly and inconsequential film festival 
five days ago? 

 
(But) No, but titillating talk of government-funded porn 
surely is a great source of headlines and a great vehicle to 
get your mug on the six o’clock news. And . . . 

 
What’s the point in doing your job of (facilitating and) 
scrutinizing the public purse when it’s so much easier to 
mobilize public outrage . . . 
 

And this is what you’ve been doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what we have here is a 
government who doesn’t mind breaking their own laws. Mr. 
Speaker, the film Hose is not deemed suitable for the 
Saskatchewan public theatres according to your very own Act, 
and yet we are going to have funding to show this film in a 
public library here in Saskatchewan. We don’t know if the rest 
of the films contravene the Act or not, but the public is outraged 
and people are cancelling their SaskTel long distance service 
because of this. 
 
Mr. Premier, your government defends panel discussion and 
you defend the screenings, yet you can’t even read the names of 
these films in the legislature. The media can’t print the names in 
the paper and radio, and radio and television can’t even say the 



1038 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2000 

names. 
 
Mr. Premier, how can you continue to spend taxpayers’ dollars 
on pornography when people in this province are so outraged 
with everything you’re doing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that since this film festival has been in 
Regina, it’s been held at the public library. And I want to go on 
and say to the member opposite about what else is written into 
The Leader-Post today and in the editorial board from 
Saskatoon. 
 
They go on to say, Mr. Speaker, that the “Saskatchewan Party 
MLAs, some of them holdovers from the former Conservative 
(government) party” have attacked this very film festival since 
1994. And the article goes on to talk about the Saskatchewan 
Party’s outrage of which came to this Assembly in 1994 and led 
by then Mr. Dan D’Autremont. And this is what it says: 

 
Dan D’Autremont, then a Tory, described himself as a 
“Philistine” when he demanded the end in 1994 to an 
individual grants to artists. Among the targets of his wrath 
was $9,000 provided for an installation entitled 
“Gaynada.” 

 
Which was this same kind of event held in this community, 
with the same community, of which in 1996, the member from 
Rosthern took exception to and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, in the last week we’ve heard four 
different ministers speak to this question and not one of them 
have given us an answer. The minister of CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) says they don’t 
condone pornography. The minister of SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation) calls the movies “erotica” 
and compares them to Academy Awards movies. The Minister 
of Culture says the films aren’t pornography, yet even the 
festival organizers call them pornography. 
 
The Premier won’t stand up in the House and talk to the issue, 
and now the government defends funding this event even 
though these films would not approved under their own Film 
and Video Classification Act. Mr. Premier, it’s time to stand up 
in this House and say that you are doing something wrong. It’s 
time to stop hiding behind the Arts Board and SaskFILM and 
SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you just pull the funding from this festival? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite and to the Saskatchewan Party, and I’ve been saying 
this now for the last couple of days and I want to say one more 
time to the member opposite . . . And I have received now a 
number of correspondences and I have another one here that I 

want to read to the record, from an individual in Regina who 
talks about the Arts Board and the arts council being in place 
now in this province for better than 50 years. And what this 
person says, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s a simple and profound fact 
— and this is an individual who both supports and doesn’t 
support some of the funding over the years — but says this is a 
fundamental fact that the arts council, the Arts Board should be 
arm’s length from government. And that — what she goes on to 
say — that the Sask Party, Ms. Draude, obviously does not 
understand the basic facts of democracy in this province. 
 
And this individual, Mr. Speaker, is from Regina, 
Saskatchewan, and her name is Hildy Wren-Diaz. She is the 
individual who has written in and says to the member opposite 
of the Saskatchewan Party, this is a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Home Care Services 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, almost 
every time you’re asked to comment on the failing health care 
reform process, you stress the importance of home care as one 
of the cornerstones of an efficient public health care system. 
Every time the NDP (New Democratic Party) closes another 
hospital, we hear you saying you want to shift some of the 
resources to home care. 
 
Madam Minister, is that still your position? Do you continue to 
view home care as a critical part of fixing the broken publicly 
funded health care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Home care is a 
vital component of our health care system and we continue to 
view it as such. We are interested in always enhancing our 
home care capabilities and have just completed in February a 
home care conference bringing together all of the stakeholders 
in home care and a wide variety of people interested in 
improving the system. We’re waiting for that response or the 
report from that conference, but we are committed to making 
the system better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another question 
for the minister. Madam Minister, on April 20, the CEO (chief 
executive officer) of the Living Sky Health District sent a letter 
to all home care clients. The letter indicates that all home care 
clients are being assessed in order to identify which clients 
could be cut off. 
 
Madam Minister, the letter says, and I quote: 
 

Immediately the Living Sky Health District will review the 
needs of all home care clients and will be assessing the 
degree of risk to each individual if services are no longer 
provided. 

 



May 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1039 

Madam Minister, how can you say that home care is the 
cornerstone of your government’s health care system when 
health districts are in the process of shutting down home care 
services for many clients that we speak to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the last few 
years, we have increased home care services over 100 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Our funding has increased 100 per cent. 
So we are committed to moving people . . . keeping people in 
their homes as long as possible, independently living, aging in 
place. Home care is a cornerstone of our health care system and 
we intend to keep it that way and intend to continue to build on 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, you keep telling us that 
home care is a cornerstone of your system, but, Madam 
Minister, the Living Sky Health District says it is currently 
spending $1.8 million on home care but your department is only 
supplying $1.3 million for home care services. 
 
Madam Minister, that leaves the district health boards in an 
impossible situation. And here’s what the letter to the home 
care clients from the CEO says, and I quote: 
 

Those individuals for whom the risk appears to be low will 
be discharged from the home care services and attempts 
will be made to put them in touch with someone (who) 
they may be able to hire privately. 
 

Is that your plan, Madam Minister? Are you planning to 
privatize the home care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I have said, 
home care is the cornerstone of the plans that we are making to 
improve our health care system, unlike the opposition whose 
plans are to privatize our health care system, to privatize it to a 
two-tier health care system, give away our province’s medicare 
system. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Regrettably I was 
unable to hear the answer, the final answer. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Unlike the opposition, Mr. Speaker, we 
have no intention of privatizing our medical care system. We 
are committed to increasing our funding, improving our 
services, and we have no intention of — as they say — 
two-tiered health or privatizing our health care system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister says she’s not going to privatize the health care system 
but she’s forcing district health boards to do it by her lack of 
commitment. 

Madam Minister, it gets even worse. According to 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses President, Rosalee Longmoore, 
you’re actually blackmailing districts who will not go along 
with your privatization plan. 
 
According to Longmoore and I quote: 
 

Boards have been told if this information leaks out, they 
will be removed from office and the government will 
appoint a public administrator. 
 

Is that your plan, Madam Minister? If boards won’t go along 
with your two-tiered plan, you’re going to have them dismissed 
and replaced by one of your flunkies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had an opportunity to speak to the 
chairperson of the Living Sky Board, and I’m advised by the 
board Chair that at no time did the board ever indicate to 
anyone that they would be removed if they released the 
information to the public. I don’t know where that information 
comes from, but I want to assure the public and I want to assure 
the House that at no time has that been indicated to that board 
or any other board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Mr. Speaker, we have 
the letter and it says and I quote again: 
 

Those individuals for whom the risk appears to be low will 
be discharged from home care services and attempts will 
be made to put them in touch with someone who they may 
be able to hire privately. 

 
The letter is in our hands and it should be in yours. Madam 
Minister, the media today says that you’re also waffling about 
reviewing the system. You’re moving from ricocheting from 
one health care crisis to the next. You attack nurses, you attack 
district health boards, you attack seniors. Who’s next? Now 
you’re attacking the people who require home care. 
 
Madam Minister, the people of Saskatchewan know that they’re 
not the problem, you are. Madam Minister, are you prepared to 
launch a comprehensive review of the system or are you willing 
to stand aside and let someone else do it who can? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as the people of this 
province will know, the Premier of our province has been 
indicating to the Prime Minister and all of the other premiers in 
the country that it’s really time for Canada to renew its efforts 
in medicare in this country. We’ve not had a review since the 
Hall Commission in 1967. We understand that there may be a 
possibility of such a review nationally and if there is a 
possibility we certainly want to participate. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I will say this. I’ve had an opportunity to 
review the record of the members opposite very carefully 
through their election campaign material and their newspaper 
articles and their policy, Mr. Speaker. I can assure members of 
the public that this province is not interested in moving to 



1040 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2000 

private surgical clinics which is the policy of the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
And that’s what we get, Mr. Speaker, if those people ever have 
a chance to govern this province. We’re not going to go there, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister has to stand and answer for the policies of her 
government. First of all you’re threatening to remove from 
home care service, then you’re suggesting that they go and hire 
whatever they can privately. And then on top of it you’re 
threatening district health boards by muzzling them and 
accusing them if they say anything out of turn, they’re going to 
be removed. Talk about your record and not Ralph Klein’s, 
Madam Minister, what are you prepared to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting. They 
can stand in the House and every day they . . . or in the public 
they hammer the health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 35,000 people receive health services in this 
province each and every day. The system is not perfect, Mr. 
Speaker, but I can say this: it’s the best health care system in 
the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we are the party that 
brought publicly funded, publicly administered health care to 
this province and to this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at their convention their party members called the 
principles of the Canada Health Act mindless slogans. We have 
a Leader of the Opposition that has said that we should get rid 
of the Canada Health Act. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re not interested in getting rid of the 
Canada Health Act because we don’t want to see private 
hospitals, private surgical clinics, and privatized health care in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Annual Returns Filed by Political Parties 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well this 
government is breaking the film classification Act; they’re 
breaking the Canada Health Act. Let’s see if there’s any other 
Acts being broken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not so very long ago in this very House, the 
Liberals would be up every day attacking other parties for 
breaking The Election Act. The Liberals would accuse the other 
parties of failing to comply with requirements to disclose the 
names of donors in accordance with the law. The Liberals 
would say the other parties had broken The Election Act and 
should be prosecuted to the full extent of the law. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister of Education if he 
still feels so strongly about compliance with The Election Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite very clearly . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say through 
you and to the members opposite . . . if the member from 
Kindersley would quit yelling and hollering from his seat. If 
he’s got a question, fair enough he can ask. But from the 
question asked, it’s perfectly impossible to answer any question 
because he hasn’t asked one. 
 
But while we’re on the issue of funding, I think there are many 
Saskatchewan people who wonder where the $800,000 that the 
old Tories had — who’s in control of that money? So if the 
member opposite is curious about money, maybe he could stand 
and explain how certain members from his caucus, handling 
$800,000 of public money — where is that money today, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s get a 
little more information here. Section 210 of The Election Act 
says that each party must file its annual return disclosing the 
names of all donors by the end of April. Yet when we contacted 
the electoral office yesterday we, the Saskatchewan Party, have 
filed our return, the NDP have filed their return but, Mr. 
Speaker, the Liberals have not yet filed their return. 
 
Mr. Minister, where is it? What’s the holdup? Surely it can’t 
take that long to list the donors. Mr. Speaker, I understand 
that’s a pretty short list. Or perhaps, Mr. Speaker, some of them 
are demanding their money back. 
 
Mr. Minister, why haven’t you filed your annual return? Why 
are you breaking The Election Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 
the member opposite that obviously the president of the Liberal 
Party, the president of the NDP Party, the president of the Sask 
Party, and maybe the president of the now-in-dormancy 
Conservative Party would explain where that $800,000 is. 
Because many taxpayers are very interested. 
 
I get more calls, I get more calls about where the money went 
from Grant Devine’s administration than I do about the issue 
that the member who raises the issue of a festival this weekend 
and about where the $15 billion in debt went to when certain 
members of your caucus were part of the previous 
administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, for the life of me, Mr. 
Speaker, I . . . 
 



May 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1041 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. I’d ask all hon. 
members to please come to order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know I 
cannot understand what the holdup is. I think the Liberals 
maybe only had one donor. Perhaps the Premier could add some 
light to this. Maybe he knows how much he gave you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section 212 of The Election Act says failure to file 
an annual return within the prescribed time limited is an 
offence. 
 
Section 213 says a party may be prosecuted for this offence. 
 
So I would ask the Minister of Justice — if he’s listening — 
Mr. Minister, will you be laying charges against the Liberal 
Party for violating The Election Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that calling on elected members here to 
explain their party’s financing, I think it’s very questionable 
whether these questions are in order. That’s one point I want to 
make. 
 
But secondly, maybe you, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, want 
to explain how — my understanding is — that companies of 
Conrad Black donated $75,000 to your party. Tell me how that 
works? 
 
And I don’t think it’s a legitimate question for me to ask you 
that but maybe you want to tell me whether there’s any conflict 
of interest? Is there any conflict of interest that Conrad Black 
and his companies would give you $75,000 and none to our 
party and there isn’t a conflict of interest? You want to mention 
or talk about that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’m pretty 
shocked at the Deputy Premier because that party accepts — 
not accepts, demands — a quarter of a million dollars from 
union members who have no choice over where their funding 
for political activity . . . (inaudible) . . . That member should be 
ashamed of himself. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’re talking about The Election Act and a 
flagrant violation of The Election Act. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, the 
election should be overturned and we should have a brand new 
election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unlike the Liberals, the Saskatchewan Party is 
very proud of our fiscal return. It shows that we raised $650,000 
without a tax credit, without a quarter of a million dollars from 
the unions, like the NDP got last year. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan people are abandoning the Liberals and the NDP 
to support a new movement in this province, and it shows in our 
fiscal return and it shows in the election result. We got more 
votes . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’d ask the hon. leader to please 
go directly to his question. 

Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier. Will you tell the Minister of Education to stop 
breaking the law and to file his election return? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I noticed clearly the member did 
not answer my request to comment . . . for him to comment on 
Conrad Black and his companies giving $75,000 to this political 
party, and what were his motives in doing that. What were his 
motives? 
 
Now let me tell you this, one thing I’ll say clearly on financing 
of political parties. I will not apologize one moment for taking 
money from the working people of this province one by one by 
one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I won’t apologize. Not . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — When the men and women of this 
province through their organized unions give money to our 
political party, I will stand up and defend it any day. But I 
challenge you, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, stand up and 
defend the $75,000 from Conrad Black’s companies. And what 
were his motives in giving that money to your political party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would tell the 
Deputy Premier that everyone who donated to the 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Hon. members . . . Order, please. I ask 
all hon. members to please come to order. There will be 
opportunity for individual debate. Order! Hon. member from 
Kindersley and the Deputy Premier, kindly come to order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we’ve 
really hit a nerve on the other side. They’re confiscating 
donations from the workers of Saskatchewan — many times 
against their will — for a government that’s running this 
province into the ground. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has always said that we 
could run this government more efficiently on less money. And 
if you want proof, just look at the fiscal returns. Because of 
their tax credits, because of their donations from the unions, the 
NDP raised $1.6 million — almost a million dollars more than 
the Saskatchewan Party. And they actually spent $1.8 million 
last year. 
 
But when the ballots were counted, Mr. Speaker, it was the 
Saskatchewan Party that got the most votes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — All the money, all the money that the 



1042 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2000 

Premier absconded from workers of Saskatchewan could not 
buy him a majority government. He had to use the taxpayers’ 
dollars to do it. 
 
Mr. Premier, why are you not allowing your minister . . . Why 
are you allowing your minister to violate The Election Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say again, 
and not to be repetitious but I will repeat a couple of things. 
First of all the Liberal Party in this province, whether you like 
them or don’t like them, the fact of the matter is they have a 
proud history, they have a proud history in this province, and 
they will defend their record on collecting money. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite, when he steps out of 
the House, when he . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, when that member 
steps out of the House, I ask him to defend and to explain 
whether a penny of the $800,000 that was in a bank account 
from the old Tory Party, whether one penny went to his 
campaign. Explain that. 
 
And also will he explain whether he sees any conflict of interest 
in Conrad Black, from out of this province, giving 75,000 to his 
party to try to influence election when he owns the newspapers? 
Is there any conflict there? 
 
You take care of your party and I’m sure the Liberals and NDP 
will take care of those. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I’d ask all hon. 
members to please come to order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise actually on a point 
of order. I would like the Speaker to review the line of 
questioning by the Leader of the Opposition that we’ve recently 
experienced in question period. 
 
It is my understanding, it is my understanding that the 
government can be questioned on administrative competence 
within its jurisdiction and that it cannot be questioned on party 
policy. And I would like the Speaker to make a ruling on that 
line of questioning for us in the very near future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — . . . respond to the point of order with a 
point of order. Mr. Speaker, the members of the . . . members 
. . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. There has been a point of order 
that needs to be ruled on. Okay. There cannot be another point 
of order, but you may speak to the point of order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, all 
members of the Legislative Assembly have right to speak to 
legislation that has been passed and is under the jurisdiction of 
this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that includes The Election Act. And my questions 
were in regard to The Election Act and the fact that that 
Election Act was being broken. Absolutely any member of this 
Assembly may speak to The Election Act. It has been done in 
the past, Mr. Speaker, by members of the opposition. It has 
been done by members of the Liberal Party. I would suggest 
that you discount the point of order by the Liberal leader. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, I will review that. But I will at 
this point in time point out that Beauchesne’s, 6th Edition, in 
paragraph 409(6), does indicate that: 
 

A question must be within the administrative competence 
of the Government. 
 

And further, further, and I appreciate . . . I take that point and I 
will review it further, but I’m just reminding members also . . . 
Order, Order. 
 
I just want to point out that further in Beauchesne’s, in 
paragraph 410(17). Order, please. Order. I just want to point out 
another paragraph in Beauchesne’s which indicates: 
 

Ministers may not be questioned with respect to party 
responsibilities. 
 

I will further review your point of order, Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition, but I just point out to members to remind them that 
this is the tradition of the House, set on precedent. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The precedents that you made? 
 
The Speaker: — The precedents that are in Beauchesne’s. 
Order. Order. 
 
Would you like to stand on your feet, hon. member, and 
challenge what I’ve just said? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we are just dealing with the 
issues as we have seen them enacted in this House in the past 
number of years, sir, when you yourself were an MLA. 
 
The Speaker: — Is that . . . hon. member, is that a challenge of 
the Chair’s ruling on this point of order? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — It was just a statement, sir, of my observation 
of what’s happened in this House in the past. 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. member, again, what I quoted to you is 
from tradition and precedence from Beauchesne’s — from 
long-standing parliamentary rules for this House, and our own 
House, from the members of this House. 



May 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1043 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 34  The Saskatchewan Evidence 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 34, 
The Saskatchewan Evidence Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: —I would ask the hon. member from Kindersley 
and the hon. member from Rosthern to please come to order. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was 
expecting this. I rise today to move second reading of The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments I’m now introducing are 
designed to streamline the process for dealing with disputes 
between landlords and tenants regarding security deposits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Residential Tenancies Act was amended in 
1997 to introduce several changes, most notably to increase the 
maximum security deposit a landlord could require from a 
tenant. 
 
Landlords were also required, within five days of the 
termination of a tenancy, to refund the security deposit to the 
tenant or apply to the Office of the Rentalsman for a hearing to 
determine the disposition of the deposit. The intent was to 
ensure that disputes in this area were settled and refunds paid to 
tenants as soon as possible. When the process was introduced, it 
was reorganized . . . it was recognized that it would increase the 
workload in the Office of the Rentalsman. Mr. Speaker, the 
increase has been substantial. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, when the process was 
introduced, it was recognized that it would increase the 
workload in the Office of the Rentalsman and consequently, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s proven to be the case. The increase has been 
substantial. There are now about 5,000 security deposit hearings 
annually as compared to 1,000 before. 
 
In 2,000 of these, Mr. Speaker, the tenant doesn’t appear at the 
hearing, and another 2,000 the tenant’s forwarding address is 
not known so that the tenant can’t be notified of the hearing. As 
well, Mr. Speaker, experience indicates that in 80 per cent of 
hearings involving security deposits, tenants don’t appear to 
dispute the matter. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is plainly inefficient, time consuming, and 
costly for the Office of the Rentalsman as well as for landlords 
who appear at these hearings. Mr. Speaker, landlords have also 
expressed concern that five calendar days is not enough time in 
which to determine whether they need to make a claim, and if 
so attempt to resolve the matter with the tenant before applying 
for a hearing. 
 
The amendments in this Bill will substantially reduce the 
numbers of hearings scheduled. Hearings will be scheduled 
only where the tenant actually disputes the landlord’s claim to 
the security deposit. Landlords will, with these changes, Mr. 
Speaker, have seven business days at the end of a tenancy in 
which to return the security deposit to the tenant or apply for a 
hearing and supply details about the claim to the Rentalsman. 
 
The Rentalsman will notify the tenant about the application and 
the nature and amount of the claim. If the tenant wants to 
dispute the claim, the tenant will then have seven business days 
to advise the Rentalsman. It’s at that point, Mr. Speaker, that a 
hearing would be scheduled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this revised process has several benefits for 
tenants and landlords. Most significantly, both will have more 
time to attempt to resolve a dispute before the landlord must 
make application to the Rentalsman. Landlords will be able to 
assess the amount of a claim before making the application 
which is often not possible within the current five days, and 
tenants will be advised about the details of the claim and be in a 
better position to know whether or not to dispute that claim. At 
present, tenants are only advised that a hearing will be held. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one new provision is being introduced with these 
amendments. A new provision will permit the Department of 
Social Services to provide the addresses of tenants who are 
receiving social assistance to the Rentalsman for the purpose of 
providing them with information about claims and notices of 
hearings. 
 
The purpose of the new provision, Mr. Speaker, is to offer more 
assurance that these tenants will receive the information they 
need about a landlord’s application. These tenants will also be 
given information on how to dispute a claim and an explanation 
of the consequences if an order is made in favour of the 
landlord. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is important information as payments to the 
landlord by the Department of Social Services, based on an 
order of the Rentalsman, will be recovered from their future 
social assistance payments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recognizing the importance of these amendments, 
consultations were undertaken with several tenant advocacy 
groups and with the Saskatchewan rental industry housing 
association. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, there are extensive 
consultations with both groups. And I’m pleased to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that they agree with those amendments. 
 
In addition, the amendments will result in substantial savings 
for the Office of the Rentalsman. Mr. Speaker, we’re always 
interested in efficient operation of government activities. And 
holding hearings only where a tenant advises the Rentalsman 
that the tenant disputes the landlord’s claim, will reduce the 



1044 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2000 

number of hearings by 4,000, saving, Mr. Speaker, 
approximately $185,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 
Residential Tenancies Act and to make consequential 
amendments to The Saskatchewan Assistance Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a few 
comments regarding Bill No. 29, The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act, 2000, before I move to adjourn debate. 
 
In listening to the minister give his reasons and his arguments 
for the current legislation to be brought forward, Mr. Speaker, it 
certainly appears that there are some points that need to be 
addressed. And I appreciate the fact that . . . some of the things 
the minister was pointing out. The fact that when the Act was 
changed a while back acknowledging some of the concerns in 
regard to security deposits, the department at that time was not 
aware of the load it might put on the department and certainly 
on the Office of the Rentalsman. 
 
And I don’t know if anybody was, Mr. Speaker. I’m not exactly 
sure if anyone had any idea of what type of workload and the 
fact that it would appear from the minister’s comments that we 
actually have in many cases, part of the workload is somewhat 
frivolous in regards to the claims made by tenants or landlords 
or vice versa in regards to security deposits and rental 
agreements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday afternoon we had the privilege of 
talking to the Minister of Social Services regarding rental rates 
and the problems that people on assistance have in receiving or 
finding good quality housing at a level that they can afford. 
 
And certainly one of the issues that becomes a major problem 
for people is the level of security deposit that is needed in order 
to rent a property. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the fact that when a person puts 
down security and the level of security that they’re putting 
down, they want to feel at the end of the day if they have looked 
after that property, that they’re indeed going to be reimbursed 
the security agreement and the funds appropriately, rather than 
having to go through a hassle for that funding. 
 
However it’s important that we do have an advocate available 
who can listen to disputes and determine the appropriate means 
of addressing that dispute. Whether it’s in favour of the 
Rentalsman . . . or pardon me, not the Rentalsman — the renter, 
or indeed the landlord. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, based on the bit of information we do have at 
this point in time, we would like to certainly take some more 
time to review the piece of legislation and to indeed determine 
that the legislation is going to address and answer some of the 
concerns in the areas that the minister has brought to our 
attention today. 
 
And therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move to 
adjourn debate. 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Police Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise today to move second reading of The Police Amendment 
Act, 2000. Keeping communities safe, Mr. Speaker, is a top 
priority for this government. Everyone has the right to feel safe 
in their homes and communities, and strong community-based 
police services are a critical component of safety and security. 
 
The amendments I’m putting before the Assembly today reflect 
the changing face of policing in Saskatchewan. Particularly, Mr. 
Speaker, these changes are intended to provide for the 
progressive development of new, community-based policing 
services in rural and Aboriginal communities in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill also provides for clarification of the 
ability of the minister to appoint a class of special constables, 
and for a chief of police to directly appoint special constables in 
their own police service. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, the rural municipalities of Corman 
Park and Vanscoy are operating small police forces to enforce 
liquor and traffic bylaws under the authority of the special 
constable appointments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Police Act, 1990 sets out detailed provisions 
regarding the establishment of police services, the governance 
training and discipline for those police services, as well as 
establishing the RCMP contracting framework for provincial 
policing contracts. 
 
Currently urban municipalities with a population over 500 are 
permitted to form a police service to provide policing services 
in their communities. No other authorities such as a rural 
municipality or First Nation are permitted to form an 
autonomous service under the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments will allow the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council to permit authorities designated 
in the regulations, such as a rural municipality or a First Nation, 
to establish a police service on specific terms and conditions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased and proud to say that the File 
Hills Agency First Nations community want to form a 
stand-alone police service, Mr. Speaker. The new force would 
operate under the direction of the RCMP during a three-year 
transitional period, becoming a stand-alone force after that 
period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, First Nations now have a range of options before 
them for the delivery of police services on their First Nations 
and many will choose to use the RCMP as their police service 
of choice, while some, like File Hills agencies, Mr. Speaker, 
will pursue, as they are doing and as we’re pleased to work with 
them on this, pursue an independent police service. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan and the RCMP view these 
choices as positive developments in the delivery of policing 
services and look forward to working with First Nations 
communities in this regard. 
 



May 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1045 

Mr. Speaker, this is an exciting time for File Hills Agency, 
being the first Saskatchewan First Nations police service. Mr. 
Speaker, File Hills agencies are to be commended for their 
collaborative approach with the RCMP and Saskatchewan 
Justice in moving towards this important goal. Their 
professionalism in this regard generates confidence in the 
policing community and bodes well for the community at large 
as well as for ongoing co-operation between existing and 
developing policing services in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note too that any police services 
created pursuant to these new provisions will be subject to the 
same standard of training and governance as exists in existing 
municipal police services. In particular the discipline and 
general ministerial and Police Commission oversight functions 
under The Police Act, 1990 will apply to such services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments focus on the ability of The 
Police Act, 1990, to accommodate new police services arising 
out of this government’s commitment to keeping communities 
safe through the development of Aboriginal policing services 
and the delivery of rural municipality policing services. 
 
The government is committed to working in partnership with 
local authorities such as rural municipalities and First Nations 
to collectively move forward to recognize new and emerging 
policing needs in a way that ensures continued professionalism 
and safety and security in our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend the 
Police Act, 1990. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in regards 
to The Police Amendment Act, 2000, I want to make a few 
comments. I understand from this piece of legislation, what the 
minister is telling us, that it’s a way for communities and in 
particular First Nations people to establish their own police 
forces. 
 
If I’m not mistaken, there are a number of communities 
throughout the province already who have some police service 
of their own. And so I’m not exactly sure what difference this is 
that . . . over this legislation, over what we already have. But 
certainly that’s an issue that we can address in the near future 
when we get into debating this Bill a little more extensively. 
 
At first blush it would just appear the Bill offers an opportunity 
just to form another police force, a private police force, in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I know that there are many communities who are looking at 
services and basically are looking at ways in which they could 
meet the needs of their community. Certainly as the minister’s 
indicated, File Hills First Nation, and I know reserves in my 
area, have talked about policing on their reserves as well, and 
working together with the RCMP in providing police services to 
meet the needs of their community. 
 
Certainly it’s important for people to understand and to feel that 
they have a liaison with the police services within their 
community and the services that they would come to trust. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what this piece of legislation appears to be 

doing is opening up the door for further extension of private . . . 
or not private, pardon me, community-based police servicing in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And we would hope that the 
legislation is going to provide some very clear direction 
regarding special forces to ensure that the public of this 
province are treated fairly and indeed are going to be dealt with 
fairly by police services across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a bit more 
time to review the legislation and be able to take some time to 
discuss the issue with concerned groups. And indeed make sure 
that when we address the issue more carefully, that we are 
indeed addressing concerns that there might be out there, so that 
we can address these directly with the minister as we move 
through the legislation. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would now move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
 
The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote, I invite the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I’d like to introduce my deputy minister to my right, 
Ray Clayton; to his right, Dan McFadyen, who is the assistant 
deputy minister of resource policy and economics. To my left is 
executive director of petroleum and natural gas, Bruce Wilson. 
Behind me is Donald Koop, who is the ADM (assistant deputy 
minister) of finance and administration. And in the back are 
Brian Mathieson, director of petroleum development branch; 
Doug Koepke, manager of accounts; and Pam Schwann, who is 
our director of mines branch. 
 
Subvote (EM01) 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr. Minister. And a 
special thanks to all of the department officials who have made 
their attendance in this Assembly today. I’m sure your help . . . 
with your help we’ll get through this much easier. 
 
My first question, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, what decision was 
made yesterday regarding the PST in the oil and gas industry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I need 
. . . and this issue does need some clarification. There were no 
decisions made yesterday. There were decisions that were made 
on March 30, on budget day. And I’m going to share with the 
member . . . And I’m sure he’s got copies of them and I’m sure 
he’s well aware that the taxation issues were dealt with in the 
budget. 
 
There’s a document dated March 30 — original in March ’85, 
but revised on March 30 — which outlines the changes with 
respect to the sales tax that were done as a result of the budget. 
And I will send these across to you. I don’t have a clean copy 



1046 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2000 

now but I will send copies to you. 
 
They were released to the media yesterday and I think satisfied 
the concerns of the individual who joined us here in the 
legislature. But there were no decisions made and there were no 
changes made. 
 
I should also correct, the member from Swift Current has 
suggested, and not to be argumentative, that there were changes 
made as a result of these issues being raised in question period 
yesterday, that’s untrue. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, it seems that the industry believes that changes were 
made yesterday. In fact, it seems that Mr. Len Stein from Sage 
Well Services came all the way from Swift Current to see that 
those changes would be made yesterday. And went away 
satisfied that they were made yesterday. 
 
And it seems that Mr. Ken Kluz believed that there were some 
changes to be made and I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
well he is a former . . . he is a very credible person, a former 
NDP MLA. 
 
And Mr. Ken Kluz sent us this letter, and I quote: 
 

As you know Saskatchewan people are very excited about 
the possibility of more oil and gas exploration. In 
conversation with Doug Anguish, former Minister of 
Energy and Mines, who is now a Government lobbyist 
with Renaissance Oil from Calgary tells me the oil industry 
is very upset with the Saskatchewan Government for the 
p.s.t. enhancement as changes will cost his company alone 
1 million dollars. 
 
At this time they are discussing their options to include less 
activity in Sask. 

 
Mr. Minister, how do you explain such misunderstanding in the 
oil and gas industry over your changes to the PST on budget 
day in light of this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I would be more 
than pleased to respond to the question that the member raises, 
and as well respond to the fax memo that was sent to one of his 
colleagues at the same time so that we can get on with the 
estimates with respect to this government’s direction in terms of 
oil and gas mining in our province, creating jobs for 
Saskatchewan people; a critique hopefully of our projected 
income from the different resource centres; a critique I’m 
hoping of our projected expenditures for personnel in different 
areas of the budget which is what estimates are about, so if I 
can maybe clear this up we can get on with what estimates are 
about. 
 
I too have read the fax and upon receiving the fax yesterday 
afternoon contacted Mr. Anguish to ask what his response 
might be. And I guess I could summarize it this way: he said to 
me well, he says, let me begin by telling you that I haven’t 
talked with Mr. Kluz for months — no, for years. So I think, 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll put that issue to rest by suggesting that 
mischief caused by the Saskatchewan Party with perhaps some 
of their friends by sending faxes back and forth really don’t 

have a lot of credibility in my mind so I’m not going to spend a 
lot of time dealing with it. 
 
The issue that the member raised was with respect to the oil and 
gas sector and the changes to the provincial sales tax. I can say, 
Mr. Speaker, that with our tax changes and things are added to a 
tax regime, there always is concern. And it takes time to 
develop some understanding as to their application and thereby 
understanding their impact on the industry. And we’re doing 
that. We have senior officials of government meeting with the 
Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers who also have 
had the document that I’ve referred the member to — that he 
could have found had he called my office March 31 or March 
30. But he chose not to do that. 
 
But I’m just saying that there are consultations happening with 
respect to our budget: as we have done, Mr. Chairman, when 
we introduced the high water cut changes that affect some of 
the marginal wells in our province; and the consultation that we 
did when we changed the heavy oil royalty and taxation rates; 
as we consulted when we were introducing the deep rights 
reversion that has created millions of dollars of investment in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it’s a process that we think works well. We 
don’t always agree with industry, and industry doesn’t always 
agree with us. But that’s the way negotiations and discussions 
work. Their job is to maximize their rate of return on their 
investment for their shareholders. And our job, as a 
government, is to regulate to ensure that we have an 
environmentally friendly industry, and that we maximize the 
return on the resources for the people of Saskatchewan. Because 
that resource plays a major, major role in developing for us the 
ability to have a first-class education system, a first-class health 
system, put money into roads and highways and, as a matter of 
fact, to pay the salaries of the members of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, are chemicals and all services relating to the oil field 
service industry exempt now from the PST or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I can respond in 
general terms, but my officials are not from the Department of 
Finance under whose purview these issues lie. These are 
officials, as I’ve introduced, from the Department of Energy 
and Mines whose job is to regulate and to enforce. And, as 
matter of fact, on the other side of that, to ensure that we have 
an expanded and a growing resource sector. 
 
But I can tell the member that mud services, all drilling fluids, 
and chemicals are subject to tax. And so if that answers his 
question. 
 
But if the member has some detailed questions with respect to 
the sales tax and its application, those would be better addressed 
when the Department of Finance officials are here with the 
Minister of Finance in order to answer those questions. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, and 
Mr. Minister, what about hourly rig rates — does the PST apply 
to them now or not? And what about, what about the rates for 
power tong operators, steamers, cementers, and other 
subcontractors? 



May 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1047 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think what 
would be probably more helpful is if I send this document over 
to the member. He can read it, because it details all of the 
exemptions and all of the inclusions. And from that he might be 
able to inform himself so that we can move on with estimates 
that are more pertinent to the Department of Energy and Mines, 
here with me today. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, and Mr. 
Minister, in light of the fact that it seems that all of this changed 
yesterday, according to the industry, I’m going to continue, I’m 
going to continue on this line of questioning. 
 
Mr. Minister, what items does this industry still have to pay the 
PST on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman. The 
member from Kindersley was engaging the House in dialogue, 
and I didn’t hear the member’s question. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I’ll ask it again then. Mr. Minister, what items 
does the industry still pay the PST on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve forwarded the 
document. He can read it for himself. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I don’t think this 
document will be extremely helpful since it was published in 
March, March 30, and according to the industry this has all 
changed as of yesterday. So I’d like an answer as of today, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Maybe the member could tell me 
who in the industry is suggesting that the changes were as of 
yesterday. From my perspective it was the member from Swift 
Current who’s indicated the changes were made — and you — 
as of yesterday. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, and welcome 
to your officials. Just as a point of clarification I guess since 
I’ve been brought in to the debate by the minister, I want to 
point out to him that there was indeed so much confusion on 
this particular issue — on the very issue we raised yesterday in 
the legislature — that the gentleman that was here yesterday 
from Sage well services actually sent out all of his April 
invoices charging the PST to all of his customers for rig rights 
which we find out yesterday is exempt. 
 
There was another similar company in Swift Current, there’s 
another similar company in Swift Current, smaller but similar to 
Mr. Stein’s that indeed was getting conflicting reports from the 
Department of Finance. And, Mr. Minister, with the greatest 
amount of respect, we did try to get the answers for them 
through the normal process. We did phone the Finance officials, 
we phoned the Finance minister’s office, and we couldn’t get an 
answer. 
 
Road bans are off. These people are making decisions now for 
their busy time of year, as you well know — I know you know 
the industry. It was very important for them to understand 
whether they were to charge the PST on their invoices. Some 

were, in the case of the latter smaller company I mentioned; 
some were not; and some had sent the PST out. 
 
So as of yesterday the gentleman that was here from Sage well 
services in my presence was actually on his cellphone to his 
support staff back in Swift Current, saying send out a fax telling 
our clients they don’t have to charge the PST. That sounds like 
yesterday became the date where this issue was clarified. And 
frankly, I appreciate the clarification, I appreciate the meeting 
we had with the Finance minister’s office, and I know the 
industry appreciates it. 
 
So I guess my . . . I guess the one question that I would have to 
the minister on this particular issue is that since that 
clarification yesterday, or the change in decision, or however it 
should be characterized occurred yesterday, was very helpful to 
the oil and gas industry in the province — and it was; it was 
very helpful — I guess I would echo the sentiments of the 
minister from Thunder Creek by asking for just a similar 
clarification or a commitment to a very quick clarification as it 
relates to all of the rest of the industry and whether the PST 
should be charged on other areas of the industry or not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I can and will, as I 
have in the past, commit, and I’ve had meetings with this 
member with respect to issues in his area in terms of 
development and questions that he might have. I sit in this 
House every day, as he does; when there are questions or 
concerns, information is available through me directly, through 
my office, or through the Department of Finance. There’s a web 
site set up that disseminates information in this new era of 
technological achievement and advancement. 
 
These pieces of information certainly should be available and 
we want them to be available. I would not suggest that there are 
times when the information flow is not what it could be or not 
what it should be. And I think that there will be interpretations 
with respect to different issues within the tax system and the tax 
base. We intend to meet with, work with industry — both the 
Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, the service 
industry — and attempt to in areas where there is no, I guess 
clear understanding, to clarify that. 
 
And as I’ve said, meetings between those associations and 
senior officials of this government will take place and will 
happen. And I can only say that if there are areas where 
information hasn’t flowed as it could have or should have, I 
would apologize, and I will do all in my power to ensure that 
the correct information goes to the people who need it in order 
to do their business and I give that commitment to the member 
and all of his colleagues. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, why did it take Saskatchewan Party lobbying and until 
yesterday for you to make changes or as you prefer to call them, 
clarifications, to the expanded PST in the oil and gas industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, it had absolutely 
nothing to do with the Saskatchewan Party in any way, shape, 
or form. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, you talk about the good working relationship you 



1048 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2000 

have with this industry. What consultations did you have with 
them before budget day regarding expansion of the PST? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, there are issues that 
are dealt with that are part of a budget process and are dealt 
with in a different fashion than others. 
 
I can say that my department has had interaction with the 
industry on an ongoing basis. I can also say that the Vicq report 
was a document that was public in this province, making 
suggestions to the government in terms of a major reduction in 
income tax which has taken place — the largest income tax 
reduction in the history of this province, which will be a major 
benefit. 
 
We didn’t share that information with industry because those 
are initiatives that are done as a result of a budget process that is 
not public and done finally through public consultations. But I 
can say that our record of interaction with industry and 
consultation and coordinating initiatives and different projects 
has been one that I think has been very well received by 
industry over the past. 
 
And as I have said, there are times when we don’t agree. I think 
that’s a natural course of negotiations, but we try to find 
consensus and I would say for the most part we have. If the 
member is trying to suggest that this is a government that 
doesn’t consult and doesn’t work with industry, I totally 
disagree with him. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — By leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly, a group 
that we have in the Speaker’s gallery, the Special Education 
Review Committee: Christine Boyczuk, director of education, 
Davidson School Division; Bob Green, chairperson, 
Saskatchewan Valley Board of Education; Dr. Len Haines, 
professor in the department of educational psychology and 
special education, College of Education, University of 
Saskatchewan; Elaine Billay of Meath Park, perennial volunteer 
and parent representative; Jean Lendzyk, a resource teacher 
with the Shamrock School Division and past president of the 
council for exceptional children; Janice Charlton, director of 
special education for the Department of Education. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are the members of the Special 
Education Review Committee. They have been extremely 
active, having been set up in September of 1998. Since that time 
they have held public consultations in 11 Saskatchewan 
communities, met with 39 partner organizations and groups, 
received over 200 written briefs, visited 20 schools, and met 
with 21 school division teams, and have reviewed the current 
research for an effective practice with regard to special 
education. 

They have been a very busy group and I would like all members 
of the Assembly to welcome them to the Assembly and thank 
them for the great work they have done. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member for Kelvington-Wadena on 
her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude: — . . . leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I’d like to join with the Minister of Education 
in welcoming the Special Education Review Committee. 
 
I’ve been around the province as well and I know how hard 
you’ve been working because the school divisions I’ve been 
meeting with have told me. And they’ve also said they’re 
looking forward to your review results and they’re looking 
forward to the benefits it’s going to bring to the children of this 
province. I commend you for your work and I look forward to 
talking to you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
 
Subvote (EM01) 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, what items will the mining industry now be paying 
PST on in light of yesterday’s interesting changes with regard 
to the oil and gas industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, before I answer the 
question, I too want to bid welcome to the Special Education 
Review Committee. I have some understanding of the 
importance of your work. My youngest daughter was born with 
a learning disability and we’ve had some interaction with the 
school system over the years. And I really do appreciate your 
work, and I look forward to some very positive 
recommendations to government as a result of your work. So 
thanks for that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that information is contained in the 
document that I sent to the member just a couple minutes ago. 
He probably had a chance to read it by now so he will know. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well I’ve already — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister 
— I’ve mentioned how much credibility we think this document 
has now in light of changes . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s marked the 30th. It’s dated March 30. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Yes. And as of yesterday it seems that there 
were some changes, at least as regards the oil and gas industry. 
Now whether you call them changes or clarifications, it seems 
that they’re different from what’s contained in this document. 



May 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1049 

Now I’m going to ask one more time: what changes, or what 
items, are mining companies subject to the PST on, and which 
ones are now exempt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the same ones that 
were in that document listed as of March 30, which is about a 
month or so ago. And I want to clarify just one more time for 
the member — there were no changes yesterday. That document 
is the same today as it was yesterday, the same as it was on 
March 30 of the year 2000 AD, and if the member would take 
the chance and the opportunity to read it, he will understand 
quite clearly. 
 
Again, let me just close by clarifying that there were no changes 
yesterday. That document is the same yesterday as it was on 
March 30 and the information that he’s asking for is contained 
in that document. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, what’s the problem then? Why does the oil and gas 
industry now believe that they’ve been granted some 
concessions, and where was the breakdown in communications 
since March 31? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, that document’s 
been available since March 30. There have been no changes. 
I’ve made that clear to the member opposite. There is a change 
in terms of some of the taxation as a result of the expansion of 
provincial sales tax, but there are also some very important 
exemptions. And if the member will read that document, he will 
know that we were trying to ensure to the best of our ability that 
the oil and gas sector remains in a competitive environment 
here in this province. 
 
And I also would be very interested to share with the member, 
if he’s interested in moving on to some of that, a description of 
what the activity has been in the past year and what it’s going to 
be in this future year in terms of the record number of wells that 
are being drilled in this province, the massive amount of 
investment that is happening as a result of the environment that 
we think industry and the government have worked together to 
create, the number of jobs that are directly as a result of the oil 
and gas and the mining sector. I’d be willing to share all of that 
information with him. 
 
But I think, Mr. Chairman, and I’m quite concerned, that 
members of the opposition will continue to do what they have 
been doing. They’ve challenged and voted against a budget that 
delivered the biggest tax decrease in the history of this province 
in terms of personal income tax. Yes, there were some changes 
in terms of the expanded PST, which is what they’ve attempted 
to focus on. And I understand that. I sat in opposition and I 
recognize that as being a process that takes place. 
 
But I also know that the members opposite have the 
responsibility to critique this government’s, this budget’s 
expenditures as it relates to the Department of Energy and 
Mines, and I’m very anxious to share that with them. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, perhaps the minister misunderstood my question. 
 
The main thrust of my question was, since the industry seems to 

have a different understanding of what happened yesterday with 
regards to the PST than the minister does, how did the 
communications breakdown occur? I mean do you not talk to 
these people at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, if there’s 
misinformation and miscommunication, it’s coming from right 
over there. 
 
We have been dialoguing with industry. We’re going to 
continue to work with them. As I said, there might be some 
areas that need clarification. And in those areas, we’re going to 
do that. That’s part of our job. That’s part of our role. 
 
Now I understand as well it’s your job to create an image of a 
government that is not responsive and not listening to industry. 
And I understand that. I understand that quite clearly. But that’s 
not the fact. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Since I can’t get 
an answer on that question, I’ll move on. 
 
The Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers maintains 
that Saskatchewan is the highest-taxed jurisdiction or the 
highest-cost jurisdiction for them to do business in Canada, and 
one of the highest in the world. What are you planning to do 
about that? 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say that 
we recognize the level of taxation in this province only too 
well. And we have been working very diligently to ensure 
Saskatchewan is competitive with respect to investment, global 
investment community, in as much as we can and in as much as 
our provincial finances will allow us to do that. 
 
But I want to remind the member opposite that there are 
pressures in all areas of this government, not only from the 
resource sector, with respect to tax reduction. And we have 
made some moves in that regard. And I think the member, to be 
fair, will recognize that we have made some changes. 
 
Is there more that we can do? I want to say that we on an 
ongoing basis work with industry to deal with all areas of cost 
of doing business in this province, not only royalties and 
taxation, but access through municipalities, access to the land, 
facilitating through the Department of Environment access and 
allowing them to do their job and working with them to do their 
job. 
 
But I want to also remind the member that this province in not 
unlimited resources. You guys, in about a two-week period 
here, were calling for expenditures of about 1.2 billion over and 
above what this government had budgeted. And that’s fine. I 
understand that, I don’t mind that. But there’s got to be some 
give and take, and you move in areas where you can, and you 
only spend as much where your revenue base allows you to do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are alternatives to that which are partly 
alternatives that were used in the 1980s that create for us a 
situation where we can’t move as much on taxation as we’d 
like. Because our third biggest expenditure is interest on the 



1050 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2000 

public debt that was rung up during the 1980s. 
 
And the member will know that. He’s been a political person 
for many years, as I understand it. He will know when the debt 
was rung up. He can read the balance sheet. He will know that 
we spend our third biggest expenditure on interest, but I don’t 
want to dwell on that. 
 
But we can spend over and above what we generate, but what 
that means is that our kids are going to be paying for that 
somewhere down the road. And I’m not willing to go there and 
this government’s not willing to go there, because we’re 
committed to balancing our budgets, we’re committed to tax 
reductions when this province can afford it and as it can afford 
it, and we’re going to continue to do that. 
 
Now with respect to the resource sector, I can tell you that 
negotiations are ongoing, discussions are ongoing. They don’t 
stop; it’s not part of a budget process. And we will be 
responsive when we can and when we need to. 
 
The oil and gas sector and the mineral sector don’t always get 
what they request but we try and find a balance where we can 
attract investment which, quite clearly, the numbers will show 
— if you’re interested in hearing about them — we have been 
able to do. Could we do more? Can we do more? Well I think 
probably we can and probably we will. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers also 
makes the claim that Saskatchewan is one of the most regulated 
and bureaucratic jurisdictions in which they do business, 
particularly in Canada. They claim that there are multiple levels 
of approvals required for each and every project, and this adds 
to their costs and makes it impossible for them to tell their 
investors when they might see some return on their investment, 
because they can’t predict when they can even start these 
projects. 
 
What are you planning to do about that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well again, Mr. Chairman, we’re 
planning to streamline, in as much as we can, the access to the 
resource in an environmentally responsible way. 
 
What I also want to tell the members . . . the member is that the 
Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers members tell us 
that they are very, very satisfied with the access that they have 
to our department, to this department, that the department is 
responses . . . They have access to senior officials within the 
department on a very short time base; they have access to the 
minister’s office; they have access to the Premier and other 
cabinet ministers and MLAs. And I think on balance, Mr. 
Chairman, Saskatchewan has fairly good access. 
 
I want to also say, Mr. Chairman, the complaints I hear from the 
industry are that they wish Alberta was as responsive and as 
easily accessible as this province is. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, British Columbia is currently undergoing a tax royalty 
and regulatory review to make them more comparable or even 
superior to Alberta in terms of being a low-cost jurisdiction for 

producing oil and gas. 
 
Do you have any similar plans for Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, those are 
discussions that are ongoing, and I can tell you that we intend to 
keep this province competitive. Whether it’s with potash, 
whether it’s uranium, whether it’s oil or gas, whether it’s in the 
taxation area, this province will compete. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I think the record of this 
administration since 1991 quite clearly demonstrates that we’re 
willing to listen, that we’re willing to make changes, and that 
we’re willing to compete. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair and Mr. 
Minister, could you tell us about any new initiatives to be 
undertaken in this budget year in your department, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I can say there were 
no major announcements as a result of this budget. But I guess 
to just share what areas of work our department has been 
advancing. We’ve been very much focused on geoscientific 
data to assist the industry in terms of their knowledge and 
understanding of our province. 
 
Royalties and taxation are an issue that’s ongoing. That’s not 
tied to the budget process. I think I’ve been in this portfolio for 
four or five years, and I don’t think I can remember a time when 
we weren’t negotiating with the uranium sector, the potash 
sector, the mineral sector, with the oil and gas sector. That’s 
been ongoing. 
 
There are a couple of other major areas that we are focused on 
in terms of technological research and development. 
 
We’re very involved with the petroleum research centre here in 
Regina, that’s been announced to partnership with industry and 
with the federal government. The climate change file is the 
responsibility of my department, working very closely with 
Environment and Resource Management. We’re working to 
advance the Weyburn CO2 (carbon dioxide) project to better 
understand sequestration of carbon dioxide — how it reacts in 
that kind of a larger environment — working with PanCanadian 
and other industry players. This is becoming very much an 
international initiative that I think has some very positive 
environmental consequences in terms of better understanding 
how carbon dioxide reacts as it’s pumped under pressure into 
the oil fields that we have. 
 
The other initiative that the department is advancing is the 
carbon dioxide test centre at the U of R (University of Regina). 
 
So those are just some of the things that we’re dealing with. We 
were looking at the electrical energy file in terms of the changes 
as deregulation is becoming more and more the norm in terms 
of operation. So that’s one area that we are working toward 
advancement on. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair and Mr. 
Minister, just to make sure I’ve covered all bases here before I 
move on; could you tell us about any changes or reductions or 



May 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1051 

eliminations of existing initiatives or services planned for this 
budget year in your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, if I’m understanding 
the member’s question I thank him for that question. We did 
eliminate one arm of our department. The drafting support 
services branch was eliminated which resulted in the 
elimination of four positions, which is very unfortunate. But in 
terms of the fiscal pressures on the department, looking at the 
need and where we could best allocate our resources, it became 
a topic of discussion around budget time and unfortunately 
resulted in the elimination of that support services unit. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, how much revenue is generated from the 15 cent a 
litre road tax from the oil and gas industry from fuel used in 
off-road applications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t administer 
that tax. That’s under the purview of the Department of Finance 
and would be best asked of the Minister of Finance when his 
estimates are up. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know you don’t 
administer that tax. So the reason I asked it, it’s such a huge 
expense to the industry, both the oil and gas industry and the 
mining industry, and it’s one they’ve been complaining about. I 
thought perhaps you might have some insight as to how much it 
actually cost them. 
 
But to move on. Is the Department of Energy and Mines going 
to digital staking of claims, mining claims, for the whole 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I am told, Mr. Chairman, by my 
officials, who work on the day-to-day changes that are taking 
place within the department that I sometimes am not aware of, 
so I learn a little bit during estimates too, — and so this is one 
of the things I’ve learned today — that we are moving towards 
digital claim maps. 
 
The department is in the process of having that available to 
industry and I believe the time frame is within a year . . . within 
the year. I’m told it’ll be done, completed within the year. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, when this happens when we go to digital staking, 
what sort of cost savings are we looking at for the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told by my 
officials that this will result in a one-stage process as opposed to 
a multiple stage, which should ultimately result in a lot more 
convenience for industry and a lot of time saving. They haven’t 
quantified the cost savings at this time; but as this process goes 
on, I’m assuming we will be able to share that information in 
terms of cost, once we have a better understanding of it. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d appreciate that 
information as it comes forward or becomes available. 
 
Saskatchewan appears to be losing out in the competition for oil 
activity in Western Canada. And I read again from Oilweek, 
Canadian rig activity, week ending March 20, showing Alberta 

with 326 active rigs; British Columbia with their tiny oil field, 
of 45; and Saskatchewan with only 37 active rigs, as of that 
week. 
 
Do you blame Saskatchewan’s high taxes, royalty rates, or both 
for this? 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, there are two issues 
that I would want to bring to the member’s attention. That time 
of the year, as the member may understand representing rural 
Saskatchewan, we’re looking at spring breakup and it’s not a 
time of the year when access in Saskatchewan is at its peak or 
its optimum. 
 
I also want to indicate to the member that his numbers in terms 
of drilling rigs are accurate, but that does reflect industry at this 
time very much focused on natural gas. As he will know, 
British Columbia has some very prolific natural gas fields as 
does the province of Alberta. Saskatchewan is unfortunately 
less endowed with that resource, but that very much reflects 
spring breakup and the fact that the focus at that time was on 
natural gas as opposed to heavy oil or other types of oil. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee 
report progress. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I thank the minister and particularly the 
department officials for helping us out here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I want to thank the members 
opposite for their questions and I look forward to returning to 
supply yet more details . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Very 
good, as often as you wish. 
 
The Chair: — On that happy note the committee will pause 
while the Energy and Mines officials leave and the Education 
officials gather. Why is the Minister of Education on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — By leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to introduce in the Speaker’s gallery, students and 
chaperones on a visit to the legislature and they are on an 
Interchange on Canadian Studies. The Interchange on Canadian 
Studies is a national organization which provides opportunities 
through student conferences and travel exchanges for grade 11 
students from all the provinces and territories to meet with each 
other. At each conference the students hear ideas from prominent 
speakers and have opportunities to discuss these ideas with each 
other. 
 
This year’s conference is in Winnipeg from May 6 to 13. The 10 
students and two adult chaperones selected are: Sandra Down 
from Martensville; Janique Dubois from Saskatoon; Catherine 
Jones from Prince Albert; Rae-lyn Laliberte from Buffalo 
Narrows; Kevin Lalonde from Prince Albert; Shane Lewis from 
Regina; Ashley Lundgren from Tompkins; Kindra Majewski from 



1052 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2000 

Wilkie; Erin Ramage from Saskatoon; Chelsea Smith from Moose 
Jaw; and Bill Harrison from Saskatoon, the provincial coordinator; 
and Kim Engel, Regina, one of the chaperones. 
 
And I’d ask all members to welcome these Canadian Studies 
students who will be travelling to Winnipeg. And it is certainly an 
honour for them to be representing Saskatchewan and I wish them 
very well indeed. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member for Kelvington-Wadena on 
her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to join again 
with the Minister of Education to welcome this very special 
group of people into the legislature. You must be excited about 
your trip, and I’m sure that you will represent our province 
well. I hope you learn a lot, and you learn the advantages of 
being able to go across this fine country of ours and learn from 
other students. 
 
So have a good time, and maybe we’ll hear from you when you 
come back. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Education 

Vote 5 
 

The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote, I invite the Hon. 
Minister of Education to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. To my right, immediate right, is Craig Dotson, the 
deputy minister of Education. Directly behind me is Ken 
Horsman, associate deputy minister. To my left and behind me 
is Michael Littlewood, executive director. And again, further to 
my right, is Larry Allan, executive director. And directly behind 
Larry is Cal Kirby, director of facilities planning. And just 
behind me is Sheila Engele, policy analyst in finance and 
operations. And in the back is John McLaughlin who is the 
executive director of the Teachers’ Superannuation 
Commission. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Subvote (ED01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome to the 
minister and especially welcome to all the officials. I’m 
delighted to see all of you here today and I imagine we’ll get to 
recognize your faces and know your names because I imagine 
you’ll be back many times. 
 
Mr. Minister, the province of Saskatchewan has many priorities. 

Health care and highways and social services are at the top right 
along with education. And in this province we’ve had so many 
people telling us that education is at a crisis state — not just the 
SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) but also the 
teachers’ federation. And many of the parents, as well as some 
of the students, are saying that we have . . . that education itself 
is in a crisis. 
 
The SSTA before the budget had asked for a minimum of $30 
million. At the same time we had the teachers’ federation, 
knowing that they were going out for their wages and 
negotiations and that was something that was up in the air even 
at the time the budget was released. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, at the same time we received copies and 
have been waiting for copies of the Special Education Review 
Committee. We have the role of the schools that are doing a 
study on education. We have small schools and the sparsity 
grants and issues that are near and dear to very many people. 
 
Yet during the budget, after the budget, we learned that there 
was an $18.5 million increase to operating grants. That’s all, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
We have the core curriculum was in the boards’ minds across 
this province. They knew that there was going to be an increase 
in all utility rates. They know that there was an increase in fuel 
so that made a difference to their transportation costs. They 
know that even with the yearly increase in salaries to many of 
the teachers, they are going to be facing a lot of difficulties. 
 
So I know that the minister wasn’t surprised or shouldn’t have 
been surprised after the budget when people talked about their 
disappointment. 
 
But before we get into the real basics of and different issues 
about education, Mr. Minister, I know that people rely on 
government to bring forward policies for their children and to 
provide the basics in life. And they rely on the government to 
provide policies that reflect the needs of the people of the 
province. 
 
We have to educate our children and get them ready for this 
global world, and we all know that there’s different cultures and 
lifestyles that have to get ready to deal with. It involves 
bringing new information to our children. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, to start with, I’d like to find what your vision 
is for this province, but specifically on issues like the Lord’s 
Prayer. Can you tell me what you as the Minister of Education 
and you as the Department of Education are saying about the 
issues involving the morality like Lord’s Prayer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I thank the member for the question. 
Certainly to begin, we are extremely proud of our education 
system in Saskatchewan. We are proud of our teachers and we 
are proud of our local school boards and we are extremely 
proud of the relationships that have developed within the 
province of Saskatchewan amongst all the stakeholders. 
 
And to just remind the member of some of the difficulties 
experienced in other provinces, where they don’t have a similar 
relationship where trustees and teachers and educators and 



May 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1053 

administrators all work together co-operatively and 
collaboratively to provide the best possible education for the 
students of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just to remind the members opposite, we 
also must recognize that there is only group that represents 
teachers in the province of Saskatchewan. This is really 
unprecedented in most other jurisdictions provincially. The fact 
is that several groups represent teachers. 
 
And I must remind the members also that there’s only one 
organization representing trustees, and every single school 
board, school division in the province of Saskatchewan 
voluntarily belongs to that organization. 
 
And I must also remind the members opposite that when we’re 
talking about our education system, that most of the initiatives, 
the positive initiatives for students in the province of 
Saskatchewan are collaborative ventures between all of these 
stakeholders. And these stakeholders, often in providing 
information and making key vision statements with regard to 
our education system, that these statements are ratified by all of 
the organizations so that it really is a consensus approach. So, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are extremely proud of our education 
system. 
 
She also mentioned some of the concerns with regard to 
funding. And as you know the funding for the province of 
Saskatchewan from the Department of Education is provided on 
a foundation operating grant formula, which is an equalization 
formula. By providing an equalization formula that has been 
ratified by all the stakeholders, and more recently by an external 
review committee which included all of the stakeholders, they 
have stated that this is the best way for the province to provide 
grants to school divisions and we strongly support this concept. 
 
And what it does is it allows for equity and equitable 
opportunity for learning experiences throughout this province 
— urban, rural, northern, or extreme remote areas. So we have 
an equitable distribution. We have equitable learning 
experiences in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now she asked a specific question with regard to the Lord’s 
Prayer and just to provide that information to the member, the 
Constitution of Canada does provide some clarification with 
regard to the issue of the Lord’s Prayer in our school systems 
throughout Canada. 
 
The Education Act, 1995 does include a clause as well which is 
a permissive clause and allows for school boards to determine 
and decide whether the Lord’s Prayer will be used at the 
beginning of the school day or whether they choose not to adopt 
this particular form of recognition or spirituality within our 
school system. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(1215) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Minister, you talked 
about the wonderful relationship that you have with the 
shareholders and the stakeholders in education, but you failed to 
talk about the fact that we have teachers that are ready to go on 

strike. And we have one of the main voices at the table — the 
wage negotiations — the SSTA, who are paying for 60 per cent 
at least of the salaries, don’t have a voice in those negotiations. 
So we won’t go there right now. But the . . . (inaudible) . . . isn’t 
something that maybe I think most people are seeing through. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the other areas that I’m wondering is what 
has your department done on sex education. Do you have an 
issue . . . do you have a policy on sex education for the students 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I thank the member opposite for the 
question, a very specific question with regard to sex education 
in our school system. 
 
The current system that we have is that Wellness 10 integrates 
health education with physical education. These are elective 
courses. In fact all of the courses are elective courses. Students 
investigate six components of wellness — physical activity, 
stress management, physical fitness, leisure, relationships, and 
healthy eating — and how these components relate directly to 
them as individuals. 
 
We also have a Life Transitions 20 and 30, which again are 
elective courses that integrate health education, family life 
education, from home economics and career and student 
development. And I must also point out that the aim of Life 
Transitions is to enable students to plan and enhance their 
career development, family and community life, and personal 
health throughout their lives. 
 
And one optional module in Life Transitions 30 does include an 
HIV/AIDS (human immunodeficiency virus) (acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome) education component as well. 
 
We also have liaison committees at the local level. The 
department does develop in conjunction with these liaison 
committees the actual curriculum and program with regard to 
health education, and more specifically, sex education in our 
system. And it has been very well received by the communities. 
And we’re actually very, very much in tune in keeping our 
health and sex education as up to date as possible. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, I know that 
your department approves the books that are recommended for 
reference material for students. And regarding Wellness 10, I 
imagine The Wellness Workbook by John Travis and Regina 
Sarah Ryan is a workbook that you are aware of. 
 
I’m wondering if you’ve had this book or any sections of this 
book brought to your attention and if there’s anything in this 
material that you would consider something that should be 
considered at least a little bit controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — With regard to the specific question 
that the member opposite asked, the department has a protocol 
for actually reviewing all resource materials provided . . . or 
recommended to school divisions. A lot of educators will use 
resource materials that are not necessarily actually approved by 
the department because we believe in the independence of 
professionals in the classroom. 
 
However, there is no way for myself or my officials to 



1054 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2000 

determine whether the specific book she is referring to is on our 
recommended list or not. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, of course 
there would be a way for you to know it. That’s your job to 
know what kind of books, reference material, is allowed by the 
teachers in this province because we’re dealing with youngsters 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, this book that you . . . that is being used by some 
schools has been brought to my attention and has caused a lot of 
concern. And I will just read you a quote that was given to me. 
It says, quote: 
 

I take exception to the fact that in grade 10, teachers are 
encouraged to teach 15- and 16-year-old children about 
sensuous sex and give them a test on questions. 

 
And I’m not sure whether I even want to read you this, but I 
guess if I don’t then you won’t know what I’m talking about, 
quote: 
 

I fully experience the many stages of lovemaking rather 
than focus only on orgasm. 

 
These are the kind of test questions that are asked students in 
grade 10. And this material is from a book that is in use or given 
credibility by your department. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, will you remark on that, and then I will give 
you . . . ask you some more questions on this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — If the member opposite, if the 
member opposite would actually give us the name of the book, 
we could actually determine whether it’s on the recommended 
list or not. 
 
But just to remind the members opposite and to inform them, 
with regard to the number of resource materials that the 
department does scrutinize, there are literally tens of thousands 
of resource materials that are reviewed on an annual basis, and 
these recommendations are provided to school divisions. 
 
But I must remind the members that the school divisions are 
also responsible in determining the recommended books and 
resource materials. We do not actually, through our curriculum, 
insist on the use of any of these resource materials. What we 
say is we provide them, and we do provide the recommended 
list. 
 
With regard to the special question on sexual education, if 
you’re providing sex education that is suitable for the age group 
and is appropriate, that these resource materials, I must remind 
the member, are reviewed by classroom teachers. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, you said 
you scrutinized the material. You’ve made this material 
available for students in our province. And I can tell you that I 
checked the recommended bibliography at the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation, and the book is indeed listed as one of the 
recommended materials that can be used. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, don’t blame it on the teachers. Don’t blame 

it on anybody. You and your department has to make sure that 
the material that is available for our students is something that 
the parents not only agree with, but something that maybe 
would include some of the issues that we have been talking 
about in this legislature. 
 
One of the things that this book talks about is dealing in X-rated 
movies, reading erotic material aloud, and writing your own 
forms of letters. Now, Mr. Minister, is it not illegal to rent one 
of these X-rated movies until you’re at least 18 years old? Is 
that something that your department is saying: it’s okay if it’s 
part of a school subject; you can rent it. 
 
Mr. Minister, these X-rated movies are something that is 
suggested in this book of yours. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, again I’ll 
remind the member opposite that all of the resources utilized in 
classrooms in the province of Saskatchewan are reviewed by 
classroom teachers. And the process for review is 100 per cent 
endorsed by all of the stakeholders in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, are the parents whose children 
are involved in using this material, are they given copies of 
this? Do they know what their children are being taught? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I thank the member for the question. 
 
With regard to the parents’ input and the role of parents, 
obviously in our school system that we do support as much as 
possible the role of parents in determining what is taught in our 
classrooms. 
 
The recommendation is that each school board and each school 
have what is known as a local liaison committee. The role of 
this committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is recommended to 
support the teacher and to facilitate coordinated planning. The 
committee structure and mandate will vary from one area to 
another, depending on the number of classrooms, the size of the 
community, health related programming in the community, and 
other factors. 
 
It is recommended that responsibility for setting up the 
committee be considered by the local school board and assigned 
either to a trustee or a school administrator. 
 
Now the functions of this committee are to provide support to 
the classroom and total school programming; provide liaison 
with health related programming in the community; provide a 
forum for discussion of parent-student health related issues and 
concerns. 
 
And the membership of this committee should include the 
school principal; a school local trustee; a health professional, as 
well as a health promotion staff member of the local health 
district; a member of the clergy; a parent; a representative from 
a local youth club; a student representative from the 
representative student council; a representative from the 
business and professional community; an Indian or Metis 
representative; and others who have special contributions to 
make. 
 



May 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1055 

And these local liaison committees do represent their 
communities extremely well in determining the content within 
our health curriculum. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, who appoints the 
liaison committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The liaison committee is selected by 
the local board. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Is there a Chair, Mr. Minister? Does every 
school division have one of these liaison committees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no way 
for us to know whether every school board has a local liaison 
committee. It is the recommendation of the department that they 
have these committees. 
 
But I also will remind the member, or inform the member, that 
it is a requirement of the department that boards are required to 
have local procedures in place where parents can challenge the 
use of particular resource materials directly with their local 
school board. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, the material that is 
being used in the school system, do the students have . . . or do 
the parents have the opportunity to ask if their children should 
be in this, or are in this program? Do they have the opportunity 
to opt out? 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Certainly the department does recognize the importance of this 
issue that the member opposite has brought up. We also 
recognize the sensitivity with regard to this issue throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan. But the department has ensured that 
there are many mechanisms in place that — community and 
parental involvement — that these sensitivities can be brought 
forward and discussed. 
 
And some of the procedures that I’ve mentioned are the review 
material process that we have in place that is endorsed by all the 
stakeholders. I’ve mentioned the liaison committee which we 
have asked all school boards to have in place. We also look at 
the fact that it is . . . that our parents and their children can opt 
out of these programs if they so desire. And also that groups of 
parents do have a process, through the local challenge process, 
to go to any school board and say that this particular material be 
withdrawn. 
 
Those processes are in place and certainly we do encourage that 
the health curriculum does provide up-to-date information that 
is age appropriate, but also recognizes the sensitivity of this 
issue. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, right now our children have to 
opt out of this program. There should be a system where we can 
opt into the program, not opt out. Because as soon as this parent 
or child have to say that they’re going to opt out of this, then 
right away then they are showing they are different and 
everybody knows that their parents are taking them of the 
program and it causes the children themselves a lot of concern. 

Now why doesn’t your department change the process around 
so that parents and children can opt in instead of having to opt 
out of this process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Just to clarify for the member. The 
health program, the healthy living, the physical activity — all of 
those components are part of the recognized curriculum. But 
with regard to the sexual content — the HIV, AIDS portion of it 
— any parent or student cannot opt out of that part of the 
program. And school divisions can choose whether they would 
include that in part of their health curriculum as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. Minister, my 
question to you is are you considering making changes so that 
children can opt in instead of having to opt out of this program? 
If that was happening, then the parents would know what was 
happening. They’d have a chance to review the material and 
they would know what their children are being taught. 
 
So again, Mr. Minister, I’m asking you, are you going to 
consider the opportunity for the children to have to opt in, 
instead of having to opt out so that they’re indifferent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Again just to clarify for the member 
opposite, the question with regard to opting in and opting out, 
we believe that the decisions on curriculum is best, obviously in 
this particular area, left to school divisions. 
 
But to talk about . . . there’s a dual process involved here. There 
is the opportunity to challenge by a group of parents whether 
the actual content with regard to sex education would be 
included in the health curriculum. So there is this process. And 
then the second process of course is if the community at large 
agrees that it should be included in the health curriculum, if the 
individual parent does not believe that their child should receive 
this education, then they have the opportunity to opt out. 
 
So we have a sensitivity and a process that has checks and 
balances built into it, that allows for: one, a group challenge to 
have it not included in the curriculum to begin with; and 
secondly, if the community decides as a whole that it should be 
included, then there is the individual option to opt out. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, maybe you 
could explain this process to me. How does this review process 
actually work? From the parents I’ve been hearing from, there 
isn’t . . . the process isn’t something that is workable. So maybe 
give me the information that you have on it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a 
process in place, and the department does require a local 
procedure be in place for challenges brought forward by a 
parent or parents to challenge any of the resource materials 
included in the curriculum. And that process must be heard by 
the board and it must be listened to. 
 
And of course the decision by the board is the board’s decision. 
And that is why we have independent school divisions in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, does this 
make any sense to you or to your department that the parent 
would have to go to the board and have their child taken out of 



1056 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2000 

a program? Something like sex education or this type of 
curriculum activity that’s going on, wouldn’t it make more 
sense to have the parents or the child say I’d like to go into that 
program, rather than saying, I want to take them out and this is 
the reason why. Mr. Minister, we’re talking about children and 
the sensitivities around sex education and some of the 
moralities that we’re talking about in this province. 
 
And the government across, in the last few days, has shown me 
that there isn’t . . . I’m afraid there isn’t the kind of sensitivities 
that we would like to see in this province. And we cannot, at the 
age of grade 10, see children being influenced by this kind of 
information. 
 
I am well aware that there are a lot of parents don’t even know 
what is happening to their children in the school system. You’re 
going to say that this is their responsibility, but just a second 
ago you said we were leaving it up to the very capable hands of 
the school division trustees. What kind of responsibilities are 
you giving them over the responsibilities of the parents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly the 
jurisdiction for the education of our students in the province of 
Saskatchewan rests with school divisions. School trustees, as 
have been the case since the beginning of this province, have 
been responsive and responsible to the communities that elect 
these trustees. 
 
Certainly if a group of parents or a community has a particular 
problem with trustees, then they have the option of electing 
different trustees. That is part of responsible government. 
 
But I must also point out to the member that she seems to be 
fixated on one particular area. But you should . . . must also 
recognize where communities have decided to not include sex 
education, HIV-AIDS education within their health curriculum, 
that groups of parents could come forward and also challenge 
that ruling to have it included. So it works both ways. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, there’s not a fixation on any one 
area here. What we’re trying to do, and what you should be 
doing as Minister of Education, is making sure that the children 
get a well-rounded education that includes the parents. Where 
the responsibility of some of these very important issues could 
be left with the parents and not with the school divisions 
themselves. 
 
What is your Department of Education’s idea of what the 
parents’ role is compared to what the idea of what the school 
board’s role is? Don’t forget the school boards are elected and 
the parents themselves are the ones that have to take the 
children to school every day and know what . . . and worry 
about what the children are like at the end of the day. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I’m asking you to do is to reconsider the 
way that you have this set up right now so that parents of 
children have more input in what’s happening with their 
children in sex education in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly we’re talking about a fairly 
specific area. And as I’ve outlined to the member opposite, that 
we do have several mechanisms in place so that the curriculum 
that is provided to students in the province of Saskatchewan is 

up to date and is as current as possible, and also provides 
teachers with the resources that they require to teach the 
Saskatchewan curriculum which is internationally recognized as 
being one of the finest curriculums anywhere. 
 
So certainly we do believe in the autonomy of school divisions 
to make decisions. We do believe in the process where all 
stakeholders participate in reviewing the resources available to 
classroom teachers and that the department will continue to 
support school divisions and classroom teachers. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister. Then within 
each school itself, then the teachers are the ones that are 
actually given the last say? The school division gives them 
some guidelines but each teacher in an individual school would 
make up their own mind on how they were going to bring 
forward this part of the curriculum? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly as I 
have explained to the member opposite, the process for 
curriculum development and endorsement, and we do recognize 
the value of our teachers. Our teachers are professionals. They 
live in the communities where they teach. They are often 
parents themselves and they are very sensitive to these specific 
issues. And I think that our classroom teachers as professionals 
do teach the Saskatchewan curriculum very well, but they also 
are sensitive to the needs of their community and the 
sensitivities within their communities. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, of course our 
teachers are very sensitive to it and we have very great teachers 
in this province. We’re not talking about that. We’re talking 
about what the parents’ rights is, and the school boards and the 
teachers. 
 
Mr. Minister, do the parents have a right to come into classes 
and sit through each and every one of these classes, if they 
would like to, to see what their children are being taught? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly the member opposite does 
bring up a rather practical issue, recognizing that teachers are 
teaching a curriculum that could possibly have 25 or 30 
children in a classroom — it may be less, may be more. But the 
reality is that the protocol is that parents who wish to participate 
or observe would make that recommendation directly to their 
school based administrators. And if arrangements could be 
made in a practical sense, then there is no reason why not that 
parents could not participate in the instruction components of 
some of these areas. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So, Mr. Minister, then what you’re saying is 
the parents have to let the teachers know ahead of time so that 
they can be prepared to bring . . . and come and sit. They can’t 
just come into a class at any time. They have to let the teacher 
know before. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well of course that’s correct because 
you couldn’t all of a sudden have, you know, 25 parents arrive 
in a classroom and saying we want to participate. Obviously 
there has to be some coordination. And that’s why . . . the 
question really does deal with some very practical and very 
specific issues. My understanding is that school-based 
administrators and teachers are very receptive to their 



May 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1057 

communities and that parents may come and go. But they 
obviously need permission, otherwise it could be disruptive to 
the classroom and the education of our students. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, we recognize 
that that could be disruptive and that’s not what the parents are 
asking for. I’m sure that parents that would be coming to this 
class would be coming because they have . . . they care very 
deeply and they’re very concerned about what is being taught to 
their child. 
 
So I think the questions that we’re asking . . . I know the 
questions I’m asking are from parents that care and they want to 
ensure that when they would come in at any time, that the 
material their children are being given is something that isn’t 
being screened or desensitized because they know that there’s 
going to be somebody else there, somebody else watching. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess what I’m really asking you about with this 
whole issue is what do you think your department’s role is in 
determining whether some of this material is appropriate for the 
students in our schools in Saskatchewan? Some of this material 
that I will send over and show you, there is some very graphic 
material here, not even as far . . . not that far removed from 
some of the other topics we were talking about earlier this 
week. 
 
When we’re talking about X-rated films that are illegal unless 
you’re 18 years old, how can this type of material be approved 
by your department? Mr. Minister, do you have a review group 
that is looking at this material so we can ensure that there is 
nothing that gets into the classrooms that the parents don’t have 
an opportunity to see at any time and that they would approve 
of? 
 
(1245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you. With regard to the 
member opposite’s most recent question, as itemized earlier, 
there is a rigorous process for screening all resource material 
that is included in the curriculum. But I must remind the 
member again that the teacher, as the professional in the 
classroom, does have the opportunity to look at that 
recommended bibliography and choose the resource materials 
that they will be recommending or utilizing in the instruction of 
the core curriculum. 
 
The other thing to remind the member is that there is an 
extremely wide spectrum of what should and should not be 
included, whether it’s health education, whether it’s science, 
whether it’s math, and that the process that we have in place 
where the classroom teachers actually do review all of the 
resource material that is recommended by the department. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, the material 
that . . . some of the material that I’ve looked at also talks about 
things like rape and personal impotency and that type of issue. 
And I know that there’s more; from my research I’ve found that 
there’s quite a lot of information that’s available to these 
students, but it is usually picked out and given to them in one 
format by teachers and by . . . and I imagine it’s mostly the 
teachers that would have the direct knowledge on this. 
 

How many of these issues does your department give actual 
information on? Do you have books that are sent out to or 
available to the teachers on these issues? And do you keep track 
of how many different books on sex education and these issues 
are used by teachers in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, certainly when we 
look at the whole question of health education in the province 
of Saskatchewan, it’s not just a focus on one particular 
component with regard to sex education. 
 
And again to refer to some of the actual curriculum that is 
taught in wellness 10, it includes physical activity, stress 
management, physical fitness, leisure activities, relationships, 
and healthy eating, and how these components relate directly to 
them as individuals. 
 
The health of our children are extremely important to us as a 
government and as educators in the province of Saskatchewan 
as well. And the process that we have in place does utilize all of 
the stakeholders in providing screening of the material that we 
teach in our health curriculum. 
 
And as I’ve indicated, there is a process that does recognize the 
sensitivities of communities. And opportunities — if there are 
sensitivities where the boundaries have become intolerable for 
the community — that there are opportunities in several ways 
for them to go directly to their local board and have these issues 
dealt with. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, then if you screen the 
material, then I guess you are in agreement with it. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering: is there the same 
opportunities for different programs, like Teen-Aid, to come 
into the school as there is for the education system right now on 
the sex education? Or do they have to opt in to Teen-Aid rather 
than opt out like they do on the other program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Again, Mr. Deputy Chair, the school 
boards are able to utilize any resource within their community. 
There’s no restriction by the departments in the resources and 
that applies to health education, it applies to science education, 
it applies to math education. 
 
They can invite public health nurses; they can invite 
professionals. It doesn’t . . . there’s no restriction by the 
department and in fact, obviously if the community and the 
board so desired to have representatives from Teen-Aid  
 to come in and participate, there’s no reason that that could not 
be included as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, what you’re saying 
then is you have to opt into Teen-Aid but you have to opt out of 
sex education? Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The health education curriculum in 
the province of Saskatchewan is comprehensive. It is age 
related, and it does provide for sensitivities within the 
community. 
 
The question that the member has just posed is a bit of a 
misrepresentation. When we’re talking about core curriculum 



1058 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2000 

and curriculum on health education as I’ve identified, that is 
comprehensive, age related, and does recognize sensitivities, 
but must be separated from the ability to use resources. The 
professionals in the classroom do make those determinations 
themselves along the lines that have been developed with all the 
stakeholders within regards to the core curriculum. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, we have in this 
province one of the distressing statistics with the number of 
teenage pregnancies in the province increasing. So we have a 
sex education program in school that teaches children about 
sex, where they have no opportunity to get out of it unless they 
opt out, usually with parental consent needed. But on the other 
side, when we need Teen-Aid or something that talks about 
abstinence, that type of thing, they have to opt into that type of 
program. 
 
Now when we start talking . . . looking at it, aren’t you 
questioning whether what your department is doing is actually 
working, remembering that the number of teenage pregnancies 
is increasing, the fact that we are only talking about one side of 
the issue. 
 
Haven’t you been getting a lot of questions from parents in this 
province saying, is this Department of Education lacking in this 
area when we have one side of the picture, one side of the issue, 
promoted by the school board, promoted by, mostly by your 
department, because you are in charge of it all, and we don’t see 
the other side without making parents feel like they’re being 
some kind of a villain or they’re being strange because they 
want their child to get Teen-Aid. 
 
That way it is your responsibility to make sure that both sides of 
the issues is being seen. And again remembering, that one of the 
biggest problems that we have in this province is the fact that 
we have a lot of single parents and it is your responsibility to 
see if we can be dealing with this issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I’m having a little trouble 
understanding the logic of the member opposite. Earlier she has 
a line of questions that seems to criticize the teaching of sex 
education in the curriculum, and now she says that there’s an 
increased incidence of teen pregnancies. Well you know, you 
can’t have it both ways. 
 
The fact of the matter is that the curriculum in health that deals 
with sex education talks about the problems related to sexually 
transmitted diseases. It talks about HIV and AIDS. It talks 
about health education with regard to healthy lifestyles. And 
what it does is it indicates clearly in the curriculum that 
abstinence is presented as the safest and most appropriate 
choice for school-age youths in the province of Saskatchewan. 
But they also recognize that all of the information provided 
with regard to sexual and reproductive health is extremely 
important in dealing with some of the misconceptions and 
misperceptions that always occur in communities around 
sexuality and the actual discussion with regard to sexual and 
reproductive health. 
 
So school boards and school divisions make the determination 
based on the recommendations of the core curriculum that is 
completely endorsed by all the stakeholders. 
 

Mr. Deputy Chair, certainly I think the actual bottom line in 
terms of sex education within the province of Saskatchewan is 
that all of the curriculum indicates that abstinence is presented 
as the safest and most appropriate choice. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — I want to wish you all a very pleasant 
weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:58 p.m. 
 
 


