





























































Hansard: May 18, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1273 
 May 18, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just in time for the 
long weekend I see that fuel prices are rising again so it’s 
timely that I should present a petition to reduce fuel tax by 10 
cents a litre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And this petition is signed by the residents of Gull Lake, Webb, 
Shaunavon, Tompkins, and Pennant. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present 
petitions signed by the good people from Saskatoon, from 
Watrous, from Rosthern, concerned with the price of fuel at the 
holiday time. And I read the petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present petitions on behalf of citizens throughout the 
province concerned about the high fuel tax. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am pleased 
to present a petition to reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. The 
prayer in the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures come from all across the province 
including Hague; Swift Current; Outlook, Saskatchewan; and 
Denare Beach. Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to present this 
very timely petition. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
today requesting reduction of fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Swift Current 
and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of the citizens who are increasingly alarmed about the 
high price of fuel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from my home 
community of Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition regarding the fuel tax and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by the good 
people from Abbey, Swift Current, and Webb. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 
regards to the high cost of fuel. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from 
Waldeck, Swift Current, and also one from Taber, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 



1274 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2000 

concerned about the high cost of fuel. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks from Swift Current, Cabri, and 
Glenbain. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
people that are concerned about the high price of fuel in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from 
Wymark and the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of people of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the high price of fuel. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And this is signed by residents of McMahon, Swift Current, and 
Wymark. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today dealing with gasoline taxes. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Neville, Regina, 
and Swift Current areas of the province, all in favour of gas 
reduction. 

I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding fuel tax. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I would ask members 
from both sides to kindly respect the members who are 
presenting petitions. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition on behalf of citizens upset over the fuel rate in this 
province. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good people in Denare Beach, 
Rush Lake, Moose Jaw, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to read a 
petition from citizens concerned about high fuel taxes. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good people from Swift Current. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too also have a 
petition to reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal, provincial 
governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes by 10 cents 
a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Petitioners are . . . signatures are from Gull Lake; Craik; 
Martensville; Regina; Saskatoon; Moose Jaw; Vernon, BC 
(British Columbia); Calgary, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition of citizens concerned about the high price of fuel. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 



May 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1275 

provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The petitioners are from the town of Govan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning, Mr. 
Speaker, I rise with a petition to call for the reduction of fuel 
taxes by 10 cents a litre. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people 
from Birch Hills and Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present today on behalf of citizens concerned about the high tax 
on fuel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 

And the signatures to this petition come from the communities 
of Dysart and Cupar. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to reduce the fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. Mr. 
Speaker, the price of fuel keeps going up every day and that’s 
just like the popularity of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, please. I’d just 
remind the hon. member that entering into debate during 
presenting petitions is inappropriate. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 

And the petitioners are from the good people of Spiritwood, 
Glaslyn and Glenbush. 
 
I so present. 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present a petition to reduce fuel costs by 10 cents a litre. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Melfort, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Petitions from citizens of the province on the following matters: 
 

To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes; 
 
The provision of reliable cellular service in Prud’homme, 
Bruno, Vonda, Cudworth, Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and 
Bulyea. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Prior to calling introduction of guests, hon. 
members, I ask your leave to introduce to you someone, a 
dignitary that has kindly come to visit our Assembly this 
afternoon. I’d like to introduce seated in the Speaker’s gallery, 
Mrs. Rosemarie Myrdal, the Lieutenant Governor of North 
Dakota. And Mrs. Myrdal . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — . . . accompanied by Mr. Clare Carlson who is 
the Agriculture Policy Advisor to North Dakota Governor 
Schafer, and Mr. Francis Schwindt, Chief, Environmental 
Health, North Dakota Department of Health. 
 
The Lieutenant Governor is visiting Regina today, and while in 
this city will be meeting with the Minister of Energy and Mines, 
the Minister of Highways and Transportation, and the Minister 
of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs; officials from the 
Department of Agriculture and Food, the Department of 
Environment and Resource Management. 
 
I had the honour of co-hosting a luncheon with the Minister of 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs in her honour. I will 
also be meeting with Mrs. Myrdal later this morning and I 
would ask you all to please join me in welcoming the 
Lieutenant Governor of North Dakota and her delegation here 
this morning to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1276 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2000 

I had the honour of co-hosting a luncheon with the Minister of 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs in her honour. I will 
also be meeting with Mrs. Myrdal later this morning and I 
would ask you all to please join me in welcoming the 
Lieutenant Governor of North Dakota and her delegation here 
this morning to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure and an 
honour to introduce a friend and Member of Parliament from 
Blackstrap, Al Kerpan, who is joining us in the House today. 
Mr. Kerpan was first elected October 25, ’93, and I just want to 
say welcome to the Assembly and we hope you enjoy question 
period and the operation of the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 
to join with members in welcoming both the representatives 
from North Dakota — Rosemary Myrdal, Mr. Carlson and Mr. 
Schwindt — as well as my former colleague from the House of 
Commons, Allan Kerpan. Welcome to the Assembly and would 
you join with me in again welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through to you to all the members of the 
House, 28 students seated in your west gallery. These adult 
students are from SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology), the 8th Avenue North campus, and 
these young students are presently studying Canadian 
government. And they are accompanied here today with their 
teachers, Faith Synk, Linda Holowaty, and Warren Gervais; and 
I ask all the members to give them a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
member from Northeast in welcoming the students from SIAST 
that are here with us today. I hope they enjoy observing the 
proceedings, and I’m sure they’ll find it very informative. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to 
introduce a class of students who are sitting in your gallery 
from SIAST, the 23rd Avenue campus. There are 12 students 
who are studying English as a Second Language, accompanied 
by their teacher, Mr. Ron Mang. 
 
And also while I’m on my feet, I’d also like to make a special 
point of welcoming Lieutenant Governor Myrdal to 
Saskatchewan. It’s too bad that she wasn’t here yesterday to 
hear my speech in Norwegian celebrating Syttende Mai. 
 
So let’s welcome the students and the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Prince Albert Hosts Millennium Citizenship Court 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, It is my 
distinct pleasure to rise this morning in our honoured Assembly 
to inform yourself and all members of an event that took place 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was 
honoured with the opportunity to attend Prince Charles School 
yesterday in Prince Albert as they hosted the first citizenship 
court of the new millennium in Prince Albert . . . that Prince 
Albert had the honour to host. Mr. Speaker, Canada . . . 
Canadian Immigrations is attempting to hold 2,000 such 
proceedings throughout our fabulous country this year to 
honour the year 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as citizens of Canada and Saskatchewan, I am 
certainly proud and I am certain that all members of this 
Assembly are very proud that 38 people from all corners of our 
globe have chosen to make our province their home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to illustrate to the Assembly, I’m pleased to 
inform you of the countries that people have left to enjoy 
Canada, such as the United States of America, the Dominican 
Republic, South Africa, Pakistan, Yugoslavia, 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, Germany, Somalia, the Philippines, 
Sweden, China, Switzerland, Ireland, and last but not least, Mr. 
Speaker, Poland. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these new citizens will now have all the rights and 
responsibilities that we often glibly take for granted. I ask that 
all members of the Assembly join me in welcoming these 38 
new citizens to Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Newly Created Nursing Position 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, well, 
well, well, well, well, well, wellness. I repeat — wellness. Good 
news from our Minister of Health. 
 
I want to congratulate the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker. Not 
only for listening to all the bushwa from the opposition, 
although she deserves a medal for that. No, Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Health deserves our applause for continuing to 
improve what is already the best health care system in North 
America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — It can be made better. It can be made better. 
She is a tireless worker for . . . in her efforts to make it better. 
 
Just yesterday, as reported in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, she 
met with the Saskatchewan registered nurses to announce the 
creation of a new position focused solely on nursing. The 
person appointed is Marlene Smadu, a nurse herself with a 
Ph.D. (Doctor of Philosophy) and great government experience 



May 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1277 

as assistant deputy minister of Health. 
 
The nurses reacted to this news with a standing ovation, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m pretty happy about it myself. As one nurse 
said, we feel Marlene represents us well. This is an exciting 
time. Everyone is upbeat, Mr. Minister. Nurses are being 
valued. 
 
We are upbeat, except you know, those across the way. There 
was a time, we admit, when there was tension with nurses. But 
this is getting better. The government listens. Good news, a 
long weekend . . . to begin a long weekend with. Good news for 
Health. 
 
Thank you. 
 

Scholarship Winner from Spalding 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to congratulate a 
youth from our constituency who has received the Toronto 
Dominion Canada Trust scholarship for outstanding community 
leadership for $50,000. 
 
Dionne Pohler from Spalding received the award at the national 
awards ceremony on May 8. Out of a total of 2,600 
applications, Dionne is one of 20 recipients across Canada and 
the only one from Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Pohler is a wonderful example of the youth of our province. 
She is active in her school community and throughout the 
province. 
 
She was instrumental in opening the Spalding chapter of SADD 
(Students Against Drinking and Driving) when she was in grade 
8. She’s the oldest of eight children growing up on a family 
farm. Dionne was president of the Students Against Drinking 
and Driving last year and is serving as past president this year. 
 
She is president of the local chapter of SADD and a 
Saskatchewan young speaker for the organization. She’s been 
speaking throughout the province and has spoken at the national 
level in Ottawa. Last year she met with the Prime Minister 
concerning the future plans of lowering the blood alcohol 
allowances. 
 
She was part of the Encounters with Canada at the Terry Fox 
Centre in Ottawa; she was a member of the Carlton Trail youth 
for life. She is vice-president of the SRC (student representative 
council) at her school, she is editor of the yearbook, coaches a 
senior boys’ volleyball team, and participates in volleyball, 
curling, badminton, track, drama, and piano. She is also active 
in the church as a reader, a server, and an organist. 
 
Ms. Pohler is in grade 12 at Naicam School and plans to attend 
the U of R (University of Regina) to take administration and 
political science. I’d like to congratulate her and look forward 
to watching her political career. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Business Excellence Awards 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Swift Current 

business community honoured its own last night at the Swift 
Current Business Excellence awards night. And the winners are 
as follows: 
 
Property appearance, 7th Heaven’s Hair Design; community 
involvement, Stark and Marsh; heritage, Kurt’s Take-Out and 
Catering; new business, Legault Manufacturing Ltd.; customer 
service, Pharmasave #406 and Scentiments Gifts and Crafts; 
and for business of the year, National Manufacturing of Canada 
Inc. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is really all of Swift Current and district and all 
of the province that benefits from the business community in 
Swift Current, for their enterprise and their contributions to the 
economy, the quality of life we enjoy, and the opportunities that 
we have for the future. 
 
I commend the small business in Saskatchewan for creating 
most of the jobs in Saskatchewan’s economy and playing their 
very important part in making Saskatchewan the best province 
in the best country in which to live. 
 
On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I ask all 
members of the Legislative Assembly to join me in 
congratulating the Swift Current Business Excellence award 
winners. In fact all of the members of the Swift Current 
business community. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bluenose Bed and Breakfast Wins Award 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 
me great privilege and a pleasure to congratulate some 
constituents of mine. Ken and Jo Mader of the Bluenose 
Country Vacation Bed and Breakfast from Qu’Appelle, 
Saskatchewan was awarded the Attractions Canada 2000 
distinction award. 
 
As provincial winners they’re up against attractions such as the 
West Edmonton Mall, Confederation Centre of the Arts in 
Prince Edward Island, and came out the winner. The Attractions 
Canada contest is the only coast to coast competition organized 
to promote the quality, success, and innovation and diversity of 
Canada’s attractions. 
 
Ken and Jo Mader are hosts of over 7,000 visitors a year to their 
country vacation farm, and give tours on ag and on many 
Saskatchewan issues. Ken and Jo make excellent ambassadors 
as they present our province very well to the rest of the world. 
 
On behalf of the people of Indian Head-Milestone constituency 
as well as myself and my wife, I would like to congratulate Ken 
and Jo Mader and the support staff of the Bluenose Country 
Vacation Bed and Breakfast. Not only for the award that they 
have won, but for the vision of Saskatchewan that they bring to 
the world. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1278 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2000 

Child Care Week 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to bring to the attention 
of this House that this is Child Care Week in Saskatchewan. 
Current research leaves little doubt that the blueprint for a 
child’s life is largely laid out before he or she starts school. 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, for thousands of children right here in 
this province, the quality and success of that blueprint is greatly 
affected by the care they receive from those their parents trust 
to care for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to quality child 
care. Since 1992 we have consulted extensively with 
stakeholders in this field. We have spent more than 4.5 million 
in responding to their suggestions and recommendations. We 
have further committed $2 million over the next four years to 
the development of early childhood resources in licensed child 
care facilities. 
 
Last year we released a discussion paper on early childhood 
development called “Building on Community Success: Creating 
a Long Term Plan for Saskatchewan’s Youngest Children and 
Their Families.” The response to this has been very positive and 
we remain committed to working with our provincial 
counterparts and the federal government to make early 
childhood development a priority all across the country. 
 
I ask all members of this House to join me in expressing 
appreciation to all those caring individuals whose dedication 
and commitment to Saskatchewan children will determine not 
only the quality of their future, but the future of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Millennium Grove Project in Moose Jaw 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tuesday, Mr. 
Speaker, I had the very great pleasure of representing the 
government in Moose Jaw at a very historic event. The grade 2 
students from Moose Jaw’s Empire Elementary School made 
history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These students planted 2,000 seedlings for the province’s very 
first Millennium Grove. These projects are a way of celebrating 
the new millennium, Saskatchewan’s upcoming centennial, and 
enhancing our natural environment. The Millennium Groves are 
a centennial project sponsored by the Shand . . . SaskPower 
Shand Greenhouse and the TREEmendous Saskatchewan 
Foundation. 
 
The Moose Jaw Millennium Grove was planted along Spring 
Creek. The seedlings planted on Tuesday will enhance the 
natural stand of willow along the creek bed, and green ash 
seedlings will provide shelter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the grade 2 class from 
Empire Elementary for beginning this project, and I would also 
like to thank the students from grade 9 to 12 from A. E. 
Peacock Collegiate who helped the younger grade 2 students 
from Empire plant their seedlings. 
 
I would also like to thank the grade 8 to 12 students from John 
Chisholm School who helped prepare the site for planting and 

who will make the final planting of seedlings. 
 
SaskPower Shand Greenhouse and the TREEmendous 
Foundation are to be commended for their sponsorship of this 
very worthwhile project. 
 
The Millennium Groves will enhance the environment and our 
lives for years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Gas Tax Reduction 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, well the first long weekend of summer is approaching. 
We hear that the weather is going to be turning nice, and our 
beautiful provincial parks open up today. So the only thing 
standing in the way of Saskatchewan families enjoying a great 
long weekend is this high-taxing, remnant band of NDP (New 
Democratic Party) and a Liberal Party caucus that can now 
conduct their meetings on a golf cart, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Finance. His 
budget jacked up park fees by an average of 40 per cent, and 
now the price of gas is on the way up again in Saskatchewan. 
We hear that the price of gas will go up even higher. 
 
We’re proposing a 5 cent a litre tax cut in provincial gas tax, 
conditional, conditional on a matching cut from the federal 
government. That would mean a 10 cent a litre break for 
consumers at the pump. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we first asked this question after the budget, 
you said you wouldn’t rule out at least talking to the federal 
government. Have you even spoken to federal minister, Paul 
Martin about the opportunity for a federal-provincial gas tax 
cut? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I’d say to the members 
opposite they may want to read an editorial from the Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix, which I think does a good job of characterizing 
their position: 
 

There may be good reasons for the (province) to reduce . . . 
its 15-cent-a-litre (fuel) tax on (gasoline), but helping 
motorists cope with rising fuel prices isn’t one of them . . . 
 
That the Opposition would — with no regard for the 
consequences and having learned nothing from Grant 
Devine’s gas tax mess — advocate . . .  

 
And it goes on. 
 
And what I say to the members opposite is what I said to the 
Leader of the Opposition yesterday — how does he plan to pay 
for his irresponsible tax cut promises? By taking money out of 
the people’s savings account and by getting rid of what is 
unnecessary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1279 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, not long ago members of this 
Assembly and people in the agriculture industry in this province 
worked extremely hard, day and night, struggled to get even 
any assistance at all from the federal government. 
 
Now we have a federal government offering potentially up to 
$50 million of federal tax relief for Saskatchewan motorists, 
and we’re asking the government only to contact the federal 
government and determine if this is a possibility for 
Saskatchewan motorists. 
 
That’s the question, Madam Minister. Why won’t you at least 
call the federal minister and ask if this offer is on the table and 
provide some immediate tax relief to Saskatchewan motorists? 
Why won’t you do at least that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I think the people of 
this province have to listen to where this line of question is 
going. And these aren’t my words. These aren’t my words; this 
is the Saskatoon StarPhoenix saying this line of thinking takes 
us back to Grant Devine’s gas tax mess. 
 
Because I ask those members two questions — they’re going to 
pay for their tax cuts out of the people’s savings account, the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund, one-time money for an ongoing 
expense; Grant Devine’s gas tax mess — and I ask the Leader 
of the Opposition to answer the question that I asked him 
yesterday. 
 
He says he’s paying for all of this by getting rid of unnecessary 
expenditures. What is he going to get rid of that’s unnecessary? 
Is it health care? Is it education cuts? What kind of things that 
are unnecessary are you going to get rid of, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
abundantly clear that this government and that minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — It’s pretty clear, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
and that minister is completely obsessed with the past, Mr. 
Speaker. They are condemned to repeat the mistakes of the past. 
They’ll suffer the same fate as the administration suffered that 
they constantly refer to, Mr. Speaker. And the polls proved it 
yesterday — they’re headed for an electoral horsewhipping of 
biblical proportions, Mr. Speaker. That’s the bottom line in all 
of this. 
 
Madam Minister, the Minister of Finance, when we first asked 
this question last month, at least committed to the fact that he 
wouldn’t rule out talking to the federal Minister of Finance 
about the opportunity for a gas tax cut for Saskatchewan 
motorists. He wouldn’t rule it out. 
 
Has he contacted the federal Finance minister to determine what 
may be on the table for Saskatchewan people? And if he hasn’t, 
why not, Madam Minister? Why won’t he call his federal 
counterpart to determine if there’s a tax cut potential for 
Saskatchewan people? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, this is not about the 
past; this is a Saskatoon StarPhoenix April 1 editorial which 
they say takes us to Grant Devine’s tax mess. 
 
And the members opposite have to be accountable. They say 
they’d have a huge income tax cut, they’d cut the gas tax — 
how are they going to pay for it? It’s a simple question and it 
deserves a simple answer. 
 
When our spending per capita is already $500 less per person 
than the province of Alberta, I ask the Leader of the Opposition, 
when he says he’s paying for his tax cut by getting rid of what 
is unnecessary, what is unnecessary? 
 
The people of the province have a right to know what he thinks 
is unnecessary and what he would cut. We on this side believe 
in balanced budgets and money for progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Review of Personal Injury Protection Plan 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the minister responsible for SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance). Mr. Minister, you’ve 
blown nearly $87,000 on your botched review of no-fault 
insurance. Eighty seven thousand dollars on a review that has 
no chairperson, no victims, no lawyers, and no public meetings. 
 
Mr. Minister, how is that possible? You’ve spent $87,000 on a 
review that has accomplished nothing to date. Where has all this 
money gone? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that it may be noted 
that the member from up in Canora may have gone off for a 
plumbing course, because he’s now unblocked the question 
pipeline for the hon. member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . from 
Rosthern. 
 
I’m very pleased, very pleased to have a question today. Now 
we . . . and it’s a question . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’m not that far from the minister. I’m 
having a difficult time hearing him. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the issue of dealing with the 
personal injury protection plan is something that was set out in 
the original legislation and it contemplates a review which 
includes a committee of people to do that review. It also 
includes others who will work with that committee and do 
background research. And they’re working on all of that. 
 
We are also working to make sure that we have a committee 
that will be in a position to include all of the people in 
Saskatchewan who are interested in contributing to this. And 
we are on that track and there will be further announcements 
about this very soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, your 



1280 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2000 

review of no-fault insurance system is a complete failure. So far 
it’s cost the taxpayers $87,000. However, fortunately there are 
public meetings taking place on no-fault, but no thanks to your 
government. 
 
The Coalition Against No-Fault is holding its own public 
meetings. I was at one of those meetings last Saturday in 
Saskatoon along with approximately 300 other people — 
victims, medical professions, and organizations like Mothers 
Against Drunk Driving. 
 
And they’re coming forward to express concerns about your 
flawed no-fault system. Of course, you’re not listening because 
these people have been shut out of your phony-baloney system. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you admit that your botched review has been 
a costly failure? Will you start over with a new review that 
includes no-fault victims? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have set up a committee 
of fair-minded people from Saskatchewan who are going to 
look at this issue. I have received the information from the first 
of the coalition’s hearings and that’s been forwarded to the 
committee. I look forward to receiving information from the 
meeting that the hon. member attended last week and that will 
also be forwarded to the commission. 
 
But there is information from many places that needs to come 
as we analyse this personal injury protection plan so that we can 
improve it and make sure that our system continues to remain a 
very good system for all of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The only hearings 
that are taking place are taking place outside of your concept. 
How can you say your process is working? You’ve spent 
$87,000 to date. Victims’ groups are boycotting. Lawyers are 
boycotting. You had no public meetings. 
 
Of course you did have a few of those timed but you had to 
cancel them because your chairman quit. So to date you’ve 
accomplished absolutely nothing, but you have spent $87,000 
doing nothing. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you going to admit your new process is 
an absolute failure? When are you going to scrap the whole 
thing and start over? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work 
with the process that has been outlined using the committee 
people that we have. We will take the information that comes 
from the coalition and from all of the other interested people in 
Saskatchewan and we’ll make sure that it goes to this process so 
that we can get a report that will help us look at how we define 
policy in this area for the coming decades. What is very 
important is we do this in a way that listens to all the people of 
Saskatchewan so that we can build the best system that we 
know how here in Saskatchewan. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So far this 
government has listened to absolutely no one because they’ve 
shut everyone out of their process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last election, the Minister of Education got up in a 
rally in Saskatoon and said he was going to scrap no-fault 
insurance. He was on a radio show the other day where he was 
asked what had happened to that promise. 
 
And here’s what he said, “When you say scrap, I don’t mean 
scrap.” I’m going to repeat that because it doesn’t make much 
sense to us either. “When you say scrap, I don’t mean scrap.” 
So the minister said he was going to scrap no-fault. He just 
didn’t mean he was going to scrap no-fault. I’m shocked, Mr. 
Speaker, that they’re even at 7 per cent. 
 
My question is for whichever minister is covering for the 
Minister of Education today. Can you explain, whoever wishes 
to, what the Minister of Education is talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to even go to 
that particular question. What I’m going to explain is that we in 
this government are working to provide the best policy options 
for all of the citizens of Saskatchewan as it relates to our 
personal injury protection plan. 
 
What we want to do is take the advice that we get from our 
Saskatchewan people, make comparisons with other 
jurisdictions to develop and continue to develop the best system 
that we can. 
 
That’s what this legislation was all about in 1995, that’s what 
it’s all about in the year 2000, and that’s what we’re going to do 
in the years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tuition Fee Increases for Post-Secondary Education 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education. Mr. Speaker, this is the time of the 
year when post-secondary education students are planning their 
fall courses and determining what . . . which institution they 
might attend. But some students are wary of attending the U of 
S (University of Saskatchewan) because they don’t know what 
their tuition costs are going to be. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan is considering raising tuition 
fees anywhere from 6 to 14 per cent because the 4 per cent 
increase in operating grant from the provincial government only 
covers the costs of inflation. The U of S says the government 
has told them there may be more money coming to help keep 
tuition costs down but they don’t know when and they don’t 
know how much that might be. 
 
Mr. Minister, the U of S and post-secondary students need to 
know now what tuition fees will be this year. What are your 
government’s plans to help the U of S keep tuition fees 
affordable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1281 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is an interesting 
question put by the hon. member and I simply point out to the 
hon. member that the decision about tuition fees is in the 
mandate of the universities, of course, and it’s a work in 
progress. And they will have the information by next month, 
Mr. Speaker, in order to make that important decision. 
 
But let me remind the hon. member about commitments to 
universities as well as other post-secondary educations . . . 
institutions in this budget. Mr. Speaker, budget increase for 
institutions in order to keep tuitions down by 4 per cent — 
double the rate of inflation — for all of our institutions. A 
commitment by this government, Mr. Speaker, with two 
partners on this side in the last provincial election that said they 
supported post-secondary education, while those members sat 
on their tongues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget, the commitment that 
post-secondary education increase by 4 per cent on this side. 
What would it have been on that side? Nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, an increase of 
technology-enhanced learning by over a million dollars on this 
side. What would we have seen by . . . over on that side, Mr. 
Speaker? Nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an increase in funding . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the reason 
the U of S is considering a hike in tuition fees is not only 
because the 4 per cent increase in the operating grant is not 
enough but you’ve also told them that they had to use 2 per cent 
of it to implement the DesRosiers report. 
 
You put conditions on their funding at a time when they need to 
recruit new faculty, increase programming, and improve their 
facilities. Because of all that needs to be done they have no 
choice but to look at increasing tuition fees. 
 
Last year you took $9.8 million from students’ millennium 
scholarship money and gave it to the universities with the 
promise that this would help keep tuition costs down. 
 
Mr. Minister, you put conditions on the U of S operating grants, 
you’ve confiscated students’ scholarship money. What are you 
going to do to ensure students won’t face a major increase in 
tuition fees at the U of S? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member will 
want to be a little careful with the extremity of the language that 
he chooses to use. Because he knows that he sits with a party, 
Mr. Speaker, in the last provincial election, which sat on its 
tongue when it came to talking about commitment to 
post-secondary education and skills training. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the DesRosiers report is being worked on. 
Mr. DesRosiers has been in the province and this will be 
resolved in due course, Mr. Speaker, and the decisions will be 
made in the best interests of the post-secondary sector of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Let me remind again, Mr. Speaker, the hon. members about the 
commitments on this side to post-secondary compared to theirs. 
I already said 4 per cent increase were introduced from this 
side. What would be from there? Nothing. 
 
Technology and enhanced learning — 1.4 million from this 
side. What would it be over there? Nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an increase of 25 per cent funding for people with 
disabilities from this side. What would be over there? Nothing, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the introduction of a graduate tax credit to provide 
incentive and to meet the financial needs of students who were 
graduating and making their careers on this side . . . from this 
side, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Transition Fund 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, in the budget address delivered not even two 
months ago, the Finance minister introduced 150 million health 
transition fund. He said that this would provide one-time 
support for change to the health system. He said that changes 
were needed, and I quote, “to ease the transition to the health 
system of tomorrow.” 
 
He said this fund would help make the changes while ensuring 
people continue to have access to quality services. 
 
Well now we hear that the Minister of Health had $26 million 
of this transition fund used to paydown operating deficits of the 
Saskatoon and Regina Health Districts. You’re using this fund 
to pay for the underfunding of health districts in the past. 
 
Madam Minister, is this the real story? Will the NDP health 
transition fund be used to balance health district budgets? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, well, well, well, well. Obviously 
the member did not listen on the day of the budget. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Again. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Again. In interviews on Lindy Thorsen 
dated March 29, 2000, I clearly indicated it was possible for the 
money from the health transition fund to go toward district 
deficits. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned it in my budget 
speech on April 4 on Hansard, page 510. And, Mr. Speaker, it 
was mentioned in The Leader-Post on April 11. 
 
Where has that member been, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 



1282 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2000 

question to the minister. 
 
Madam Minister, if it is going to be a deficit-reduction 
transition fund, why don’t you call it that? 
 
In an interview you’re quoted as saying that the name itself may 
give the wrong impression to people about what this transition 
fund is for. The obvious reason why you are using this to shore 
up past underfunding is because you don’t have a plan. You 
have no direction where you’re going. You don’t know where 
health care is going so there’s nothing to make the transition to. 
 
Madam Minister, if you were really going to use this money to 
prop up underfunding, why didn’t you just say so? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the members 
opposite need to ask Conrad Black to send them The 
Leader-Post and not the $75,000 for their party. Mr. Speaker, if 
they would pay attention to that secret document, The 
Leader-Post, they may have more information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
would be pretty inconsistent if the Finance minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Hon. member for 
Melfort-Tisdale, you may begin your question, please. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again to the Minister of Health. I wish you would explain the 
inconsistency of the message that’s delivered on budget day by 
the Finance minister and then some obscure quotes that you’re 
giving in The Leader-Post. 
 
The record in this House is the record that that government 
should stand by, not the kind of backtracking apologies that you 
have to make when you realize that what is going on is wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, Madam Minister, you are 
also saying in the budget that there was going to develop a 
health care system that was going to provide a vision and it was 
going to be done in consultation with the public. And then you 
end up putting a gag order on health districts. 
 
Dr. Barrie Davidson, with the Pipestone Health District Board, 
told the World Spectator newspaper that he believes there 
should be open discussion about the operating plans. But he 
says he will not violate the gag order because, and I quote: “I 
don’t know what kind of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member’s been quite 
lengthy in his preamble. Kindly go directly to your question. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
clearly board members are feeling that they’re under your gag 
order. Will you lift it and disclose what’s in these health care 
budgets? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well you know, Mr. Speaker, as I said 
yesterday, and as I’ve been saying sometime, the members 
opposite use very interesting language. They use language like 
forced amalgamation. They use language like confiscation. 
They use language like gag order. And then, Mr. Speaker, they 
say there’s some sort of secret thing going on over here when 
they can’t even read the newspapers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. I am so pleased that Conrad Black 
released his poll showing that they’re ahead, because, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s going to galvanize the public opinion in this 
province and three years from now, we’re going to defeat the 
Saskatchewan Party and thank goodness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
clearly health districts across this province are very, very much 
intimidated by the gag threat that you’ve put on them. They 
don’t understand what . . . what penalty they may pay if they 
speak out in public. 
 
So, Madam Minister, the responsibility falls on you. The 
responsibility to disclose these budgets clearly falls on you. Or 
clearly you’ve got to allow health district boards to discuss 
these budgets with the communities they serve, with the health 
care professionals that they serve, before you do anything 
further, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, will you lift the gag order on these district 
health boards, or will you table these budgets forthwith in this 
legislature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s no gag 
order, there’s nothing to lift. That member attended a public 
meeting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and let me say this as well, let me say this as well. 
If there is any intimidation that’s going on in the legislature, 
Mr. Speaker — and I’ve listened very carefully since the end of 
March — it is practically impossible to answer a question on 
this side of the House because those people spend their time 
hooting and hollering, and they’re not interested in the answers, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time, it’s time, Mr. Speaker — listen to them, 
listen to them — it’s time, Mr. Speaker, that they quit 
bulldozing the people at this Legislative Assembly and the 
people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
the minister. Madam Minister, the reason that this health 
transition fund isn’t being used appropriately, the reason why 
district health boards . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. I’ll ask the hon. member 
from Rosthern to kindly not engage in debate with members on 



May 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1283 

the opposite side while a question is being asked. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, the reason 
that health boards are feeling under siege, the reason that you’re 
using the transition fund to shore up deficits instead of 
transisting to new vision is because you simply don’t have one, 
Madam Minister. 
 
The problem that this government has is you’re going from one 
crisis to the next. You deal with the nurses in an inappropriate 
way; you undercut their ability to set educational requirements. 
It’s no wonder when you finally do something right that they’re 
very happy about it. 
 
Madam Minister, but you don’t have a plan. And you can’t keep 
going from one crisis to the other and think that’s going to be a 
solution. 
 
Madam Minister, when are you going to do a proper review of 
the system in this province so that everyone in the health care 
profession can finally see you’re doing something right, as we 
suggest? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, there will be a review in 
the province of Saskatchewan. Either it will be done on a 
national level or it will be done here in the province. I can 
assure the members of that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, each day we hear the members opposite raise 
some particular issue and as the professor from Yale said, 
antidote is the kind of thing that the right wing tries to do in 
order to undermine a publicly funded and publicly administered 
health system. 
 
I hear, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite yesterday were 
suggesting that we should privatize firefighting services in the 
province of Saskatchewan, privatize firefighting. In fact I 
understand it came from second-in-command, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well let me say this: the people of this province have a history 
of public administration and public funding when it comes to 
our public services, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the difference . . . 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Saskatchewan Labour’s Ready for Work Initiatives 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now a year 
ago you may remember I announced Saskatchewan Labour’s 
Ready for Work initiative aimed at helping young people make 
the transition to the workforce. And I just announced some new 
initiatives the department is undertaking to further its work in 
this regard. And it’s particularly significant that we’re making 
this statement partway through the North American 
Occupational Safety and Health Week. 
 
First experiences often shape a person’s attitude and behaviour 
for the balance of their lives, and this is as true in the workplace 
as elsewhere. Yet young or new workers experience the highest 
workplace injury rates and have more workplace problems than 
older, more experienced workers. 
 
The Ready for Work initiatives are directed towards helping 

140,000 Saskatchewan young people between 15 and 24 of age 
to make the positive transition from school to work. And the 
theme is: You need more than a job to be ready for work. You 
need to know your rights and your responsibilities. 
 
The key elements of the initiative are: wallet-sized information 
cards distributed to more than 300 high schools, 3,800 
occupational health and committees, and 40 employment 
centres around the province, a poster with a fine looking bunch 
of young people directing them to a new web site for 
information, and the new web site itself located at 
www.readyforwork.sk.ca. and a $27,000 grant to the 
Saskatchewan professional development unit of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation for workshops to have high 
school teachers adapt their ready-to-work materials for their 
local youths. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we’re facing the 
challenge of changing demographics. In less than two years, a 
quarter of all new workers in Saskatchewan will be Aboriginal. 
It’s therefore critical that we develop strategies inclusive of 
Aboriginal people and encourage them to participate in the 
workforce, help them find jobs, and ensure they’re prepared for 
the workplace. 
 
At the same time we must ensure that workplaces are 
hospitable, inclusive, and open to new perspectives. So to that 
end, Saskatchewan Labour has hired educational consultants of 
Aboriginal ancestry to help build working relationships with 
First Nations and Metis organizations to develop services that 
support a more representative workforce. 
 
As a first step we’re working with 17 First Nation high schools 
across the province to get advice on health and safety resources 
as part of a school-to-work transition project, and many 
excellent suggestions have come out of those discussions with 
the high schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that proper preparation can help ensure 
workers for positive first-time work experiences. We’re 
committed to a comprehensive prevention approach that 
includes awareness, education and training, as well as 
legislation and enforcement. And I’m confident that the 
initiatives I have mentioned will help us achieve those goals. 
 
So thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the minister 
for her statement concerning the ready-for-work initiative, as 
we all in society, as individuals and families and the 
government, should be very concerned with helping our youth 
in all aspects of our society, and giving them the experience to 
go into the workforce was one of those areas that we must take 
some initiative. 
 
And it is very true that the first experiences often shape a 
person’s attitude and behaviour. And it’s important that we 
provide the transition from school to work to be a very 
productive one. 
 
I’d also like to comment on . . . it’s very important that we also 



1284 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2000 

include the Aboriginals as well as all youth in Saskatchewan in 
our policies in the future, considering a quarter of all new 
workers in Saskatchewan will be Aboriginal in the future. 
 
It is very important that the workplace provides a safe and 
work-fair environment and the people in that environment know 
the responsibilities and rights. But I’d like to point out an area 
where the government has been given failing marks for many 
years, and that’s in the area of readying our youth and giving 
our youth the knowledge in running a small business, being an 
entrepreneur, given that small business is the engine of growth 
in this province and in our economy, and also the main 
producer of jobs. 
 
I’d like to ask the minister to also include in this initiative 
giving our youth some . . . the training and skills in order to do 
a business plan, marketing skills, and the knowledge of going to 
a bank and getting loans in order to start a small business. And 
I’d like the minister to consider that as well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy to present the 
answers to question 140 and, by leave of the Assembly, 141 and 
142 at the same time. 
 
The Speaker: — Answers to questions 140, 141, and 142 are 
tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, before beginning second 
reading debate on Bill 40, The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies Act, I would request leave of the House to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before 
beginning debate, I would like to introduce some guests who are 
in our gallery who take a very strong interest in the piece of 
legislation before the House at this moment. And I’d like to 
introduce them to the members of the House. 
 
In the gallery today joining us — first of all, I’d like to 
introduce first vice-chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations, Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology, Vice-Chief Morley Watson. And joining him is the 
president of the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies, 
Joan Greyeyes. Along with them is vice-president of academics 
of SIIT (Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies), Roger 
Schindelka. And finally to introduce the director of the 

Saskatoon campus of the SIIT, Darlene Arcand. 
 
I’d ask all honoured members to welcome these guests to our 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, to introduce and welcome guests. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to take the 
opportunity on behalf of the official opposition to welcome the 
members in the gallery from the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) as well as from the institutes. 
And we look forward to the great work that’s going to happen 
in the future in regards to education and training. 
 
So I welcome you today, and I ask all members of the 
Assembly to once again welcome our guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40  The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies Act 

(continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
introduce the proposed new Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies Act, 2000. 
 
This proposed legislation will recognize the Saskatchewan 
Indian Institute of Technologies, or SIIT, as a technical institute 
governed by First Nations people that issues recognized 
certificates and diplomas and serves the post-secondary 
education and skills training needs of First Nations people. 
 
The Bill supports the priority of helping First Nations people to 
access quality training and education that prepares them for 
employment. Access to education and training is essential for a 
good quality of life in Saskatchewan for all people. 
 
The Bill also supports the need to address the pending 
tightening of the labour market by assisting more First Nations 
people to participate in the Saskatchewan workforce. Our First 
Nations population is under-represented in our workforce, and 
this growing, young population represents a great untapped 
potential and natural advantage for Saskatchewan. We must 
make the most of this advantage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Access to education and training for First Nations people is one 
of the keys to a successful, bright future in Saskatchewan. And 
we all share a responsibility in providing the training to meet 
the needs of individuals and communities. Full participation of 
all our citizens is necessary for the social and economic 
well-being of the province. This is a win-win situation for every 
citizen of Saskatchewan. 
 
Individually, community and provincial success depends on our 
ability to respond to these changing needs in the future. And, 
Mr. Speaker, higher education is very much about building the 



May 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1285 

future. 
 
This proposed legislation is linked to several provincial 
initiatives including the post-secondary education sector plan; 
the economic strategy, Partnership for Prosperity; the social 
assistance redesign strategy, “building independence”; and the 
northern development strategy. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training is bringing forth this proposed 
legislation at the request of the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations. The FSIN wants SIIT to be recognized as a 
technical institution governed by First Nations with legitimate 
credit-granting authority in the province. 
 
And this legislation comes as a result of years of collaboration 
and consultations among FSIN, SIIT, and our department. It is a 
sign of good things to come through collaboration and 
partnership in the post-secondary sector. 
 
The collaborative nature of the proposed legislation and its 
drafting process are precedent setting for the dynamic evolving 
relationship between the province and the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations. We expect, Mr. Speaker, to be 
sharing many more successes together. 
 
SIIT currently falls under The Regional Colleges Act and has 
outgrown this legislation. SIIT needs the ability and the 
authority to develop the strategies needed to address First 
Nation’s changing and emerging technical education needs. 
With the proposed new Act, SIIT will be removed from The 
Regional Colleges Act. We are recognizing current practices at 
SIIT. 
 
SIIT, Mr. Speaker, is a mature institution that has been 
providing high quality training for 25 years in Saskatchewan. It 
has credibility and a reputation as an excellent training provider 
for First Nation students in the province — and employers 
across the province hire SIIT grads. 
 
SIIT’s accomplishments include some leading-edge 
partnerships with industry, Mr. Speaker, including the travel 
and hospitality industry, SaskTel, the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police), and the gaming industry. And with this 
legislation we are also acknowledging the effective 
accountability relationship with FSIN that SIIT desires and 
needs. 
 
Currently, FSIN nominates the board of SIIT but the provincial 
government appoints them. The proposed SIIT Act ensures a 
direct relationship between FSIN and the Saskatchewan Indian 
Institute of Technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to be clear that this Act does not affect the 
mandate or roles of SIAST or the regional colleges. Their 
powers are maintained as outlined in their respective Acts. 
SIAST will continue to be the primary source of technical and 
applied science education and training in the province, funded 
by the province. 
 
SIIT will continue to be a non-university, post-secondary 
technical education institute for First Nations people funded by 
the federal government and First Nations. 

No single institution can be expected to address all needs. SIIT 
is one of many institutions that must focus on meeting the needs 
of our First Nations students. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m confident 
they will be a story of success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I would like to outline some of the main 
clauses of the draft Bill for the hon. members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Clause 5 ensures that everyone is clearly aware that SIIT is 
independent of the province in terms of its operations and 
activities. To ensure continued connection with the provincial 
system, the Bill also contains the requirement that SIIT is to 
provide information about its plans, activities, and students to 
the provincial government. 
 
The legislation establishes SIIT as an independent technical 
institute. It does not result in any new obligations for the 
province. 
 
Clause 6 identifies that SIIT is primarily to serve the 
non-university, post-secondary education and training needs of 
First Nations people. This will be the major focus of SIIT’s 
continued activities. The programs are open to people who are 
not of first ancestry as well of course, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Clause 7 outlines SIIT’s general powers that enable the 
institution to fulfil its objectives and purposes. This section 
allows SIIT to hire staff and provide for their conditions and 
terms of employment, to acquire and dispose of property, and to 
enter into agreements with organizations or agencies in order to 
achieve its goals. 
 
Clause 8 elaborates on the education training- and 
employment-related activities that SIIT may undertake. This 
includes developing courses, determining criteria related to 
student conduct, issuing credentials for its programs, providing 
financial support to students, and entering into agreements with 
other organizations including post-secondary institutions. 
 
Two specific items I would like to highlight, Mr. Speaker. SIIT 
will be able to continue providing basic education programs to 
its students through an arrangement with the province in order 
to ensure comparable standards are met. 
 
As members are aware, for many adults, basic education is the 
fundamental building block for post-secondary education or 
training, or for entering the workforce. 
 
The second area I wish to highlight is credit transfer. The Act 
will ensure, Mr. Speaker, that credentials from SIIT are 
recognized by both employers and other post-secondary 
education institutions. And making transfer of credits easier will 
improve the employability of SIIT grads. It will also reinforce 
our desire and our wishes, and the wishes of the FSIN, that SIIT 
remains strongly linked with our provincial post-secondary 
education system. 
 
Clauses 9, 10, and 11 provide for a board of directors for SIIT. 
The board will manage the institution and make relevant 
policies for its operation. The first members of the SIIT board 
will be those members currently appointed by order in council. 



1286 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2000 

Subsequent board members will be appointed through a process 
established by the SFIN. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier that there are some reporting 
and accountability requirements placed on SIIT, and members 
will note that clause 14 requires the appointment of a qualified 
outside auditor. Clause 15 requires SIIT to provide government 
information pertaining to its head office and its board members. 
 
Clause 15(3) requires SIIT to provide to government 
information concerning its plans for the future and the annual 
report, including audited financial statements and outcomes of 
its activities in terms of its graduates. This will assist in the 
coordination of provincial and SIIT initiatives. 
 
I would like the Assembly to note that although the SIIT is not 
provincially funded, SIIT wanted to report its plan, finances, 
and outcomes to the provincial government and to the people of 
Saskatchewan. This desire and the information in clause 15 
demonstrates that SIIT is committed to being accountable, not 
just to First Nations and its students but to the whole province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in summary the 
proposed Bill will mean changes at SIIT that include these: 
establishing a board appointed by the SFIN to manage the 
institution; the ability to issue recognized certificates and 
diplomas; clarification that SIIT is not an agent of the Crown; 
and support for the expansion and refinement of skilled First 
Nations expertise. 
 
And in closing, Mr. Speaker, I simply want to say that this 
government is committed to First Nations people. We’re 
committed to ensuring the post-secondary education and skills 
training that is available to best meet their needs. 
 
We are committed to building the future for all our people 
through higher education. When individuals and communities 
succeed, Mr. Speaker, we all succeed. 
 
We welcome the SFIN’s interest and commitment to training as 
demonstrated by a desire to support a First Nations technical 
institute. We also appreciate SIIT’s commitment to strengthen 
its linkages and partnerships with our provincial post-secondary 
education system. They are among our most important partners 
in the future business and that is the business of post-secondary 
education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First Nations people need to have the opportunity to participate 
fully in our society. We want and need their participation in the 
post-secondary sector, in economic and business ventures, in 
government — not only in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, but in 
the municipal, education, and health sectors as well. 
 
We look to First Nations people to be leaders and guides to our 
future well-being as a province. And, Mr. Speaker, through this 
unique legislation we want First Nations people to participate 
fully in the economic and social life of the province, Mr. 
Speaker. Just as we wish . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Just as we wish to share and learn from the 
unique wisdom, experience, and culture in providing the best 
post-secondary education and training opportunities anywhere, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And today I call upon all Members of Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to support this Bill and to demonstrate our 
commitment to all people to building our futures together. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to move second reading of 
Bill No. 40, The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies 
Act, 2000. I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
make a few comments in regard to the Bill before us, Bill No. 
40, The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies Act 
before moving of adjournment of debate to review the Bill 
further, but as well to recognize the involvement of a number of 
individuals who have joined us from the FSIN, most notably, 
Mr. Morley Watson, the first vice-chief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the Assembly are not 
opposed whatsoever to our First Nations people having more of 
an opportunity to develop the skills and the training that is 
needed to give them the ability to pursue work opportunities 
within the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1115) 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, last Friday I had the privilege of 
attending again the adult basic education graduation in 
Moosomin. And for the past number of years this program, 
sponsored by the regional college system in the province, has 
certainly given many individuals, including First Nations 
people in our community, the ability to pursue and enhance the 
educational opportunities, giving them the tools to indeed add 
to their educational knowledge so that they can, as I’ve 
discussed with a number of the grads through the years, gain the 
experience and the education necessary to pursue further life 
skills, and opening up the doors for their entry into the 
workforce in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am concerned a little bit of whatsoever though as 
we look to the future of this province and look to the future of 
our country. And I find in discussing and talking to First 
Nations people that many of them have the same concerns. 
 
And the concerns surround the fact that many people would like 
to see us beginning to work together more. And as I’ve listened 
to the Minister of Post-Secondary Education, he talks about 
working together to build those educational opportunities 
through the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies. 
And that’s much the same program or the same services as 
provided through the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied arts 
and sciences . . . or the Science and Technologies that we have. 
 
And the concern I have and the concern I raise is the fact that 
we should be . . . and in talking to a lot of First Nations what I 
hear, and for example visiting with the community of Building 
a Nation, one of the things they were talking about is working 
together as individuals regardless of our race or regardless of 



May 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1287 

our colour, and starting to develop as a community rather than 
two separate communities. 
 
And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is going to be one of the 
most important requirements as we look to building our 
province and building our future. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
what I find is many First Nations people feel that they would 
like to have the ability to enter the workforce, and not just enter 
at just beginning or low-income jobs. 
 
They’re looking forward to entering in at higher levels, and 
that’s why FSIN and many of our . . . even our . . . the reserves 
across the province are getting involved in, as we have in front 
of us today, a piece of legislation that will work together with 
them to provide the tools necessary and the training that will 
give them, give our First Nations people the ability to certainly 
pursue higher levels of education and higher levels of work 
skills and indeed enter into more meaningful types of 
employment. That’s what I’m hearing from First Nations 
people. 
 
But coming back to what I was saying originally, I think it’s 
necessary as well, rather than building if you will separate 
institutions, that we begin to amalgamate and we begin to create 
opportunities where we’re working and we’re training together 
so that we can create that liaison that builds and breaks down 
the walls and breaks down the barriers that have hindered many 
of our First Nations people from really advancing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe many businesses and many 
corporations in the province of Saskatchewan have lent a hand 
and are lending a hand and are looking forward to lending even 
a greater hand in helping design and helping with input in 
regards to the type of programming, the type of courses, and the 
type of training that is needed that would allow First Nations as 
well as the White community the access to the type of training 
that is needed, that they as a business are looking for when they 
begin to offer job opportunities. 
 
And I think . . . I firmly believe for one, that we need to include 
the business community. We need to include corporations and 
involve them in designing the programs and get their input so 
that regardless of whether you’re of First Nations ancestry or 
whatever other ancestry we might have, people have the 
opportunity to enhance the life skills that are needed to build for 
the future. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while we’re talking of a Saskatchewan Indian 
Institute of Technology institution to — wrong word — training 
facility to enhance the skills of our First Nations people, I think, 
Mr. Speaker, this is certainly a good start. And certainly the 
First Nations community has worked diligently over the past 
number of years to offer their members the skills and the 
training that is needed. 
 
And I believe what the Bill before us is doing, it’s just 
expanding on what’s been done to build to the future. And, Mr. 
Speaker, certainly my caucus, our caucus, is looking forward as 
well to working with our First Nations community to help build 
upon the life skills that they are . . . that they want to enhance 
with their community so that we begin to work as brothers and 
sisters, if you will, rather than as separate individuals building 
our own community. 

And I think that’s the point that I’m trying to stress because 
that’s what I hear from so many, so many people as well. 
People are getting tired of the fact that we have educational 
facilities sitting over here on reserves and we’ve got educational 
facilities off reserve as well. 
 
In fact in my area, I envision some day that we may end up 
where we’ve got a transfer of students back and forth because 
of the fact of the numbers and the population, and beginning to 
work together in that regard so that we’re beginning to 
understand each and every one of us as individuals and the 
differences in the community. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, having said that and having just informed the 
Assembly that we are pleased to see that they’re initiatives 
being taken that really will expand upon what is already there 
and build to the future so that we all, we all begin to work 
together as partners. And giving our young people the 
opportunity to develop and expand their educational needs so 
they can build for their futures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it would appropriate as well however for us 
as an opposition to sit down and review the legislation. And I 
know many of my colleagues want to take the time as well to 
discuss with the stakeholders the different aspects of this piece 
of legislation before we would just move it further along. In fact 
it will move along in due process. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I now move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am pleased to outline the key provisions of the new proposed 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 
Act, 2000 to all of the members of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Post-Secondary Education and 
Skills Training was created to reflect the increasing importance 
of post-secondary education and skills training in our province. 
Since its creation in April, 1996, the department has changed 
and evolved. 
 
One important change, for example, is the signing of a 
Canada-Saskatchewan Labour Force Development Agreement 
in 1998. This resulted in a shift from federally-delivered to 
provincially-delivered labour market services, and we now have 
20 Canada-Saskatchewan career and employment services 
centres throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
The department’s former responsibilities were mainly for 
post-secondary institutions and student financial assistance. The 
Saskatchewan training strategy has broadened our array of 
services to include skills training, work-based programs, and 
career and employment services relevant to Saskatchewan 
people and our labour market. 
 
We are linking training directly to employment. To ensure the 
programs and services we deliver are more relevant to regional 



1288 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2000 

needs, we have developed a much greater range of partners. In 
addition to post-secondary institutions, we’ve included 
employers, community-based organizations, First Nations and 
Metis employment and training boards, and industry-sector 
partnerships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the department is a critical component of the 
government’s vision to help Saskatchewan people adapt, 
compete, and succeed in our knowledge-based economy. 
 
As observed in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, post-secondary 
education and skills training are critical components of the 
government’s new economic strategy, Partnership for 
Prosperity. The provincial budget supports the important 
priority we have placed on higher education and the department. 
And the department’s work is also key to the success of 
building independence, the strategy to increase the self-reliance 
of those now on social assistance. 
 
And as a pilot department in implementing government’s new 
accountability framework, our department is developing a new 
strategic plan in consultation with our sector partners. The plan 
articulates our vision. It also identifies broad goals, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’d like to identify the top four. 
 
Number one, the province has a sustainable, high quality 
post-secondary education training and employment services 
sector. This will involve effective leadership by the department. 
Secondly, the sector meets the needs of individuals and 
communities. Thirdly, the sector meets the needs of employers 
and industry and contributes to economic growth. And fourthly, 
the sector promotes discovery, integration, application, and 
transfer of knowledge. 
 
This new Act further clarifies for our partners, especially our 
newest partners, employers, and community-based 
organizations, the responsibilities and powers of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. This sets the 
stage for clearer accountability. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the federal government in other provinces 
also recognize the high priority of post-secondary education, 
student financial assistance, and career services. These key 
public services have become part of the national agenda through 
the work of a council of ministers of Education Canada, the 
CMEC (Canadian Ministers of Education Council). And I have 
the honour to chair the CMEC for two years and to represent 
Saskatchewan’s interest in this national forum. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the new Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training Act, 2000 will consolidate 
existing legislation which currently provides the department’s 
authorities into one single departmental Act. It combines 
sections from The Education Act, 1995, The Government 
Organization Act, and The Human Resources, Labour and 
Employment Act. 
 
I would like to highlight some of the aspects of the new Act for 
you today. Many sections are clearly housekeeping changes 
involving the transfer from other legislation to this new 
legislation. The transfers from The Education Act and The 
Human Resources, Labour and Employment Act, simplify and 
clarify ministerial responsibility. 

In addition to the sections transferred from the other Acts, Mr. 
Speaker, there are a few sections being addressed, or being 
added I should say, to address our renewed services and to 
improve the accountability of government. 
 
One, section 13, gives the minister the authority to require or 
establish an audit process. Secondly, section 14 pertains to the 
standard requirement to submit an annual report for the 
department. We propose to change the reporting period from 
the school year, July 1 to June 30, to the fiscal year, April 1 to 
March 31. 
 
This complements how funding is provided to and disbursed by 
the department, and this will also make a reporting year the 
same as other government departments. 
 
Thirdly, section 16 creates explicit legislative authority for the 
Canada-Saskatchewan career and employment services I 
mentioned earlier. This section also allows the province to 
co-locate offices with others involved in post-secondary 
education, training, career and employment services. And 
fourthly, Mr. Speaker, section 19 includes a provision to ensure 
our clients have a mechanism for appeals. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to be clear that this Act does not 
affect the mandate or roles of the two universities, SIAST, the 
regional colleges, or the Apprenticeship and Trades 
Certification Commission. Their powers are maintained as 
outlined in their respective Acts. 
 
This department Act simply brings into one piece of legislation 
the powers of the minister now outlined in various Acts of the 
legislature respecting department delivered programs and 
services. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, let me simply summarize by saying 
that this new Act is more focused than our existing legislation, 
particularly as it relates to the regional delivery of programs and 
services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is listening to the people of 
Saskatchewan and this Act brings clarity to the role of the 
department for the sector. This Act also signals the importance 
of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training to the 
operation of government, but even more importantly, Mr. 
Speaker, in the lives of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And this legislation will put in place a fundamental building 
block for a brighter future for our young people. Simply put, 
Mr. Speaker, Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training is 
in the future business, together with many partners in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m proud to move second reading of Bill No. 39, The 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 
Act, 2000. I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And in response 
to the Bill that we have before us, The Department of 



May 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1289 

Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, 2000, I’d like to 
make a few comments before I move adjournment of the 
debate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s no question that just having the 
grade 12 education is going to meet all the needs of future 
requirements for job opportunities, not only in our province but 
across this land and across the world. We are quite well aware 
of the fact that there’s even a greater need to upgrade and to add 
to your knowledge as you prepare for the future. 
 
And the piece of legislation that we have before us, the minister 
acknowledged that fact and is indicating that the Bill is hoping 
to address that by creating some opportunities for people as 
they . . . and for our young people . . . and not only just our 
young people, even individuals who have probably been in the 
workforce for a while as they look to possibly job changes and 
just expanding some of the education and some of the 
knowledge they have so that they can prepare themselves for 
possible job opportunity and further job training. 
 
The thing that I’m pleased to see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
fact that we’re looking at partnerships — building partnerships 
with companies, with businesses, with employers — to develop 
the training skills and the necessary tools that will be needed as 
we look forward to the future. 
 
Certainly we have seen, just over the past few years, the 
changes in technology and the skills that are needed. And 
yesterday, Mr. Deputy Speaker — I’m not exactly sure or aware 
of how many individuals may have caught the news — I believe 
IBM was looking for something like 500 programmers in their 
current level, the need within their company. And I just forget 
the number of applications that they had submitted. 
 
So certainly when you’re looking at starting in, for the jobs that 
they were looking for . . . I believe they were talking anywhere 
from 75 to $150,000 for those job opportunities, starting wage. 
Granted, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they were not people just coming 
out of college. They already had some, they had some enhanced 
skills. And they needed people to fill certain roles. 
 
But what that says to us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact that, 
that the market trend is changing and therefore, people are 
going to have to enhance the knowledge that they have in the 
area of post-secondary education to prepare themselves, to 
equip themselves for the jobs that will be available in the future. 
 
It’s . . . I’m also pleased as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to hear 
the minister talk about this Act is going to combine a number of 
current Acts to simplify the process. And I think that’s 
important. I think it’s important for us as legislators as well to 
not have to deal with a number of different Acts that deal with 
specific areas in addressing needs in post-secondary education. 
 
And it’s certainly important, I believe, to simplify the process 
and to cut down on the red tape so that people themselves when 
they enter the educational field are not always having to deal 
with going through different Acts to fall in line with the 
different requirements that are necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister made comment about many 
individuals who currently are on social assistance and giving 

them opportunities to enhance their life skills. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in this Assembly over the past number of weeks we’ve 
both discussed with the Minister responsible for Post-Secondary 
Education and the Minister responsible for Social Services, the 
possibility of maybe sitting down together at some time in 
estimates with the two departments to address some of the 
overlapping areas of responsibility in providing the job 
opportunities and the job training for people currently on social 
assistance, who would really like to have the tools and to 
enhance their educational skills so they can move off of that 
area of assistance, that I don’t believe many people really enjoy 
being on. 
 
But the reason they’re stuck on it — because they do not have 
the abilities nor the skills to really enter a higher level of job 
opportunity. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to debating this question and 
getting a greater understanding of what is implied by the Bill in 
regards to those opportunities. Having said that, Mr. Speaker, it 
seems that there’s a number of areas in this Bill that we’re 
going to have to look at very carefully, to review very carefully, 
so we’re prepared to address the concerns of our constituents. 
And therefore at this time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Medical Profession 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 
move second reading of The Medical Profession Amendment 
Act, 2000. The Act reflects our continuing commitment to the 
Saskatchewan public to ensure an adequate supply of 
physicians in our province, and to ensure that the profession is 
responsive to the public interest. 
 
I’m pleased to say that the new Act contains some positive 
changes for both the profession and for the people it serves. 
Over the past year we’ve consulted with the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan and the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association on these changes to the Act. 
And one of the key changes is to allow physicians to 
professionally incorporate. 
 
This amendment, Mr. Speaker, fulfils a commitment made to 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association arising out of their last 
collective agreement that was signed in 1998. Professional 
incorporation is a mechanism by which some physicians can 
benefit in terms of savings. With most other provinces in our 
country offering such benefits to their physicians, 
Saskatchewan was at a disadvantage. 
 
This change will ensure our province can continue to compete 
with other provinces in attracting new physicians and retaining 
our existing practitioners. 
 
The college and the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association), 
Mr. Speaker, currently collaborate in a peer review process 
aimed at enhancing the practice of physicians. Physicians were 
concerned though that in the process of improving their 
practice, the peer review findings could be used against them in 
a civil proceedings. 



1290 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2000 

Protection will be provided similar to that permitted for hospital 
quality assurance findings. This change will encourage 
physicians to be open and to participate in the physician 
enhancement program. 
 
Another key change in this Act is the requirement that the 
college make bylaws requiring all practising physicians to 
hold adequate liability protection. And while it would seem 
unusual for a physician to hold liability . . . or not hold 
liability protection, it can happen and, Mr. Speaker, it did 
happen. 
 
We recognize that almost all physicians hold liability 
protection. But almost all is not adequate. This provision will 
make sure every physician in our province holds liability 
protection — liability protection that protects the public. 
 
The college of physicians and surgeons is currently working 
with the Saskatchewan Medical Association to develop the 
necessary bylaws as soon as possible for the government’s 
consideration and implementation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the college takes its responsibility seriously to 
protect the public and act in the public’s interest. To further 
ensure the college is responsive to the public, the number of 
public representatives on the college’s council will be 
increased from three to five. These representatives are 
appointed by government and are expected to bring forward 
the general public’s perspective on matters affecting health 
services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some very positive changes for the 
public and for the profession of physician services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’re pleased to see today that the government has 
certainly recognized the need of the medical professions in 
regards to the incorporation provision of this specific Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the past number of years, that’s an 
issue that’s been brought to the attention of our caucus. It’s 
an issue that we have indicated that we’re more than . . . we 
would be more than prepared to move on. 
 
But I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s important that it’s 
moved on sooner rather than later. And we’ll give credit where 
credit is due. 
 
I believe that’s something that is indeed a positive move, 
especially when we look at health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan or indeed across this nation, in fact around the 
world. And the need for physicians to feel that they have that 
privilege as well to be the professionals they need to be, as well 
as giving them the opportunity to have the protection and to 
protect the public. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk of incorporation this just 
allows physicians the abilities to work together with other 

physicians in preparing and building their practices so that they 
can continue to enhance their skills within their community or 
within the area that they are serving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe . . . and as I’ve heard, many 
physicians many times feel bogged down with the needs of 
managing their offices and certainly a business. And it takes 
away from their ability to really provide the medical services 
that they so strongly feel committed to the patients that they’re 
dealing with. 
 
Talking about liability, that’s another question that certainly a 
lot of people are very concerned about. And physicians are no 
exception. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are areas where 
physicians have refused to provide services because of the 
inability to really have the liability or trying to carry the type of 
liability that is needed that may protect them should something 
happen. 
 
And the unfortunate part for doctors and physicians across this 
province, sometimes a mistake could be a fatal one. And that’s 
something that they’re all aware of and certainly that they have, 
indeed through the past, have tried to really protect themselves 
from. And when we have so many physicians moving in and 
out of the province and coming to this province, it’s certainly 
important that we also take the time to make sure that the 
citizens of this province are protected as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I notice we have a group that has come 
into this Assembly. I’m not sure how long that they’ll be 
available to be introduced. And having said those few words, I 
will move to adjourn debate and allow for the introduction of 
guests. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the hon. member for Indian 
Head-Milestone on his feet? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — To introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it gives me great privilege to introduce a number of 
guests from the Montmartre School, 20 in number, with their 
teachers, Leah McDonald and Angie Eberle. 
 
They made the trip in from Montmartre today after coming off 
of a victory in the division track meet yesterday. Montmartre 
was the winner of the track meet yesterday and they’re just in to 
observe the proceedings. 
 
Unfortunately, they missed question period — because it was 
such a good question period. But we had a visit for about a half 
an hour and they’ll be heading back I guess in a short while. 
 
So I’d ask all the members in the Assembly to welcome the 
guests from Montmartre. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1291 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Power Corporation Superannuation 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Power Corporation Superannuation 
Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
The amendment I’m introducing today will increase the size of 
the Power Corporation Superannuation Board from five to 
seven persons and designate one of the positions for a 
representative of the superannuates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment makes it possible for 
superannuates who now form the majority of plan members to 
have a representative on the board. The increase in board size 
will allow for the appointment of a nominee from the Power 
Pioneers Association, a volunteer association that represents the 
majority of SaskPower superannuates. The additional position 
would be allotted to a nominee of SaskEnergy management. 
 
(1145) 
 
Representation on the existing board of directors, which is 
appointed by order in council, includes nominees from both 
unions at SaskPower — CEP (Communications, Energy and 
Paperworkers) and IBEW (International Brotherhood of 
Electrical Workers) — and SaskPower management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the demographics of the old plan, given the aging 
workforce and the fact that the cut-off for entry into the old plan 
was 1997, has led to a situation where at September 30, 1999 
there were 718 active plan members, 22 deferred members, and 
1,685 retired members. 
 
The Power Pioneers have sought a voice at the pension board, 
given that they comprise the largest group involved in the plan. 
SaskPower management made a commitment in 1998 to 
consider adding a nominee from the Power Pioneers and have, 
since April 1999, extended observer status to a representative of 
the Power Pioneers. 
 
Prior to the corporate split of Sask Energy from SaskPower, a 
large number of employees were active members in the Power 
Corporation superannuation plan. Under The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Act, SaskEnergy as an institution is 
required to continue to match employee contributions into the 
plan. 
 
To date SaskEnergy has not had an active voice at the board 
table. Observer status was extended to SaskEnergy as an 
interim step in April 1999. 
 
In short, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amendment of The Power 
Corporation Superannuation Act would permit effective 
representation from additional stakeholder groups affected by 
the Power Corporation superannuation plan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Power Corporation Superannuation Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A few 

comments regarding the Bill before us, Bill No. 47. Mr. 
Speaker, one at first glance would have to ask why we would be 
expanding the board from five to seven. But as well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as we’ve listened to the minister, the addition 
of a superannuate to the board I think is certainly something 
that is positive. 
 
I know, I believe many of my colleagues have had a number of 
calls from a number of superannuates in regards to some 
complications they have been facing in the past in regards to 
their pension plan. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we would 
like to take the time, while this Bill seems to be very minute 
and doesn’t really have a lot to it other than the expansion of the 
board and the addition of a superannuate as a representative on 
the board, I think there’s a few things we’d like to have clarified 
before we would allow the Bill to move further. And certainly 
we would like to take the time to discuss this piece of 
legislation with parties that may be affected or certainly will be 
affected by the legislation before us. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will keep my remarks 
short at this time and move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Women’s Secretariat 

Vote 41 
 
The Chair: — Before I call subvote 1, I will invited the 
minister to reintroduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Again today I 
have with me Faye Rafter, the executive coordinator of the 
Women’s Secretariat; and Joan Pederson, the assistant 
executive coordinator of the Women’s Secretariat. 
 
Subvote (WS01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, and 
again to Faye and Joan, welcome. 
 
When we left on May 15, I’d asked for a couple of answers 
from questions, the first one being a breakdown of the $380,000 
that was above the money spent on personnel. I was wondering 
if you had that information. And also the information for the 
total money spent on the WOOL (women’s organization on line 
program) project. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’ll just 
. . . (inaudible) . . . salary costs, 731,000; the operational costs — 
now that’s office equipment, telephone, communications, 
distribution, contractual services — 82,000; communications 
costs, 121,000; travel, 23,000; office supplies, stationery, and 
books, 15,000; furniture, computer equipment, 23,000; 
partnership grants, 106,000; the minister’s office expenses, 
14,000; and accommodation and central services, 78,000; for a 
total of 1.193 million. 
 



1292 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2000 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And also the 
information on the total amount of money spent on the WOOL 
project since it was initiated, I believe it was in 1997. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The total amount since the inception of 
the program is 826,755. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I believe I’m 
correct in saying that when it was actually initiated in 1997, it 
was supposed to be 750,000. So I believe that means there’s 
about $76,000 that must have come directly out of the Women’s 
Secretariat budget. 
 
And as we were saying last week, that there was so many 
different initiatives that the secretariat is involved in. That 
means that we’ve spent more money beyond what the 
government has allocated as a special project for this initiative. 
I was wondering how you decide that money should be going 
again to this project rather than to the many initiatives that I’m 
sure the women of Saskatchewan are wanting to be involved in. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Chair, depending on what the 
particular nature of the technology project is, in some cases 
there was some additional funding out of the partnerships 
project, and the other was partly out of communications. So that 
was where the additional money was pulled into this program 
from. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, has all the monies been spent 
on this project that is going to be spent? Is this going to be an 
ongoing project every year where we see more money being 
spent from your department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: —Mr. Deputy Chair, I would be very 
pleased if we were able to get more money for this program 
because when we did the program evaluation, I’m just going to 
read three quotes from participants that reflected very much the 
quotes of the women. 
 
One WOOL participant said: 
 

Taking the training showed me I could learn and gave me 
the courage and incentive to return to school. 
 

Another group told us: 
 

We find that being able to access information right away is 
great for our clients as they used to wait a week or two for 
the mail to come. 

 
And one woman said: 
 

The Internet supports connecting to remote areas for 
information, keeping in touch, and connecting with sister 
organizations across Canada. 

 
And I would have to say that of all the programs we’ve had, 
which I believe they’re all very valuable, this one has hands 
down been the most widely supported by women. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, last time we also spoke 
about the booklet that was written on the Profile of Aboriginal 
Women in Saskatchewan. At that time we discussed the cost of 

what amounted to $55,000, yet the information that I received 
through you under advertising and communications has a total 
of $38,000. 
 
Can you tell me what that difference is? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I can, Mr. Deputy Chair. That money 
has been spent over two years. So the figure that I think that 
you’re referring to would be a one-year figure, and the other 
part would have been expended in the other year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, so this is just the 
actual publication costs. Is there . . . do you keep track of who 
actually gathered the information, how it was received, and how 
it was compiled, the cost of the personnel involved to do this 
book? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We could try to break down the per 
cent of staff time that went into preparation, but also there 
would be expenses like purchasing StatsCanada runs on specific 
areas, that kind of thing. 
 
And certainly if the member wishes, Mr. Deputy Chair, to have 
that information we could certainly break it down. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, is it part of your 
policy in the secretariat to have a workload or a description 
each day of what your personnel do? Or is it just comes in in 
the morning and do whatever the phone calls ask you to do? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess it would be a little like this job, 
Mr. Chair. You look at your priorities. You allocate your staff 
time according to your priorities. And you work hard to get the 
job done and are accountable for completing the work that 
you’ve undertaken to complete in that given year. 
 
I think that it would be a very inefficient use of time to spend 
the time micromanaging in the way the member is suggesting. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, then that means 
that you have no . . . there’s really no deadlines or guidelines 
for the employees. And we have a certain number of staff — the 
staff complement hasn’t changed in the last number of years. 
 
So depending if there’s more people coming in or calls needing 
more help, do they . . . are they just put on those duties and then 
the books listing the profiles and the reports that are written, 
they just get put off longer? Well how do you actually run this 
department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Chair, I would have to say that it’s 
not like any business you would run or any other type of work 
you would do. You re-priorize. If you get an order that’s larger, 
you would re-priorize your work in order to do what was most 
important to get done. 
 
But I would say that I have not had any difficulties with this 
group of people completing the assignments that they’re given 
by executive government, nor have they had any difficulty in 
accounting for their actions — either to the deputy, to the 
Premier, or to the Treasury Board process so I do not interfere 
in their internal management. But every employee would have 
assignments that they’re working on and would have expected 



May 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1293 

deadlines that they should complete them by. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, I don’t believe it 
was a stupid question. I believe it is a question that the women 
of this province are asking. How are we actually making the 
best use of these dollars for a department that is supposed to 
deal with the issues that involve women in every aspect of this 
government and of the province? 
 
I’m asking: do you have a list of priorities? Do you have goals? 
You said Executive Council . . . executive government says 
they should do this is a list of documents or brochures that they 
want to put out. I’m also imagining you must get a lot of phone 
calls everyday from women calling in saying are you doing 
this? Is this on your list of priorities? 
 
Madam Minister, I guess I’m asking you what kind of priority 
list does your government give the secretariat? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, to a degree, Mr. Chair, we have 
our own long-term objectives within government, including 
participation on all the interdepartmental committees where 
women’s policy issues are discussed. But as well there are 
requests from groups to meet with them, to provide services to 
them. We had requests for example from farm women to talk 
about the way that the government is involved in supporting 
farm women and their organizations. 
 
So to a degree you have control over your time, and to a degree 
you’re responding to requests from the community as they 
emerge. So I would say probably you have control of about 
two-thirds of your time in terms of your ongoing work with 
departments and projects that are in progress. And probably 25 
per cent of the time would be responding to direct requests from 
the community for services that they want from the department. 
 
(1200) 
 
Without listing a very long list of meetings attended, events that 
we were involved in, reports, research done, I think it’s difficult 
to be any more specific than that about the member’s question. 
Every employee in government is subject to an evaluation 
process. I mean there are standard systems by which this kind 
of management takes place and this is no different. 
 
But certainly we keep track of it all, and on a case-by-case basis 
certainly the detail can be provided of all the meetings, events, 
etc., that are attended. 
 
For a few years as a MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) I provided those lists to my constituents of the pages 
and pages of meetings and whatnot attended. But part of the 
measure of what an organization does is the effectiveness of the 
results within the organization, not merely the busyness of the 
activity. 
 
So while it’s important to look at specific activities that are 
undertaken, it’s also specific to look at the impact that they 
have on the organization and the society. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
Madam Minister, there is personnel reports that were requested 
under the global questions, indicates that they were reported by 

Saskatchewan Labour — by your Department of Labour — not 
by the Women’s Secretariat. So I guess I’m just clarifying that 
indeed the employees of the Women’s Secretariat are paid by 
the department of . . . by the Women’s Secretariat and not by 
the Department of Labour? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Deputy Chair, this is a shared 
services arrangement with the Department of Labour so that 
there's not duplicate staff within the two departments. So 
they’re actually sharing the services of some of the 
administrative staff. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So then this $713,000 that is paid for by the 
Women’s Secretariat, some of it possibly could be done by the 
Department of Labour or perhaps Department of Labour is 
paying for some of the secretariat’s personnel. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This is not unlike the Department of 
Post-Secondary and the Department of Education where, 
instead of having two communications units and two 
administrative units, they have it all folded into a co-operative 
arrangement. So what this is, is an efficiency measure. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I’m just wondering if there 
was any money given to the farm stress line this year by your 
department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Not in this year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I’m wondering, the rent, 
you’d indicated there was about $78,000 rent you said paid. 
Could you clarify that? And is this . . . it’s about the same . . . is 
this a normal amount for the space that you have for your 
department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — SPMC, the Sask Property Management 
Corporation, assesses departmental needs and tries to find the 
most competitive market accommodation either within owned 
government space or within the private sector in the case that 
we don’t have sufficient space. But they certainly do an analysis 
of the space and an analysis of the best rate that they can get 
that space for. And that’s done for us by the Sask Property 
Management Corporation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I’m aware that the minister 
feels that a number of the questions that I’ve asked are stupid 
questions. I think maybe rather than — as indicated directly 
from the minister — then maybe what I’ll do rather than ask 
them individually is give you a list of them and perhaps then 
you’d like to give me a written reply from them, 
and then maybe take less of your time, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, I understand . . . we know that May 14 to 20 
was Purple Ribbon Awareness Week. We’re wondering what 
kind of special programs or services your department supported 
to raise the awareness of this important issue? 
 
Madam Minister, the YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 
were held here in Regina. I’m wondering if there was an 
attendance from your department . . . given by your 
department’s mandate. If so I’m wondering how many of your 
employees attended, and how much that cost was? 
 



1294 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2000 

Madam Minister, I’m wondering about the Battered Women 
Awareness Week that is held the first week in December, and 
the purpose of this week is to build safer communities and to 
reduce violence against women. We also have a Purple Ribbon 
Awareness Week, which we’re in this week, and the purpose of 
this week is to promote the elimination of violence against 
women. 
 
I certainly don’t want to negate the important messages and the 
significant impact these awareness weeks have, but I’m 
wondering if you can explain to me why we have two different 
weeks that are held essentially to promote the same thing? 
 
Madam Minister, we also have concerns that the Women’s 
Secretariat places a great deal of importance on the area of pay 
equity. Obviously this is an important element in the 
enhancement of women’s social and economic well-being. 
 
Would you please provide this caucus — who does care what’s 
happened to women and I don’t think any of these things are 
trivial that we’re talking about today — provide me with details 
that pay equity and initiatives that your department has 
undertaken and the result of these initiatives. And what pay 
equity programs have you planned for the coming fiscal year? 
 
Also, Madam Minister, regarding unpaid work, I note there is a 
significant number of women who are considered unpaid 
workers. Obviously in this supposed age of progress there needs 
to be some attention given to this. What role does the Women’s 
Secretariat play in addressing these issues? And what programs 
and services do you feel we should be putting forward to make 
sure that this . . . that we can go . . . that this work will go as a 
recognized part of the labour force? 
 
And, Madam Minister, we have a very high number of 
single-parent families in this province. On an average I note that 
one out of ten single-parent families has a woman as head of 
these. What measures is your secretariat taking to place . . . help 
address this very crucial issue for women in this province? 
 
Madam Minister, we are also worried about the issue of 
violence against women, and I’d like to speak on this matter 
specifically as it pertains to Aboriginal women. 
 
Records recently indicate that over half of the women who use 
shelters are Aboriginal. And I believe that is correct. And also, 
within the Aboriginal community, it’s estimated that 60 to 70 
per cent of family violence and sexual assault is going 
unreported. Is your department working on that issue, Madam 
Minister? 
 
And I’d also like to talk about Aboriginal women who face 
sexual and economic barriers to both race and gender. I see 
there is a significantly high number of Aboriginal women who 
are unable to find employment in this great province of 
Saskatchewan. What is the women’s department, what is your 
secretariat doing about that, Madam Minister? 
 
Madam Minister, we have an increasingly large number of 
senior women in our province — women whose needs will be 
specific to their age group. And they will be concerned about 
things like adequate health care, affordable housing, access to 
essential services. Does the Women’s Secretariat have any 

long-range plans in mind for the women in this province? 
 
Madam Minister, I also note that in a recent annual report that 
an evaluation was to be done on the women’s on-line program. 
I’d like to see some of that information made available to the 
women of this province. 
 
Is the Women’s Secretariat still involved with the RESOLVE 
(Research and Education for Solution to Violence and Abuse) 
committee, a regional research network involving the three 
prairie provinces that does research and education on ending 
violence and abuse? How closely are we working with Alberta 
and Manitoba? Is this more of a research resource centre? And 
would anyone be able to access information through this or are 
there just those involved directly in the community? 
 
Madam Minister, if we’re going to look at out-of-scope 
employees making greater than $50,000 a year, what proportion 
of those employees would be men and what proportion would 
be women in your government? 
 
Madam Minister, the list of questions that I have for your 
department can go on and on. And although many people look 
at this as a department and a secretariat that isn’t worthwhile, 
you and I both know, Madam Minister, it is very worthwhile. 
And I don’t think there’s any point in anybody becoming . . . 
saying that this is a touchy issue or a silly issue or something 
that we shouldn’t be looking at, Madam Minister. 
 
If we’re going to make women important in this province, it 
cannot be delegated to one little secretariat that gets $1.1 
million and that we bring up women’s issues in one little 
department, then we forget about them the rest of the time. 
Women’s issues are something that’s seen right across the 
whole government. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I think rather than listening to these . . . 
waiting for you to respond to them all, perhaps you’d like to 
give me a written answer to most of them, and I’ll send over 
some more if you would take them. And perhaps if there’s 
questions or answers you’d like to see given to everyone in this 
province, we can bring it up again at another day. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The 
questions that I was taking exception to was suggesting that the 
department doesn’t do work on a daily basis. Other than that, 
we are more than happy to address all of your questions, 
because that’s what we are here for. But I am not prepared to 
say that any women, particularly the women in that department, 
don’t do their work everyday. 
 
Now, I’m going to answer many of these questions briefly 
because they all have answers. And I’ll just mention that the 
Women’s Secretariat is on 25 interdepartmental committees 
within government that bring women’s perspectives into the 
policy making. So they have a significant effect on all levels — 
whether it’s Economic Development, whether it’s Social 
Services, whether it’s a child action plan, whether it’s Health 
policy — the people from the Women’s Secretariat have a 
substantial affect on every department in government. 
 
In terms of family violence. The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Act, the Saskatchewan partnership to ending violence, which is 



May 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1295 

a community partnership that has wide representation, the 
alternatives to violence programs through the Department of 
Health, the funding of shelters, the charging policies through 
the Department of Justice that allows charges to be laid by 
police, the farm stress line — these are all things that the 
Women’s Secretariat is involved in offering support and 
assistance to. 
 
In the area of pay equity, we have almost completed our pay 
equity exercise in executive government and in the Crown 
Corporations, and we will now need to look at where that will 
go next. 
 
When you talk about single parents, you voted against the 
budget, and the fact of the matter is many of the tax changes 
that existed in this budget are going to be hugely beneficial to 
single parents. Fifty-five thousand low income people will be 
removed from the tax rolls. Many of those will be low-income 
Aboriginal women and single parents and seniors. 
 
And I’ll also mention that a basic credit of $8,000, as well as a 
spousal equivalent of $8,000, a child credit of 2,500 per child, 
and a supplemental senior credit of 1,000 were all parts of the 
budget that the Women’s Secretariat were involved in in order 
to benefit the economic condition of women and of single 
parents and of senior women and Aboriginal women. 
 
Particularly regarding Aboriginal women, I think I mentioned 
the last time we spoke, Mr. Chair, that we’ve done considerable 
work with Aboriginal women’s organizations, so they have a 
stronger voice within the Aboriginal governments, who also 
allocate resources to various things within their community. 
And these women are certainly interested in having the kind of 
issues that the member is raising being more on the forefront of 
their agenda within their organizations. 
 
And if you would like to know the figures for employment 
within the government, I would suggest that that question is 
most appropriately addressed to the minister responsible for the 
Public Service Commission, although certainly we can 
undertake to let her know that you are intending to ask that 
question. 
 
And I think at that, Mr. Chair, I would certainly make a 
commitment to the member to answer all of her substantive 
questions about the Women’s Secretariat because there is 
substantive answers for all of them, and we certainly agree with 
the importance of women’s programs, services, and policy 
development in the province. As well as our long-term goal of 
the Secretariat, just to reaffirm it in people’s mind, is to ensure 
progress in the social and economic equality of women. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
I really appreciated you saying that there was 23 different 
interdepartmental agencies that the department had to work 
with; I also understand that there’s really only 13 staff 
members, and you say that two-thirds of their time is spent with 
things that have to be dealt with on the department level and the 
other third is spent on phone calls that just come into the office. 
 
So obviously this is a very, very, busy department, and 
obviously there isn’t enough time to deal with women’s issues. 
The Saskatchewan Party and I feel like women’s issues is in 

every department — it’s just not regulated to one little 
department. 
 
Madam Minister, you talk about $120,000 for communication. 
Will you break that down further? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll just clarify with the members, the 
question for 1999-2000? 
 
Ms. Draude: — That’s correct, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay. Well I will read it into the record 
for the member. The annual report printing, 1,571; Impact 
Summer ’99, which is an update newsletter, $774.44; Impact 
Fall ’99, $188.60. 
 
Profile of Aboriginal Women in Saskatchewan, the design, 
$7,339.64; printing, $28,577. The publication on rural women, 
Thirteen Women . . . Thirteen Different Stories, design, $2,968 
and printing, 8,670. Control Your Financial Future, 3,946; 
Money Smarts Learning Resource, printing design, 2,884 — oh, 
the design part was 587. The pay equity policy framework 
document, $1,889.21. 
 
The Moms on the Move brochure, 1,779.81, printing $920; 
Moms on the Move poster, $1,248.52, printing $900. Flexible 
Work Arrangements, $998; 2000 Saskatchewan Women’s 
Directory, $13,548.52; an information kit folder, $1,285. The 
Wage Gap publication, $1,660.30; Employment Equity for 
Women, $492; Funding Opportunities for Saskatchewan 
Women and Families, $4,048; and Sources of Support for 
Saskatchewan Women in Business, $3,300. For a total of 
$89,575.04. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Which is different than the 120,000 that you 
mentioned at the beginning when you talked about 
communications being $120,000. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The balance of money is things like 
duplicating, advertising, and inter-departmental initiatives. It’s 
not specific to a project. It’s more the general expenditures on 
those things. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Just general advertising. Who are you 
advertising with, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — These would be things like . . . 
(inaudible) . . . major landmark days or major events involving 
women. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, who does your advertising? 
Who does your advertising, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We advertise in The Leader-Post and 
the dailies and the agent for our communications is Quest 
Communications. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister. I have a large number of the 
questions that I asked you before, most of them are written and 
I’m going to send them over. And I would appreciate a response 
to them. And I have no further questions, and I’d like to thank 



1296 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2000 

your officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would like to thank the member for 
her questions, Mr. Chair, and to assure her that we will do 
everything we can to give the most complete information over. 
 
Subvote (WS01) agreed to. 
 
Subvote (WS02) agreed to. 
 
Vote 41 agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn and also that we have a great weekend. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I adjourn the House, hon. members, I 
want to wish you a safe, happy, holiday weekend with your 
loved ones and in your constituencies. And please come back 
safely when this House reconvenes at 1:30 p.m. Wednesday 
next. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:27 p.m. 
 
 


