





























































Hansard: May 24, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1297 
 May 24, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to the House signed by the good citizens of Gull 
Lake. And it deals with a request for a reduction in fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present a petition for improved cellular telephone coverage in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
And the petitioners on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Cudworth, from Saskatoon, from Rockglen, and Regina, 
Saskatchewan, as well as Craven. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the increasing cost of fuel. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from my 
community of Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 
regards to the high price of fuel. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and the signatures are from the community of 

Govan. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
stand today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens concerned about the high cost of fuel. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the signatures on this are from Govan. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people primarily from my constituency also concerned about 
the high price of fuel. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And all of the petitioners on this particular one, Mr. Speaker, 
are from Swift Current, save one who is from Regina Beach. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition to reduce fuel 
tax by 10 cents a litre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures here are all from the town of Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I rise 
to bring a petition to oppose enforced municipal amalgamation. 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



1298 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people from the Rural 
Municipality of Paddockwood, No. 520. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today regarding a petition to reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the petitioners are from the good village of Shell Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petition has been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) it is hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly: 
 

To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 50 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan): what is the average age of vehicles insured 
by SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) at this 
time? 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 50 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

Does SGI charge people who incur vehicle damage due to 
highway conditions a $100 surcharge on their drivers’ 
licences, registrations, or auto insurance if they make a 
claim? Is this surcharge applied in those cases where the 
Department of Highways accepts responsibility for the 
damage? If so, is this policy under review? 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 50 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many MRIs (magnetic 
resonance imaging) are provided annually in 
Saskatchewan, and what is the cost to the health system to 
provide an MRI? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it is a great honour to introduce 
through you and to the members of the Assembly, a class of 38 
students from Colonsay from my constituency. They’re 

accompanied with their teachers Les Eley, Kathy Weir, Bev 
Eley, and Lynsey Wilkins. They’re seated in the east gallery. 
 
Would you please join me to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the rest of the members of 
the House, 49 students sitting in your west gallery from St. 
Philip School, grades 6, 7, and 8. 
 
They’re with their teacher John Bundgaard and Brad Ehr, and 
chaperones Rod Shivak, Mr. and Mrs. Thompson, and Krissy 
Haynes.. Welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
legislature, a group of grade 6 to 9 students from the 
Countryside Mennonite School at Saltcoats. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher Ms. Rogers and a number of 
parents and chaperones. 
 
I would ask the members of the legislature to welcome them 
here today. I’ll be meeting with them later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
legislature, a number of people who are sprinkled in different 
galleries here so I can’t point to the specific gallery, but I’ll ask 
them to stand in a minute. 
 
These are the people who have quite literally built this province, 
Mr. Speaker. They’re the trades people who have built the 
houses, done the plumbing, done the wiring, done the steel 
work, done all the work that goes into all the construction and 
trades in this province. 
 
And because there’s a number of folks, I won’t go name by 
name, but I just ask you to welcome these people who are here 
to see today the second reading of The Construction Industry 
Labour Relations Amendment Act. If you could stand and be 
recognized, and we’ll welcome you to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
extend a welcome to the tradespeople and the construction 
workers of this province. I’m glad you could make it today. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 
to introduce to you and through you to all of the members of the 
Assembly, four people seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Two 
of them are constituents of mine. Chad and Jaime McCormick 
are brother and sister and son and daughter of John McCormick, 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) candidate in Moosomin 



May 24, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1299 

during the last election. 
 
With Chad and Jaime, Mr. Speaker, are two of their friends, Jen 
Cronk, who is a resident of Saskatchewan but who was invited 
and has spent two years playing baseball in Australia and 
working there, and Jen is back potentially for good, but it’s 
unresolved yet whether she’ll be redrafted to Australia. 
 
And another friend is Paul Simon, who is a resident of Perth, 
Australia, and Paul is visiting Saskatchewan for the next nine 
months. This is Paul’s first visit to Canada and I ask all 
members to help me in welcoming him to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Humboldt Company Receives Funding 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
in the House today to announce more good news for the 
province of Saskatchewan. Today the Minister of Economic 
Development and her federal counterpart were in Humboldt to 
announce $331,175 in funding under the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Western Economic Partnership Agreement, or WEPA, to 
Western Canada Testing Inc. 
 
This funding will help Saskatchewan take a big step toward 
opening up new export markets in Europe for agricultural 
equipment manufacturers by helping manufacturers across 
Western Canada meet stringent European Union import 
requirements for machinery. 
 
This project responds to the needs voiced by the agricultural 
implement industry. The project will give the industry a 
competitive edge and increased sales to the European Union. 
Over the next 10 years this project could create more than 1,100 
person-years of employment in the agricultural implement 
manufacturing sector and increase sales to the European Union 
countries by $134 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan continues to be known for its 
innovative agricultural equipment industry. This project will 
continue to see our top quality farm equipment at work all 
around the world. 
 
My congratulations to all the partners involved in the project 
and to the dynamic town of Humboldt whose success in 
economic development continues to be a model for rural 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Trans Canada Trail Relay 2000 Celebrations in Borden 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
night I had the privilege of attending the Trans Canada Trail 
Relay 2000 celebrations in Borden. Borden was selected as one 
of the many trail of celebrating communities and will be having 
a stretch of the Trans Canada Trail passing on the outskirts of 
its community. 
 
The trail is the longest shared-use recreational trail in the world, 

spanning 16,100 kilometres and joining the Arctic, Atlantic, and 
Pacific oceans. It will accommodate the five core activities — 
walking, biking, cross-country skiing, horseback riding, and 
snowmobiling. 
 
Eight water carriers were also selected from Borden. I would 
like to congratulate Brian Kraft, Julia and Jeanette Unruh, Jenna 
Rempel, Meaghan Dyck, Don Sutherland, Lore Neufeld, and 
Lorraine Olinyk for being chosen to take part in the historic 
relay that is transporting water from the Arctic, Atlantic, and 
Pacific oceans to its final destination in the National Capital 
Region where it will be symbolically poured into a newly 
constructed Trans Canada Trail fountain to officially proclaim 
the opening of the Trans Canada Trail on September 9, 2000. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the members of the Trans 
Canada Trail Relay 2000 committee and the Riverbend Trans 
Canada Trail Incorporated for organizing the celebration in 
Borden and putting on the festivities worthy of such a historic 
event, as well as dedicating their time and efforts in the building 
of the trail near Borden. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina’s Cathedral Village Arts Festival 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I want to borrow a line from US 
(United States) Senate candidate, Hillary Clinton, who as you 
know wrote a book called It Takes a Village. Well actually, Mr. 
Speaker, she stole that line from me, because every year at this 
time I remind members that it’s time for them to come to the 
Cathedral Village Arts Festival, the annual spring festival in my 
constituency, which utilizes the talent and energy of virtually 
everybody in the community. It’s a truly unique event put on by 
a unique community. 
 
The 10th festival began on Monday, carries through to 
Saturday. And, Mr. Speaker, the Village Festival has food and 
drink, classical organists performing at the Holy Rosary 
Cathedral, drama and poetry, jugglers, jazz, folk, rock and roll, 
face painting, a pancake brunch — and that’s just for openers. 
 
The Cathedral Village Arts Festival features performances by 
one of the smallest demographic groups in North America: an 
English-Canadian, grandmother, MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), cabinet minister Libra drummer with 
the Cathedral Village Drum Circle — I’m afraid I’m a 
demographic group of one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So come to the Holy Rosary on Friday at 8:30, Mr. Speaker, 
and we’ll have your shoes off and your toes tapping before you 
know it 
 
And my congratulations to creative director, Donna Kriekle, 
and the whole village for this annual work of art and love. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Old Time Fiddle Jamboree in Battleford 
 

Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Battleford will be 
a busy place this weekend as the Battleford Royal Canadian 
Legion hosts the fourth annual Old Time Fiddle Jamboree, 



1300 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2000 

which will be held Saturday, May 27 in the Battleford Arena. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in four short years, this fiddle jamboree has 
become quite a tradition in my constituency. This year’s 
program features many local entertainers as well as some 
national and international talent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, events like this are not easy to plan, and I would 
like to take this opportunity to commend all those people in the 
Battleford who — and surrounding areas — who have worked 
so hard to make this jamboree possible. And to the rest of the 
people of Saskatchewan, I would like to invite you to come to 
Battleford for what promises to be a very entertaining and fun 
day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tourism Training 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the Land of the Living 
Skies, our beautiful land of lakes, forests, plains, rural life and 
urban diversity provides our fourth largest economic sector. 
 
Tourism in Saskatchewan, which includes attractions like the 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) museum here in 
Regina and Ron and Kathy Chaplin’s bed and breakfast in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Southeast, generates something like 
a billion and a half dollars annually and employs 42,000 people. 
Those numbers are expected to grow to $2 billion and 65,000 
workers in 10 years by which time you and I, Mr. Speaker, will 
have greater opportunity to sample the delights offered to the 
tourists to Saskatchewan. 
 
So it is with pleasure and anticipation that I inform the House 
that today our very busy Minister of Economic Development 
and of the Internet Highway along with Saskatchewan’s federal 
minister, Mr. Goodale, announced a $299,000 program to help 
Saskatchewan tourism operators improve their services to the 
public. 
 
This program, funded by the WEPA agreement will provide 
tourism workers with training using the latest information 
technology. This means they can learn the jobs of tomorrow at 
home. The training comes to them, not the reverse. 
 
Good news for them, for the industry, and for tourists. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Bed for Cancer Patients 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
honoured to rise today in this Hon. Assembly to bring mention 
of a person from the city of Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, Tannice 
Thompson has brought great distinction to herself and to the 
Victoria hospital foundation. 
 
Ms. Thompson took the initiative, because of her caring heart, 
to provide cancer patients receiving chemotherapy a great deal 
more comfort than was previously experienced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Tannice challenged her colleagues and all 

residents of Prince Albert and district to provide the funds 
necessary to equip the cancer unit with a $9,000 Hilrom bed. To 
her amazement, Tannice was so successful that she was not 
only able to raise enough money for one bed, but with a single 
contribution of $9,000 from the Royal Canadian Legion was 
able to amass enough funds to purchase two of these beds and 
have more than $10,000 left over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is people like Tannice Thompson who are 
making a positive difference in Saskatchewan and 
Saskatchewan hospitals. Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all 
members of the Assembly join me in congratulating Tannice 
Thompson. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mining Week 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to 
rise in the House today to recognize Mining Week. It would be 
hard to overstate the contributions of the mining industry to 
Saskatchewan’s economy. We are among the largest exporters 
of potash and uranium in the world. 
 
Mining is Saskatchewan’s third largest industry and employs 
almost 20,000 people directly or indirectly. We all know how 
important this industry is to the province, and this week serves 
to make all of our citizens aware of the benefits of 
Saskatchewan’s mining industry. 
 
Mining has changed to reflect new technologies. Information 
technology is one of the fastest growing career areas in the 
mining industry. Right now, 85 per cent of the mining 
workforce uses advanced technology. Leading edge technology 
not only contributes to the cost efficiency and productivity of 
mines but also to their safety. Advanced technology also makes 
it possible for mines to be more environmentally friendly. 
 
I wish to congratulate all workers employed in the mining 
sector, including those in research and development, for their 
contributions to this industry. Their knowledge and innovation 
has made this industry the success it is today. 
 
Saskatchewan greatly values the contributions of the mining 
industry. For our top-notch mining industry not only contributes 
to our province, it contributes to the rest of Canada and to the 
world. 
 
Once again, I want to congratulate the mining industry for a job 
well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Health Care Review 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Just a few days ago, the 
Premier admitted he couldn’t convince the Prime Minister to 
hire him to do a health care review. So the Premier has decided 
now that there will be a provincial review undertaken. 
 



May 24, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1301 

Madam Minister, the Saskatchewan Party has been calling for a 
comprehensive review of the health care system since October 
of 1998. Over and over we have said a review would help us 
determine how provincial health care dollars are being spent, 
but it took the NDP to suffer a near-death experience in the 
provincial election before they sought treatment. And that only 
with life-support from the Liberals. 
 
Now a year and a half later, a year and a half after the 
Saskatchewan Party introduced the idea, the Premier has 
admitted it is needed. 
 
Madam Minister, when can we expect this provincial health 
care review to get under way? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I 
happen to have a copy of The Way Up which was the Sask 
Party’s election campaign material and just for the recollection 
of the member, at no place do I see anything about a review. 
What I do see is a value-for-money audit of the health system 
where, Mr. Speaker, listen to this — the Provincial Auditor will 
have the authority to consult with health care specialists and 
economists as required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not talking about the Provincial Auditor 
adding up columns of money in terms of expenditures and 
revenues, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking about a review of 
medicare in the province of Saskatchewan which would ensure, 
Mr. Speaker, that it is publicly funded and publicly 
administrated and sustains us into the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. At least the 
minister has got some good reading over there. That’s a good 
first step. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have been asking the Minister of Health 
to release the proposed budgets of the health districts to the 
public, but so far she has refused. 
 
She even placed a gag order on health district board members to 
try to keep their budget plans quiet. But some plans for service 
and facility cuts have been revealed by board members who 
refused to be muzzled. 
 
Yet in the midst of all the speculation fuelled by the minister 
who refuses to be open with the public, now we hear the 
Premier talk about a health care review. The critical question, 
however, is whether or not this review will take place before or 
after the health districts go ahead with cutbacks to health 
services in this budget year. 
 
Madam Minister, can you assure the public today that there will 
be no hospital or health facility closures and no health service 
cutbacks in this province until this review is completed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I see that The Way Up has 
some other interesting things to say about health care. And, Mr. 

Speaker, you will know that for some time now the 
government, the coalition government, has been calling on 
Ottawa to restore its funding to health services all across this 
country. 
 
And you will know that hundreds and hundreds of millions of 
dollars — billions of dollars in fact — tens of billions of dollars 
have been taken out of the health system in this country. And it 
has created huge problems for health systems across Canada, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I can say is that we’re continuing to discuss with the 
federal government the need to restore the Canada Health and 
Social Transfer in order that we can sustain health services into 
the future, Mr. Speaker. I can say this, that we continue to 
support a publicly administered, publicly funded health system 
in this country. We’re not going to go to private surgical clinics 
like those . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is looking back 
into history, and she forgot to answer my question. She did 
review our policy, which I would remind the House more 
people voted for than for her position. 
 
And speaking of history, Mr. Speaker, the NDP closed 52 
hospitals in Saskatchewan under the disguise of something they 
dreamed up called the wellness model. They said it would help 
stabilize health care in this province. 
 
In 1998 they closed the Plains hospital, saying it would stabilize 
health care services in the Regina area. Well health care in 
Saskatchewan is anything but stable these days. 
 
Health care districts are facing huge deficits, board members are 
resigning under this minister, specialists are leaving, 
recruitments of doctors and nurses is difficult because we have 
a system under siege. 
 
It makes no sense at all to conduct a review after another round 
of health facility and service cutbacks take place because it’s 
too costly and too difficult to go back . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, please. I just . . . 
Order. I remind the hon. member . . . quite lengthy in a 
preamble. Kindly go to your question. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question to 
the minister: why would you approve cuts to services and 
closure of health care facilities before a comprehensive review 
of our health system takes place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s always important that 
we remind members of some of their previous comments. And, 
Mr. Speaker, what I would like to remind the member opposite, 
the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party, is his comments from February 15, 1994 on page 1409 of 
Hansard in the House of Commons. Just listen. 



1302 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, he says . . . Mr. Speaker, he says: 
 

I know that most Canadians place a high priority in health 
care. We had governments that liked to build monuments; 
that liked to build hospitals. We probably have more 
hospitals than in any other part of Canada. Unfortunately, 
we now have no money to operate those hospitals. Our 
priorities were probably wrong. In fact, I’m sure they were 
wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, then we have a member say on March 20 of 
this year — he urged Ottawa to hold back on cash to this 
province until we completed a provincial audit by the Provincial 
Auditor. Well, Mr. Speaker, how ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the minister quoted correctly: I am concerned about 
health care. And governments in the past, including her 
government, have mishandled health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party would welcome — would 
welcome — a complete review of the provincial health system. 
After all, it was our idea. But we know how system reviews by 
this government are handled. The no-fault insurance review has 
been the most expensive review that has never taken place. 
 
So we want to make sure that if this government conducts a 
health care review, it is done by a qualified, independent body 
with clear terms of reference and open public and stakeholder 
discussion. Don’t take a good idea from the Saskatchewan Party 
and mess it up. 
 
Madam Minister, will you table the terms of reference for this 
health care review in the House for open debate so the public 
will have confidence in the process? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe on 
Thursday, May 18 in Hansard he will find that I indicated at the 
time that there would either be a federal health review in the 
country or there would be a health review in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What I can tell the member is that the terms of reference and 
mandate will not be about two-tier health care in this province. 
It will not be about private health care. It will not be about 
private surgical clinics that allow private hospitals to 
overcharge. 
 
It will not, Mr. Speaker, violate the principles of the Canada 
Health Act, which that party calls mindless slogans, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister refuses to 
answer my question. The minister spoke with the media last 
week, outside this House, and said there would be a chance for 
public discussion on health district budgets after they were 
approved. That is forecast to be in June. 
 
So many public consultations will happen halfway through the 
budget year and when budget plans are already being 
implemented. That makes absolutely no sense. 

Any review of the provincial health care system must not be 
backwards and should not include process for public and 
stakeholder involvement. Health care providers at all levels 
need to have input during any review. 
 
Health district board members who represent the public need to 
be able to openly discuss the challenges they have faced and 
their ideas for improvement without worry of retribution from 
your department. 
 
Madam Minister, will you assure, will you assure this House an 
independent review process with complete and open 
consultation of all stakeholders? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I can assure the member is that this year for the first time 
in many years, we will have health plans approved in June. Mr. 
Speaker, if you look at previous years, health plans have not 
been approved until the fall or into the new year, Mr. Speaker. 
So we’ve tried to improve the process where we would have 
health plans approved in June. And I think that’s a positive 
thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I can tell the member is that health plans by the province 
will be put into a provincial context which is welcomed by 
health districts across this province, because we’re looking at 
this from a provincial plan point of view. The health plans will 
either be varied, they will be approved, or they will not be 
approved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can assure the health districts that they will have lots of 
opportunities to consult with the many stakeholders who are 
interested in health care, and most importantly, Mr. Speaker, 
they will have an opportunity to discuss the health plans with 
the public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Construction Industry Union Legislation 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Labour. Mr. Speaker, today the Minister of Labour will give 
second reading of her forced unionization Bill in spite of the 
fact that she has just received a letter from the Saskatchewan 
Chamber of Commerce asking her not to proceed with this 
destructive legislation. 
 
At their recent meeting in Prince Albert, chamber members 
passed a resolution strongly opposing this Bill. They have now 
sent that message to the Minister of Labour and the Premier. 
Madam Minister, these are the people who create the jobs in 
this province. They have sent you a clear message. Are you 
listening? 
 
Madam Minister, will you withdraw your forced unionization 
Bill? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I continue to wonder what 
the members opposite have against working people in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 24, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1303 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This Bill does not give people any 
rights that don’t exist everywhere else in Canada. It doesn’t 
require that the industry operate under any different rules that 
exist anywhere else in Canada. And why the members opposite 
think our construction companies and workers should have a 
lower standard here, I don’t understand that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, well the minister always likes to 
say that it’s the same rules across Canada, but the people of 
Saskatchewan know better. Madam Minister, you keep saying 
this isn’t about forced unionization. The Saskatchewan chamber 
says that’s exactly what it’s about. I’d like to quote from the 
letter you got from the chamber. It says, and I quote: 
 

Although your statements surrounding the amendments 
claim they will not require all construction workers to 
automatically become members of a union, clearly the 
amendments have that very result. 
 

Madam Minister, you’re not fooling anyone. The goal of this 
legislation is to force every construction worker in this province 
into a union. Madam Minister, why won’t you listen to what the 
chamber is telling you. Why are you proceeding with this 
forced unionization policy? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, there is no country in the 
G-7 economies where people don’t have the right to unionize. 
It’s a fundamental part of a democratic economy. And the fact 
of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And the fact of the matter is, is that for 
the past 25 years, regardless of the government in power, no 
one has changed the rules around the certification or 
decertification of unions in this province. 
 
And this one’s the only piece of legislation that wasn’t in step 
with the rest in this regard, Mr. Speaker. So I just say that if 
we’re going to operate competitively in a global economy, we 
need to do it from the basis of the commonly accepted rights. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Madam Minister, here’s another quote from the 
chamber’s letter: 
 

The Saskatchewan Chamber . . . has spent the last several 
months developing the first phase of an action plan . . . to 
make this province a place where people want to live, 
work, and invest. 
 
Moves such as this amendment are viewed as 
anti-business, and make it difficult for all . . . (those who) 
are attempting to place Saskatchewan in the forefront of 
economic development and job creation . . . 
 

Madam Minister, the Saskatchewan chamber is trying to build 
our economy. They are telling you this legislation will hurt our 
economy. Why won’t you listen? 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, these were the very same 
laws we had during the years the Saskatchewan economy was 
booming in the ’70s; there’s no difference. And if they can 
explain to me please, why it boomed then and it isn’t going to 
boom now, I’d like to know. 
 
I know it upsets them that we have 10,000 new jobs this year. I 
know it upsets them that we have some of the lowest costs for 
businesses operating anywhere in Canada or the United States. 
We have lower capital tax, lower employee cost, lower health 
costs. We have manufacturing and processing tax credits. We 
have everything that people would need here to operate 
successfully and competitively. And I ask them, what’s their 
problem with a bit of good news? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what this minister 
and this government has against the democratic process. Why 
don’t they allow the workers of this province to vote if they 
want a union or not? 
 
Madam Minister, the chamber has raised another concern you 
obviously don’t care about — the harmful effect your Bill will 
have on First Nations’ businesses. The chamber says, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . the Provincial Chamber is also very concerned with the 
impact of your amendments on companies who have 
joint-ventured with First Nations (representatives). . . 

 
Madam Minister, the chamber says this legislation will hurt 
First Nations’ businesses right at a time when they are trying to 
get ahead by building partnerships with other Saskatchewan 
companies. Madam Minister, your government should be 
helping First Nations’ workers and businesses build these 
partnerships. Instead you’re kicking them down. 
 
Madam Minister, the chamber is telling you this legislation will 
hurt First Nations’ businesses. Why won’t you listen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s difficult to keep 
up with the amount of information that is not totally accurate in 
this House, but the fact of the matter is there are as many 
examples of partnerships in the unionized as the non-unionized 
sector regarding Aboriginal employment. I mention the 
Alliance Pipeline. 
 
But I have to say to the members opposite, that when they ask 
us to do things differently, or at a lower standard than exists in 
other provinces in Canada, I just can’t understand what their 
motivation would be. 
 
And certainly we appreciate what the chamber of commerce 
says and often the government acts on what the chamber of 
commerce says, as it does on what other people say. But I have 
to say that, in this particular regard, we have a body of law here 
that exists in democratic economies and we plan to keep it that 
way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1304 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2000 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the minister refuses to tell us the 
real reasons behind this legislation. Fortunately the chamber 
gives us that answer too. The chamber says, and I quote: 
 

. . . the amendments you have introduced have nothing to 
do with workers and wages, and everything to do with 
politics. 
 

Madam Minister, this Bill has nothing to do with workers. 
Workers don’t want it. It has nothing to do with wages. 
Non-union construction wages are competitive and in some 
cases even higher than union wages. This Bill is about politics. 
It’s a political payoff to the unions who bankroll the NDP. 
 
Madam Minister, if you won’t listen to us, will you listen . . . at 
least listen to the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce and 
withdraw this legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t like to keep 
bringing this up but anybody who accepts donations from 
Conrad Black isn’t sitting on very solid ground. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The fact of the matter is, is what this 
Bill does is exactly what the member opposite is opposing. It 
gives people the right to certify if they wish and it gives people 
the right to decertify if they wish. So how that is not exactly in 
keeping with what this member says they want, is for people to 
have the choice — I don’t understand it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Representative Area Networks in Northern Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Environment minister. Mr. Minister, your 
department is in the process of establishing a series of 
representative area networks in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Would you explain to the House what a representative area 
network is, and why your government is establishing them in 
northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to the 
member, I thank him for the question and after several weeks of 
sitting in the Assembly waiting for questions, I really do 
appreciate some of these questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, the 
representative area networks is what Saskatchewan is working 
with a number of different groups on throughout the province. 
We’re trying to take the different landscapes in the province of 
Saskatchewan to try and see if we can keep them as they are so 
we’re able to appreciate the environment in which we live and 
for generations to come. 
 

And northern Saskatchewan certainly is one of the areas that 
we’re looking at. At this stage of the game, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
not going to spread doom and gloom when it comes to the RAN 
(representative areas network) program. 
 
We are now working with a number of northern groups and 
northern leaders and northern people to tell them, is the RAN 
program something you guys can embrace. And if you can 
embrace that, we’d like to implement that so we’re able to 
protect various sections of Saskatchewan’s environment. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, another question for the 
Environment minister. Mr. Minister, as we understand it, the 
representative area networks or RANs are basically large tracts 
of lands in northern Saskatchewan that are being identified as 
no-development zones. 
 
How many RANs is your department establishing, and how 
much land will be subject to no further economic development 
as a result? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this government and this 
minister is committed to the balance between the environmental 
protection that is needed in this province and the economic 
building that is necessary to create a very good economy for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We are going to continue building on that, Mr. Speaker. And 
what we’re not going to do is spread doom and gloom like the 
Saskatchewan Party is, trying to divide the environmental 
interest with the economic interest of the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I urge that member to take that approach. 
 
And in reference to his question, there are RAN sites in 
northern Saskatchewan that we are working towards. And 
second point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is to also point out 
within a certain provincial park — La Ronge park to be specific 
— we have established a mine and we have done no work to 
destroy the environment. We had the mine proceed. The mine is 
now done and the environment has been kept as it was. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to the balance 
between the environmental needs and the economic building 
that is necessary for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, your department’s decision to severely restrict 
development in the North has a lot of people very concerned. 
 
On May 9, the La Ronge Mineral Industry Group wrote to you 
with a number of concerns about the representative area 
networks. Together they employ hundreds of northern people 
and generate significant tax revenue for the government. 
 
Mr. Minister, the La Ronge Mineral Industry Group is strongly 
opposed to the arbitrary established . . . 



May 24, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1305 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order please. I’m sure we’d all 
like to hear the question. I’m having a difficult time hearing the 
hon. member. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This group 
claims that the way in which you are going about establishing 
these RANs will further discourage business investment in the 
North and will have a serious, negative impact on the entire 
provincial economy. 
 
Mr. Minister, if Northerners say the establishment — the 
arbitrary establishment of large, no-development zones will hurt 
the economy, kill jobs, and chase businesses out; why are you 
going ahead with these projects in this fashion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, I 
appreciate the question in the House and also invite the member 
to come to my office. I’ll explain the whole RAN program to 
him in detail. 
 
But what I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, this government and 
this minister’s going to continue looking for that balance. We 
have been doing some significant consultation and work with 
the people of the North, with the different environmental 
groups, and also with the people that are involved with 
economic building within the province. 
 
And what is amazing to me, Mr. Speaker, what is totally 
amazing to me is you start hearing some northern concerns, 
environmental concerns, from a party that has never done 
anything significant for the North, and has on many occasions, 
through the history of this province and right across the country 
of Canada, has never had the environmental agenda on their list 
at all. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, it’s not just these groups that have had these concerns. 
I just met with the World Wildlife Fund. The World Wildlife 
Fund says they submitted a number of potential RAN sites to 
you based on scientific research but your government hasn’t 
responded. They, as well as the mining and exploration 
industry, are angry that the NDP is arbitrarily proceeding with 
the RAN projects without adequate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — . . . without consideration for their input. 
 
Mr. Minister, here’s where both industry and environmental 
groups agree. They think your arbitrary process is flawed and 
harmful. And the first casualties of your mismanagement are 
Northern people, your constituents, who will lose their jobs. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you step in today and put a stop to this 
process until you have consulted with all the stakeholders? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to 

respond to that member’s questions. I want to point out on one 
hand a few questions ago he asked me, what are you doing; 
you’re destroying the economy. And now he quotes the wildlife 
federation. Make up your mind. Do you want less RANs or do 
you want more RANs? 
 
The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is this government, this minister 
has an agenda. We’re going to balance all the interests of the 
people of Saskatchewan as best as we can. 
 
And when he talks about the environment, he talks about the 
North, he talks about the jobs, I can get the Minister of 
Northern Affairs to give him all the stats he needs until it’s 
coming out of his ears. 
 
The bottom line is this party, this government, is going to 
balance the interests of the economy and the environment and 
Northern interests — something that that party has never done 
and will never do. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Land Titles Act, 2000 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I move that 
Bill No. 55, The Land Titles Act, 2000 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Land Titles Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 apportant des 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée 
The Land Titles Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move that 
Bill No. 56, The Land Titles Consequential Amendment Act, 
2000 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Land Surveys Act, 2000 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I move that Bill No. 57, The Land 
Surveys Act, 2000 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Condominium Property 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 58, 
The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 



1306 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2000 

read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I ask leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and to all members of this 
Assembly, Mr. Gerald Gerrand, Q.C. (Queen’s Counsel), sitting in 
your gallery, the new Conflict of Interest Commissioner and 
Freedom of Information and Privacy Commissioner for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Gerrand was born in Melville in 1931 — 
although you’d never notice it — where his father E.W. Gerrand 
practised law and also served as a Member of the Legislative 
Assembly. Mr. Gerrand graduated from the College of Law at 
the University of Saskatchewan in 1954 and articled for his 
father, and he was appointed Queen’s Counsel in 1970. 
 
Throughout his career, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Gerrand has practised 
law with great distinction in this province and has served the 
people of Saskatchewan well, and I know that he will continue 
to do so. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, please join me, and members, please join me 
in welcoming Mr. Gerrand’s wife Ella, his daughters Nancy, 
Kelly, and Wendy Rossmo, and son, David Gerrand, and his 
two grandchildren Lindsay Gerrand and Luke Rossmo. Mr. 
Speaker, please help me in welcoming all of them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 
opposition, we certainly want to join with the Minister of 
Justice in welcoming Mr. Gerrand here and also congratulating 
him on these new roles that he will be fulfilling. 
 
I can tell the House that I have had a thankfully uneventful 
meeting with Mr. Gerrand already, and certainly look forward 
to working with him in the future. So welcome to he and his 
family, and again congratulations on the, on the new duties he’s 
about to assume. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day, it is 
my duty to table in this Assembly a letter received from the 
assistant cabinet secretary and Clerk of the Executive Council, 
and I will read for the record the content of the letter. 
 

Dear Mr. Speaker 
 
Please be advised that I have received a letter from the 
Chief Electoral Officer dated May 18, 2000 providing me 

with notice of a vacancy in the representation of the 
constituency of Wood River effective May 17, 2000. 
 
The notice has been provided pursuant to The Controverted 
Elections Act and The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act. 
 

I so table. 
 

TABLING OF REPORT 
 
The Speaker: — I would also table at this time, hon. members, 
the report, the annual report for the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Library. 
 
I so table. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with a great deal of 
pleasure that we table the answer to question 143. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 143, the answer is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Appointment of Information and Privacy Commissioner 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
at the end of these comments I’ll be moving a motion that this 
Assembly do recommend that Gerald Lorne Gerrand, Q.C., of 
the city of Regina, be appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council as the Information and Privacy Commissioner. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, Derril McLeod, Q.C., had, until his 
recent resignation, served as this province’s Information and 
Privacy Commissioner on an acting and then permanent basis 
for several years and has done an admirable job in this regard, 
and many members of course will have become acquainted with 
him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the independent function of the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner pursuant to The Freedom of Information 
and Protection of Privacy Act is a vital one in ensuring that 
members of the public have access to public information held 
by government and in ensuring that private personal 
information held by government remains private. 
 
The Information and Privacy Commissioner also performs the 
identical function under The Local Authority Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act, and in addition The 
Health Information Protection Act passed in the last session of 
this Assembly envisages an additional governance function for 
this office under that Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the responsibilities of this independent 
office continue to increase, I’m confident and I know, Mr. 
Speaker, we all are confident in the abilities of Mr. Gerrand to 
successfully manage this challenge. Mr. Speaker, there is no 
doubt that Mr. Gerrand will make this Assembly proud of the 
way in which he conducts his role and responsibilities as the 



May 24, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1307 

Information and Privacy Commissioner. 
 
And I ask all members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to join 
me in recommending the appointment of Gerald Lorne Gerrand, 
Q.C., of the city of Regina, as Information and Privacy 
Commissioner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Swift 
Current: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor recommending that the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council appoint Gerald Lorne Gerrand, Q.C., 
of the city of Regina, in the province of Saskatchewan, as 
the Information and Privacy Commissioner pursuant to 
section 38 of The Freedom of Information and Protection 
of Privacy Act. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I also appreciate, to 
the member from Melfort-Tisdale, I appreciate the opportunity 
for some exercise here after, so soon after lunch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just to join with the Minister of Justice in some 
very brief comments on the motion before the Assembly today, 
and certainly to echo the sentiments from the minister about our 
confidence in Mr. Gerrand’s ability to perform these duties as 
they should be performed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that on behalf of the official 
opposition, we did consult with certain groups and certain 
people in the legal community about the candidacy of Mr. 
Gerrand for this position and I can tell the Assembly what I told 
him when we did meet, and that is that he is certainly held in 
very high esteem and high regard by his colleagues in the legal 
profession, both here in Regina and around the province. 
 
And he should know . . . he knows that already because, as I 
said, I mentioned it to him when we met. But I think it should 
be a matter of the public record, Mr. Speaker, as now we 
entertain a motion to appoint him as an officer of this honoured 
Assembly. 
 
And so with those few brief remarks, I am happy to second the 
motion made by the Minister of Justice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Appointment of Conflict of Interest Commissioner 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the 
conclusion of my remarks, I’ll be moving a motion that Gerald 
Lorne Gerrand, Q.C., of the city of Regina be appointed as the 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner by this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Gerrand is obviously going to be very busy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you’re aware, after serving a term of five years as 

the Conflict of Interest Commissioner on behalf of the Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Derril McLeod has completed his term and is not 
seeking reappointment. 
 
We’ve been indeed fortunate to have had an individual of the 
calibre of Mr. McLeod to serve as this province’s first Conflict of 
Interest Commissioner. His public service in this regard, Mr. 
Speaker, has been exemplary and has established this independent 
office as an integral aspect in promoting public confidence in the 
activities of the members of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act clearly 
defines the concept of conflict of interest for any member of this 
Assembly. It sets out the duties required for the members of the 
Assembly and the cabinet ministers to avoid such a conflict. It also 
establishes the Office of the Conflict of Interest Commissioner as 
an independent officer of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the commissioner’s role in the operation of this 
legislation is vital. Members are required to disclose all their 
personal and business interests and those of their spouse and 
dependent children to the commissioner for use in a public 
disclosure statement. 
 
In addition, members of this Assembly must seek the approval of 
the commissioner before participating in any government contract. 
 
The commissioner also serves as a resource to all members of this 
Assembly in ruling on personal violations of the Act and in 
assisting members with compliance with the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly the role of commissioner is one which 
requires the utmost trust of this Assembly. The commissioner 
meets with each member of this Assembly to assist them in 
ensuring that they’ve complied with all responsibilities under 
this Act. 
 
Members, of course, are familiar with Mr. Gerrand and I’ll just 
say a few more things about the skills and attributes Mr. 
Gerrand brings to this important office. We will recognize and 
be familiar with him as a well-regarded and highly respected 
member of the Saskatchewan legal community. And I know 
that all members will find him to be a tremendous asset and a 
worthy successor to Mr. McLeod. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier Mr. Gerrand was born in 
Melville. His father practised law and was a member of this 
Assembly. He graduated from the College of Law at the 
University of Saskatchewan in 1954, articled with his father, 
practised law here in Regina and his practice has focused on 
civil litigation, and he’s presently counsel with the firm of 
Gerrand Rath Johnson. 
 
As I mentioned he was appointed Queen’s Counsel in 1970. He 
served as a bencher of the law society of the province from 
1978 to 1982, and indeed was elected president of the Law 
Society of Saskatchewan in 1981. In 1982, Mr. Gerrand was 
elected a fellow the American College of Trial Lawyers. He 
served on the advisory committee for judicial appointments for 
the province of Saskatchewan from 1992 to 1996 and was 
chairman of the committee during the last three years of his 
appointment. 
 



1308 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2000 

It’s with great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, following consultation 
with members of the Assembly which I appreciate, through the 
Board of Internal Economy, that I put forward Mr. Gerrand for 
the consideration of this Assembly for this position. And I 
encourage all members of this Assembly to join me in 
supporting his appointment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would like to conclude by moving the following motion, 
seconded by the member from Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly hereby appoint Gerald Lorne Gerrand, 
Q.C., of the city of Regina in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Conflict of Interest Commissioner pursuant 
to section 18 of The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Construction Industry Labour Relations 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the 
conclusion of my remarks, I’ll be moving second reading of Bill 
No. 59, the construction industry labour relations Act, 2000. 
There has been . . . Oh, I’d better be technically correct here — 
The Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 
2000 is to be read into the record. 
 
There has been a great deal of public discussion since I first 
announced our intention to amend this Act on March 14. And 
that isn’t surprising given the complicated nature of the issues 
around the construction industry as a whole, and this Act in 
particular. 
 
Also on March 14, the government announced it would end the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement, or CCTA, early in 
2001. So, Mr. Speaker, as we prepare to end that agreement, we 
will implement the following measures. 
 
We will amend The Construction Industry Labour Relations 
Act, 1992 and we will review the government tendering 
guidelines. These actions will contribute to a level playing field 
for all construction firms in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, taken together, these measures are essential 
to fair competition within Saskatchewan’s industry and will 
encourage skilled construction workers to remain in our 
province, as well as aid in the development of new skilled 
workers through apprenticeship programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are opponents of this legislation, and they 
have been opposed for a very logical reason. They’re protecting 
their own vested interest in an unbalanced industry. And I say 
unbalanced because on the one side you have unionized 
construction companies and non-unionized construction 
companies both doing their best to survive in a competitive 

business. 
 
On the other side you have companies which have for years 
been playing both sides of the fence. They’re operating as both 
unionized and non-unionized entities at the same time, and 
using whichever entity will give the advantage in bidding on 
contracts. And this also provides an unfair advantage in 
comparison to construction firms operating in other 
jurisdictions, because Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction 
where they can operate as both union and non-union at the same 
time in the same sector. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Construction Industry 
Labour Relations Act, 1992 will first and foremost level the 
unbalanced playing field by prohibiting construction companies 
from operating as union and non-union at the same time. 
 
This is the double breasting that we have heard about. Now it 
doesn’t mean that companies cannot operate as non-union 
companies, and it doesn’t mean that companies cannot operate 
as union companies. It merely means that you cannot do both at 
the same time. And this is the essential point to understand. 
 
And to fully understand it, we need to talk a little bit about the 
history leading up to these amendments. The imbalance in the 
construction industry in Saskatchewan dates back to the early 
1980s when the downturn in the economy resulted in fewer 
construction projects. Saskatchewan had introduced 
construction specific legislation in 1979 to allow for collective 
bargaining for the unionized workplaces on a province-wide 
basis. 
 
In the ’80s, unionized contractors wanted to lower their costs 
and began the practice of double breasting or forming 
non-union spinoff companies. This allowed them in effect to 
shelve their existing union certification orders. 
 
Now although those certification orders remain, collective 
bargaining effectively disappeared. This practice accelerated in 
1983 with the repeal of the legislation which was introduced in 
1979 to govern labour relations in the construction industry. 
 
The practice of double breasting has led to a situation in which 
companies with spinoffs, operating as both union and non-union 
at the same time, have the best of all worlds. Such companies 
are able to, in essence, bid against themselves on construction 
contracts and can flip from union to non-union depending on 
the project. 
 
The practice of double breasting as stated in the 1985 Board of 
Conciliation Report is also fundamentally at odds with the 
principle of the trade unionism as set out in The Trade Union 
Act, and I’ll quote directly from that Board of Conciliation 
Report: 
 

To allow a continuation of double breasting in the industry 
as presently exists, seriously jeopardizes the continued 
existence of the unionized construction industry. 
 

And that statement is even more true today, because not only 
does double breasting jeopardize the unionized segment of the 
industry, it affects the long-term viability of the industry as a 
whole, as it is not seen as an attractive career choice for young 



May 24, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1309 

people. 
 
In 1992, the government, acting on recommendations submitted 
by the Construction Industry Advisory Committee, passed The 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Act, 1992, or the 
CILRA. That legislation which we are amending today set the 
rules for the unionized construction industry with the exception 
of companies spun off prior to 1992. 
 
Now while there was no new spinoff companies created after 
that time, the numerous spinoffs created prior to the package 
remained in operation. The Construction Industry Labour 
Relations Act and the CCTA were the government’s responses 
to the issues I have just mentioned. 
 
Now neither was perfect and neither has worked the way that 
everyone hoped they would. So what we have today is a 
number of companies which established their spinoffs prior to 
1992, which are continuing to operate as union and non-union. 
 
And this is what the legislation will prohibit. It will level the 
playing field and encourage the industry fairness in the province 
over the long term. And I want to point out that Saskatchewan 
is the only jurisdiction in Canada with construction legislation 
permitting double breasting. Prohibiting this practice will put 
Saskatchewan on the same footing as other jurisdictions. 
 
As I mentioned, the union certification orders in place prior to 
the forming of the spinoffs were not revoked and remain in 
effect today. So what will happen to those companies once the 
legislation is in enacted? 
 
The legislation contains provisions to protect employees from 
being terminated as a direct result of these legislative changes. 
Prohibiting double breasting will not result in the current 
employees of the non-union spinoff automatically being 
required to join the union, but after they’ve been laid off and 
expressed their desire to work in the unionized sector, they 
would be required to become union members to work with 
those unionized firms. 
 
The building trade unions covered by the certification orders 
that are still in place will need to apply to the Labour Relations 
Board on a company-by-company basis to request a ruling on 
whether the unionized parent company and the non-union 
spinoff are related. 
 
Because of the anticipated increase in applications to the 
Labour Relations Board as a result of this legislation, there are 
provisions within the Bill to improve the board’s capacity to 
deal effectively with increased workload. These amendments 
include authority for an additional Vice-Chair, an ability for the 
board officer to investigate construction operations to help 
determine whether union and non-union companies are related. 
 
This legislation also designates the existing representative 
employer organizations or REOs, the organizations that are 
authorized to bargain with the construction unions on behalf of 
all contractors. The amendments name the Construction Labour 
Relations Association of Saskatchewan as the largest REO, 
ensuring it will maintain the relationships it’s developed with 
trade unions in 16 trade divisions over the past seven years. 
 

All unionized employers are entitled to membership, and four 
other REOs are also designated to represent another seven trade 
divisions. This is a continuation of the status quo. These REOs 
are already in place. 
 
This Bill designates them in legislation and requires the Labour 
Relations Board to review and approve or amend their 
constitutions and bylaws. This will not only ensure REOs are 
fulfilling their roles as the collective bargaining agent for the 
unionized employers, but will also enable the Labour Relations 
Board to consider and approve provisions that ensure the 
participants in the collective bargaining process adhere to the 
overall intent of the Act and function as to optimize the purpose 
of the Act, that is successful collective bargaining on a 
province-wide basis for unionized contractors and workers. 
 
Debate and discussion about labour relations within the 
construction industry have been going on for a great many 
years. And it had been our hope, Mr. Speaker, that these issues 
could be resolved through consensus within the industry, but 
that hasn’t happened despite our best efforts. 
 
More than 100 meetings with representatives of the 
construction industry have been held over the past two years in 
an effort to resolve these matters without having to find the 
solution in legislation. But it is not possible to legislate 
co-operation, Mr. Speaker. However, it is possible to legislate 
solutions, and that’s what we’re going to do. 
 
At the beginning of my remarks I mentioned there has been a 
fair amount of confusion surrounding the introduction of these 
amendments, so I’m just going to finally and further clarify the 
situation by stating for the record some of the things the 
legislation does not do. 
 
The Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 
2000 does not require all construction companies to become 
unionized. It does not require all construction workers to 
automatically become members of a union. It does not require 
contractors to hire unionized subcontractors. It does not affect 
the Aboriginal hiring provisions contained in collective 
bargaining or project agreements. 
 
These amendments to the CILRA will level the playing field for 
union and non-union contractors by prohibiting all double 
breasting in the construction industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Construction Industry Labour Relations 
Amendment Act, 2000 will bring our province into line with 
other jurisdictions and put Saskatchewan construction 
contractors on the same footing with those in other provinces. 
 
So I would now like to move second reading of Bill No. 59, The 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
speak to the House on Bill 59, the construction labour relations 
Act. Mr. Speaker, you can tell a lot about a government and 
about the state of that government by its attitude and also by the 



1310 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2000 

kind of legislation it brings forward. 
 
We’ve noticed a more and more arrogant attitude on the part of 
this government. And we’ve seen it also now in the legislation 
they have brought forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they had the nerve to talk about forced 
amalgamation. They’ve backed off on that temporarily. But 
now they’ve gone a step beyond talk, Mr. Speaker. They’re not 
talking about forced unionization; they’re actually bringing in a 
Bill to enable forced unionization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister went into a bit of history, and I think 
it is good to reflect back in history on things that have happened 
in the past. And I will do so in regard to this Act. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I talk about the attitude of this government. 
My involvement before becoming the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party and the Official Opposition was to be 
involved at the federal level. 
 
And we watched an arrogant government, the federal Mulroney 
government, get wiped off the electoral map, down to two 
members, because, Mr. Speaker, they failed to listen to people. 
They started to ram legislation through the House of Commons 
that the people of this country did not want, and they paid the 
political price. 
 
And it’s amazing to see that this government has not learned 
from that government. They are following in the same 
footsteps. They’re becoming more and more arrogant daily, Mr. 
Speaker. And now they are bringing forward Bill 59, the 
construction labour relations Act, which would force 
unionization upon Saskatchewan workers even though, Mr. 
Speaker, they do not want it. And I’m talking about the workers 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1983 the provincial government at the time 
began allowing construction companies to operate both a union 
and a non-union arm. And as the minister alluded this is called 
double breasting. Of course the unions didn’t like this much, 
though a period of labour harmony began about the same time. 
Saskatchewan has not seen a strike in the construction industry 
in about 20 years — no strike, Mr. Speaker, in 20 years. 
 
In 1992 the NDP rewrote the trade union legislation making 
spinoffs — that’s non-union arms of union companies — illegal 
again. However, Mr. Speaker, those companies operating 
non-union spinoffs were grandfathered and allowed to continue 
the practice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation, Bill 59, will take away this 
grandfathering clause. Thus, rules companies have lived under 
for 20 years in harmony and peace will be rewritten overnight if 
this Bill is passed. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Construction Association 
believes these changes will throw their industry into complete 
turmoil. We’ve also received many letters from employees of 
non-union shops very upset with these changes. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they are the ones who are calling it forced 

unionization. Mr. Speaker, it is the workers and the companies 
that these workers work for that have coined the phrase, forced 
unionization. 
 
And they have told the Minister of Labour and they have told 
the government in no uncertain terms that they are opposed to 
this legislation; they don’t want it, they don’t need it. They have 
begged the minister to not introduce it. And here we are today 
barely into this new government’s mandate and they bring 
forward Bill 59, The Construction Industry Labour Relations 
Amendment Act, 2000 which would force unionization upon 
workers and their companies who do not want it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, editorial writers in the daily newspapers 
appear to agree that this is little more than forced unionization. 
 
Now it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker — and this is something the 
minister didn’t talk about today — it’s interesting to note that 
these spinoffs could have been organized by trade unions at any 
time. Mr. Speaker, ever since 1983 the unions could have 
organized themselves in these non-unionized companies. They 
didn’t do it. They were unable to muster support among the 
workers to unionize. 
 
So what’s happened, Mr. Speaker? Now the government is 
doing what the unions themselves were unable to do simply 
because there was no support for the kind of action that Bill 59 
implements. Mr. Speaker, workers will find themselves 
suddenly in unions without having to sign a certificate card or 
without a vote being held. It’s kind of abracadabra, voila — 
we’re in the union. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while workers won’t have to become official 
union members right away, they will have to pay all union dues. 
The Minister of Labour forgot to bring that attention to the 
House. Mr. Speaker, they will have to pay all union dues. 
 
And as soon as they are laid off — and the minister did mention 
this — as soon as they are laid off, which is not unusual in the 
construction industry I might point out, then they will have to 
become full-fledged union members if they want to return to 
work for the newly unionized companies. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, many in the construction industry are laid off 
in the slow periods, quite often in the wintertime. It’s just the 
cyclical nature of that industry. And so the minister is clever 
with her words, but the workers see through it right away. They 
realize that this is just a delay tactic to force people into unions 
so that they can fulfil her election coffers so she can be 
re-elected in the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the government will argue, Mr. Speaker, the 
government will argue that this legislation will only affect those 
companies currently with spinoffs, it will actually go much, 
much deeper than that. The way several of the province-wide 
collective bargaining agreements are written, subcontractors are 
required to operate under union rules and pay union benefits, 
etc. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the province-wide contracts in existence 
today, one contract in existence today requires . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 



May 24, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1311 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another side of 
an arrogant government is they don’t like to hear the truth and 
they start making a lot of noise. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the existing province-wide contracts 
even requires subcontractors to purchase supplies — supplies 
— from union-only shops, severely limiting competition. 
 
In other words, the changes made in this Bill will affect many, 
many smaller construction companies throughout the province 
who are subcontracting work for the larger companies that the 
government says it has targeted. In reality, the effects of this 
Bill will be far more wide-reaching. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill, Bill No. 59, is like a creature with 
tentacles reaching out throughout the entire construction 
industry, in fact eventually reaching to the taxpayers’ wallets in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government will also argue that we need to 
promote labour harmony. In fact as I mentioned earlier, 
Saskatchewan has gone through an unprecedented era of labour 
peace in the construction industry. Why would the minister 
want to disturb something that’s working? Why does she want 
to irritate the workers and the businesses that are doing so well 
in the construction industry today. She didn’t give us a reason 
in her introduction to the Bill as to why she would want to rock 
the boat when everything is working so well. 
 
Also the government will state that we need these changes in 
order to promote a fair wage policy. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
figures show that wages in open shops are competitive, and 
often, Mr. Speaker, they are even better than union wages. In 
some cases, workers such as apprentices, are far better off in an 
open shop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government will also state that these changes 
are necessary to stop companies from getting around the spirit 
of the rules. And I think I heard the minister making that 
argument a few minutes ago. 
 
Well I would say, Mr. Speaker, in reality not a single complaint, 
to my knowledge, not a single complaint has been filed with the 
Labour Relations Board alleging a company was double 
breasting illegally. Why this legislation, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The government is trying to tie this legislation to the ending of 
the Crown corporation tendering agreement. However in reality 
the two are not related except through politics. The CCTA 
(Crown Construction Tendering Agreement) union tendering 
policy was adopted as a sop to the unions who wanted spinoffs 
totally outlawed in 1992. 
 
Now the government is trying to use the CCTA’s scrapping to 
cover the other changes it is making, which the construction 
association says are far worse, far worse than the horrible, 
horrible CCTA. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note the background to all 
of this mess, the introduction of this legislation. The NDP got 
about $300,000 from the various unions last year — $300,000. 
About $12,000 of this came from the construction trades, Mr. 
Speaker. Obviously, obviously . . . 

The Speaker: — Order, order please. Hon. members from both 
sides, there’ll be ample time to debate this issue. I would ask all 
hon. members to kindly allow the speaker to be heard. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Because they 
were making so much noise over there, I’ll repeat what I said. 
The NDP got about $300,000. I see the minister from Saskatoon 
Meewasin doesn’t believe that the NDP got $300,00 from the 
unions. Well she just has to look at the election returns that her 
party filed and she will see that her party got $300,000 from the 
unions, $12,000 from the construction trade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now even more interesting is that the Labour minister herself 
received thousands of dollars in donations from the unions. 
 
Now at best, Mr. Speaker, at best . . . and now I see the Deputy 
Premier is heckling and making a noise. I believe probably the 
deputy minister’s campaign was also . . . the Deputy Premier’s 
campaign was also funded by the unions. But at the minimum, 
these donations appear to be a huge conflict of interest at a time 
when the government is concocting this heavy-handed piece of 
labour legislation which is tantamount to forced unionization. 
 
At worst, Mr. Speaker, at worst, this appears to be a huge 
political payoff for unions for their unwavering support of the 
NDP. One of the few constituencies left, one of the few 
constituencies left that the NDP can still count on for support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just the leaders of the union, as the member from 
Swift Current said, because the workers, even unionized 
workers, are leaving the NDP. Everyone is leaving the NDP. 
Their fundraising capability is diminishing. So what do they 
do? They force more people into the unions to maintain their 
fundraising capability. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this Bill doesn’t appear to do anything much 
to help Saskatchewan businesses or workers. The only 
benefactors are the unions themselves — the union 
organizations. 
 
Now some major construction companies have already mused 
publicly about leaving the province because of these changes. 
One of these is the Dominion Construction company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a story in the Regina Leader-Post, March 
29, the year 2000. And it starts out by saying: 
 

Some construction companies are threatening to leave the 
province if the government follows through on proposed 
amendments to The Construction Industry Labour 
Relations Act. 
 

It goes on to say: 
 

The Saskatchewan Construction Association, which 
represents both unionized and non-union contractors, is 
upset with the minister’s response to the industry’s concern 
about the proposed legislation. 
 

This is the legislation that they had the nerve to introduce today. 
Mr. Speaker, a quotation: 
 

“We didn’t get a hearing from Crofford,” said Brian 



1312 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2000 

Barber, vice-president of Dominion Construction Co. in 
Regina, following a meeting with . . . (the minister) 
Tuesday. 

 
Manley McLachlan, of the road construction association, is also 
quoted in here. And he says: 
 

“(The minister) . . . didn’t seem to be interested in letting 
people determine their own status . . .” 

 
The association’s director said: 
 

. . . the amendments proposed by (the minister’s) . . . 
department would effectively impose unionization on 
employees of non-union construction firms. 

 
Mr. Barber of Dominion Construction later on in the article 
added that: 
 

. . . the owners of Dominion Construction may reconsider 
operating in Saskatchewan under the new legislation. “It’s 
a real concern. It limits our ability to work here.” 

 
This is a quotation from Mr. Brian Barber. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s the last thing we need in 
Saskatchewan is for this minister to chase more businesses and 
more people out of the province of Saskatchewan. And yet 
that’s what Bill 59 would do. It would encourage more 
businesses and their workers to leave the province of 
Saskatchewan — away go more taxpayers. 
 
And then what does the province have to do? They have to 
close more hospitals. They have to close more schools. They 
have to let more highways fall into disrepair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to put on the record that the Saskatchewan 
Party is adamantly opposed to this forced legislation, this forced 
unionization by the NDP. And we will be doing everything in 
our power to try to get the government to do what is right for 
the province and not simply what is right for their union 
contributors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will stand up for the rights of workers who 
want to decide whether or not to become a part of the union 
through a fair and democratic process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the unions themselves could 
not convince workers to unionize — the government should not 
be forcing them. Mr. Speaker, we will stand up for the rights of 
employers and their employees in this province who have been 
operating very smoothly for 20 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as was alluded to in question period by the 
Saskatchewan Party Labour critic, the member from Redberry 
Lake, the Minister of Labour just recently received a letter from 
the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. It’s dated May 10, 
2000. It is signed on behalf of their new incoming president, 
Mr. Casey Davis. And I’ll read just a few sentences from this 
letter. The new president says: 
 

. . . the Government of Saskatchewan should not amend 
The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act in any 
way that would eliminate the “grand fathering” rights of 
unionized contractors to continue to operate their 
non-union subsidiaries. 
 

And then later on in the letter Mr. Davis goes on to say: 
 

Given the demographics of the province, the Provincial 
Chamber is also very concerned with the impact of your 
amendments on companies who have joint-ventured with 
First Nations organizations. In our meetings with First 
Nations representatives, they have related strong 
opposition to organized labour workplaces. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, not only is this an attack on the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan — I mean they’re always attacking the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan, we’re used to that, we see that everyday — 
now they’re also attacking business in Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well they do that every other day, but 
they’re attacking the workers in these businesses. A sign of an 
arrogant government that’s losing touch with the people of 
Saskatchewan and now we hear via the Saskatchewan Chamber 
of Commerce that they are attacking First Nations people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Where will this government end? When will they come to their 
senses? I don’t think they’ll come to their senses until the next 
election and then, as we all know, it’ll be far too late. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is just another Bill from an arrogant 
government which is desperately trying to do all its social 
engineering before their fateful meeting with the voters. What 
happens, Mr. Speaker? What happens when you have a 
government who loses contact with the people, becomes 
arrogant, and brings in legislation like this? 
 
(1500) 
 
Well isn’t it interesting. I have two headlines here from May 24 
of this year. I think that’s today, isn’t it? May 24. That’s about 
as recent as you can get, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First of all the Saskatoon StarPhoenix. What does the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix say? “Fewer summer jobs likely.” 
That’s the situation in Saskatchewan. 
 

Saskatoon businesses will create considerably fewer jobs 
in the third quarter of 2000 than they did in the same 
period last year, according to a survey conducted by the 
human resources firm Manpower. 
 

Farther in the article it says, and they quote Nicole Densham, 
Saskatoon branch manager for Manpower. She says: 
 

“They are the weakest (numbers) we’ve seen in over a 
year, so that’s kind of scary.” 
 

That’s what this young person says about the potential for 
summer jobs. 
 
That’s the situation in NDP Saskatchewan. That’s today’s 
headlines in Saskatoon. 



May 24, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1313 

I also have the headlines from the Calgary Herald for today. 
The headline says “Forecast for summer jobs is hot.” It says in 
the article: 
 

In past years, SAIT student Heather DesRoches pounded 
the pavement struggling to find a summer job. 
 
This year job hunting was a cinch. She handed out 10 
resumes and got five job offers —all within one week. 
 

Farther down in the article it says, they quote Tom Sakamoto, 
the general manager of ABC Country Restaurant. And he says: 
 

“We’re having a lot of problems hiring students because 
the unemployment rate is so low. Students can really pick 
and choose what they want to do.” 
 

As a result, Sakamoto said: 
 

“We’ve had to be more lenient with requirements and pay 
higher wages than we previously expected.” 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s Calgary. In Calgary “summer jobs is hot”; 
in Saskatchewan “fewer summer jobs likely.” Night and day, 
Mr. Speaker, all because of negative legislation, regressive 
legislation like Bill 59, the forced unionization Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government simply does not understand that 
it’s because of legislation like this they barely, barely got back 
into power. Only with the help of a handful of Liberals did this 
government survive and put forward a majority government. 
And they don’t seem to realize, according to the heckling over 
there, they have no idea that this kind of legislation is going to 
take them right out of the political scene in Saskatchewan, 
probably sooner than they think, and probably a lot farther 
down than they think, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the NDP will be thumped in the next 
election because of this arrogant attitude and the legislation they 
are bringing forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Party will be opposed to Bill 59. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn debate on this Bill at 
this time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Saskatchewan Evidence 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to move second reading of The Saskatchewan 
Evidence Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
We’re all familiar, Mr. Speaker, with the speed at which new 
methods of communication are becoming part of our society, 
and it’s evident that these developments are having a significant 

and growing impact on business and on our economy. 
 
With the advent of new forms of communications such as the 
Internet and e-mail, paper is giving way to newer forms of 
electronic-based communications. The advent of new 
communication media and the increasing use of computers, 
means quite simply that in many cases there are no original 
paper documents. Rather the information contained in e-mail 
messages and attachments is being stored and reproduced 
electronically. 
 
It’s not clear, Mr. Speaker, the extent to which these 
developments can be fully accommodated by today’s rules for 
the use of records in legal proceedings, these rules developed at 
a time when only paper records were used in court. The 
Uniform Law Conference of Canada approved the uniform Act 
in 1998, entitled the Uniform Electronic Evidence Act. The Act 
was designed to address the use of electronic records and legal 
proceedings. And, Mr. Speaker, the Bill before the Assembly 
today is modelled on that uniform Act. 
 
These amendments allow modern information systems such as 
electronic imaging to produce records suitable for use in court 
without the requirement to produce the original paper records. 
The Bill has several other important features as well, Mr. 
Speaker. It provides a standard for computer records to be 
admitted in legal proceedings. It allows for an electronic record 
to take the place of an original record if the electronic system 
reliably stored and reproduced the record. It allows for 
industry-specific practices and standards respecting recording 
and storage to be used to assist in determining if such records 
should be admitted. And it allows for the use of affidavits in 
place of oral evidence to demonstrate the reliability of a record 
keeping system. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, the purpose of the amendments is to 
modernize legal roles regarding the admissibility and reliability 
of records recorded and stored by electronic systems. The law 
will be modernized, clarified, and harmonized, so that public 
and private sectors alike can make the best technical decisions 
possible about how to produce and keep records with a 
minimum of uncertainty about how their legal rights will be 
affected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Evidence Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a few 
comments in regards . . . regarding Bill No. 34. As the minister 
was indicating, there’s no doubt that we’ve had significant 
change in areas of communication and certainly technology 
over the past number of years. 
 
And I believe what the minister has been sharing with us today 
in regards to this piece of legislation, The Saskatchewan 
Evidence Amendment Act, 2000, it’s a Bill as I understand it 
that will simplify the process of working with and providing in 
many cases evidence and certainly using electronic links and 
records in courtrooms or in areas where large volumes of paper 
may have been needed before, in fact probably carrying in 
armfuls of paper to use as evidence, which can be sometimes 
somewhat tedious. 
 



1314 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2000 

And when I look at my records, it takes me a while to go 
through my papers; whereas when I ever get around to really 
understanding the computer, I’ll probably get to finding the 
information I need a lot more quickly. And I think that’s what 
the minister in essence is saying here, is it speeds up the process 
of being able to have at your fingertips the type of evidence that 
you need or access to information that is necessary, certainly in 
the process of court. 
 
The one thing we would certainly be concerned about, and I 
trust that this was what the legislation intends to do, is to 
guarantee that the rights of individuals are not interfered with or 
not . . . that they’re all respected; that the evidence as it’s 
presented is going to be presented factually, that it will certainly 
confirm what is on paper, that it will not be a means of just 
overstepping some of the evidence that a person may have or 
may be able to use but is not accessible. Or in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
because of electronic means, certainly what the electronic 
processes that are used are only as valuable as the information 
that is stored in those . . . whether it’s computers or laptop 
computers or whatever, the person who stores that information. 
 
And we trust that this piece of legislation indeed makes sure 
and sees to it that any time evidence is used electronically, that 
it has been gained appropriately and that it is certainly the 
proper evidence and is the truthful evidence that would be 
presented, rather than having to be challenged at a later date. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, having said that and anticipating that 
this is where we’re going, but wanting to review the legislation 
just a little more closely to see that it meets all these 
requirements, I now move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the hon. member from 
Melfort on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — With leave, to introduce a guest, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
recognized an hon. guest sitting behind the bar on the 
government side of the House, Mr. Gordon MacMurchy. It 
might seem strange why I’d be introducing a former, 
distinguished member of the Blakeney administration. As a 
matter of fact, when I graduated from university and had my 
very first job as a teacher in this province, Mr. MacMurchy was 
the chairman of the school district that gave me my very first 
job. 
 
And in return, I taught two of his sons, Mark and Gordon Jr. 
And at the volunteers’ award ceremony the other day, I had to 
talk to Mr. MacMurchy and see that the experience of me 
teaching his sons didn’t have any lasting ill effects on their 
well-being and careers and their future. And he assured me that 
it had not and that they still speak fondly of me, at least up until 
the time that I got into politics. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure to welcome Mr. 
MacMurchy back into the Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 49 — The Highways and Transportation 

Amendment Act, 2000 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I certainly would like to as well welcome Mr. 
MacMurchy on behalf of the government. It’s nice to see him 
here in the Assembly today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of 
The Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2000. This 
Act contains the first set of substantive amendments to The 
Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 that was passed by this 
Assembly in 1997. Members may recall that the 1997 law was a 
complete rewrite of what was The Highways and 
Transportation Act and The Department of Highways and 
Transportation Act. 
 
The former legislation had been on the books for close to half a 
century, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Over the years a number of 
provisions had become outdated or unworkable. 
 
The 1997 law attempted to update transportation legislation in 
the province. We have established a legislative framework for 
the transportation partnerships fund. We set a framework for 
ensuring that people who cause overweight vehicles to damage 
the road surface are held accountable for their actions. 
 
Since the passage of the Act, Saskatchewan Highways and 
Transportation staff and our legal advisers have indicated a 
number of relatively minor changes should be made. Several of 
the changes indicated are the result of oversights in the 1997 
rewrite. 
 
In Committee of the Whole, I will indicate which amendment 
changes are essentially of a housekeeping nature. Today there 
are a few amendments that I will highlight for you. 
 
This Bill ensures that the department is not held unnecessarily 
libel for injuries of users of highway rights of way, even if they 
are operating on the authority of a permit. We will ensure to the 
best of our ability that users of the rights of way are not placed 
in unsafe situations. 
 
Our officials have suggested there is a possibility of the 
department and, obviously, taxpayers’ liability under the current 
law. The amendment addresses this concern. Of course we 
would remain liable if we acted in any way to deliberately 
injure a user of the right of way, be it a trail pedestrian user or 
an off-road vehicle user. The current provision in the law 
dealing with the tender awards is problematic for the effective 
administration of our construction program. 
 
There are circumstances in which a contract should not be 
awarded to the lowest bidder other than for reasons of 
expediency. 
 



May 24, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1315 

This Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, authorizes the minister to seek 
Lieutenant Governor in Council approval in cases in which it is 
in the public interest to award a tender to someone other than 
the lowest bidder. 
 
In general, we are satisfied in most cases with the awarding of a 
tender to the lowest bidder. However, there has been instances 
when we may not wish to follow normal procedure. 
 
If a contractor’s performance has not been satisfactory in the 
past, we may not wish to award a tender even if the contractor’s 
bid is the lowest. Relying on the word expedient, may not be 
sufficient to have the Lieutenant Governor in Council approve 
awarding to another party. Adding the reference to public 
interest will in our view help resolve any concerns in this area. 
 
The way we organize transportation in Saskatchewan is 
changing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and more and more we are 
seeking to work with municipal governments in co-managing 
our road system. This new Bill enhances our ability to work 
with local municipalities in this area. The Bill provides that any 
move to devolve ministerial responsibilities must occur only 
with the agreement of affected municipalities. 
 
There is a new clause in this Bill to help with partnering 
agreements with private sector owners of parts of transportation 
system. This has become necessary as several public 
improvements such as airports and railways are becoming 
partially and/or fully privately owned and operated. 
 
(1515) 
 
Our legal advisers have indicated the current provisions may 
not cover these cases. For example, our loan program to provide 
financial assistance to producer groups wishing to establish 
short-line railways by lines from CNCP (Canadian National and 
Canadian Pacific) would not be covered by the current law. 
 
On the other hand if a short-line company constructed a new 
line, the department has authority to make agreements under the 
existing provisions in section 4. The amendment removes this 
anomaly and gives the department flexibility to enter into these 
types of partnerships. 
 
The section of the transportation partnerships fund has been 
rewritten for the sake of clarity. We have removed what could 
be seen as a reverse onus provision in shipper responsibility. 
This reflects input from stakeholders whom we’ve surveyed in 
1999. The provision has not yet been proclaimed, but I 
anticipate bringing a recommendation for proclamation to my 
cabinet colleagues later this year. 
 
I would therefore be pleased, Mr. Deputy Speaker, also to 
answer any questions during the committee stage of this Bill. 
 
And now I would move second reading of The Highways and 
Transportation Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I can appreciate why the minister is coming forward 
with this Bill given the state of our highways in the province of 
Saskatchewan at this time. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I talk about highways, certainly just 
over the past long weekend, and I’m sure many government 
members found the same thing, that when people were heading 
out to the resort areas to enjoy a bit of time and relaxation, the 
unfortunate part is they had to deal with a number of highway 
networks that at this time are in certainly disrepair. 
 
And given that consideration and the calls that have come to our 
office, I can also understand why the minister and why the 
department are taking another look at liability, and certainly for 
off-road vehicles. 
 
However, the minister does have a point. When you’re talking 
of highway construction, you’re talking of off road; you’ve got 
to appreciate the fact that the consumer at the same time needs 
to respect the difficulties that are incurred when your highway’s 
under construction or there’s road maintenance and what have 
you, and have to respect the fact that there are individuals, 
highway maintenance crews and construction crews, who are 
doing their best to try and upgrade the deplorable state of our 
highways. 
 
And therefore it certainly wouldn’t be appropriate for the crews 
and the department to really have to worry about a person 
driving down one of these roads who may find themselves in a 
situation where there’s damage to a vehicle or what have you, 
and then blame the construction crew when they . . . if the 
proper signage is put out there and if people are warned in 
advance of the fact that there’s construction underway. 
 
However if a person’s proceeding down a road that isn’t 
properly marked and does significant damage to their vehicle, 
we would hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that individual or 
those individuals will be able to go to the department and point 
out the problems that they’ve faced and the department will act 
accordingly. 
 
And we certainly believe that that certainly hasn’t been changed 
by the legislation, but we’ll follow a little closer as we get into 
further debate in regards to The Highways and Transportation 
Amendment Act, 2000, Bill No. 49. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister talked about hiring 
contractors and suggested that they have to change the 
terminology because they’re . . . In the past they have attempted 
to use the lowest bid or tender that’s always . . . that has been 
brought forward, and at times they’ve found that possibly the 
lowest bid was not always the best bid or possibly coming from 
a contractor that they really had a lot of confidence in. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would think, if the minister wanted to, 
the minister basically just has to say that they would award 
tenders to the lowest qualified bidder. 
 
That way then they would still have the opportunity to take that 
lowest bid. They know that that contractor submitting that bid is 
a well-thought-of and a reputable contractor who has done good 
work in the past and that would give them that opportunity and 
that ability. So that they would be able extend the dollars that 
are available and build or construct or upgrade more highways 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would suggest to the minister we 



1316 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2000 

don’t want to see the government moving away from the lowest 
qualified bidder. We do want to . . . we also though want the . . . 
and respect the fact that I believe the government, the 
department, are telling us that they want to have the ability to 
hire the best and the most qualified individual contractor to do 
the road work and the grading. 
 
And having said that I can appreciate that, driving down No. 1, 
east of Indian Head, and I get a lot of complaints on that. That 
road’s been under construction for about two years or two and a 
half years and people today are beginning to wonder whether or 
not we’ll ever see that phase of construction completed given 
the state and the way the process and the work has been 
proceeding. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think there are definitely some 
changes needed. But we, on this side of the Assembly we would 
hope that the government would indeed look very closely at 
continuing to take that lowest, but take the lowest qualified 
bidder on any of the projects that they’re putting forward. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well the minister talked about short-line 
rail and there’s no doubt in this province, and with the number 
of commodities and the miles that we need to move heavy 
commodities, that we need to take a serious look at it. And 
that’s why many community groups and farm groups are asking 
for the opportunity to form short-line rail companies and start 
getting some of that heavy load off of our highways system. 
Because as a result of the heavy B-trains and what have you 
moving down our roads and more and more traffic on our roads, 
it is becoming more difficult to maintain and keep those roads 
upgraded. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we want to look at that clause very 
closely and see exactly where the minister is heading because I 
know many groups across this province would like to have the 
opportunity. And I for one feel that for far too long we’ve 
allowed the railways to dictate the policy when the rail network 
that was built across this country was built by taxpayers and by 
governments, and the rail companies were allowed to run on it. 
 
Yes, the companies put money into it, but I know even just in 
our area, an upgrade about 15 years ago, all of the money was 
federal money into that rail bed. And there isn’t a person around 
there who wants to see that rail company now just abandon the 
line and rip it up. They’re saying we put the money in; if 
somebody else wants to put units on that line and use the line to 
transport heavy products, they should have that opportunity. 
 
So I think there’s, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s an interesting 
debate that we can get into in regards to some of the changes 
that the minister is talking of in this Bill. 
 
Having said that, I think we need to look at it a little more 
carefully. Because what the minister was saying, that the intent 
of this Bill is to change some of the areas of the ’97 legislation 
that the department felt and his office, or the minister’s office, 
felt were not quite meeting the need of today, and we feel as 
well we need to look at very carefully. 
 
And therefore at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move to 
adjourn debate. 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, growth of the provincial livestock sector offers our 
farm families here in Saskatchewan a tremendous opportunity. I 
might add the opportunity to add strength and stability to many 
of our rural communities and to our rural economy. 
 
As a result, our government — and I’m sure the members of the 
opposition — will do whatever we can to encourage the 
expansion of livestock production in our province. More 
livestock production in Saskatchewan means more jobs, more 
wealth, and more local markets for producers of Saskatchewan 
feed grains in all areas of the province. 
 
We believe the best way to encourage this expansion is to work 
in partnership with the leaders of the industry, to develop a 
regulatory framework that is both effective and responsive to 
the sector’s needs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 
is a case in point. This legislation administers a check off that is 
used to fund research and promotion, obviously the 
cornerstones of a vibrant and growing industry. 
 
Under the current structure of the Act we collect $2 from the 
sale of every animal in the province. One dollar of each of the 
two goes towards research and development in Saskatchewan 
and the other is used to fund the industry promotion at a 
national level, both at home, abroad, through a new and exciting 
national agency. 
 
Since we began collecting the second dollar in August of 1998, 
Saskatchewan cattle producers have put together more than $3 
million for injection into additional national incentives. 
 
Unfortunately the new national agency meant to administer the 
funds is not yet in place and that means the funds are 
unavailable under the current legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that means our industry faces a gap in its ongoing commitment 
to funding of the national promotion, research, and marketing 
initiatives. 
 
Saskatchewan’s cattle industry has told us that that is 
unacceptable. They have requested and received our 
co-operation in changing the province’s check-off legislation to 
free up those funds. Therefore the amendments we propose to 
the cattle marketing Act reflects that scheme and that 
co-operation. They have and are fully in approval of the 
changing that are being proposed. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I ask members of the Assembly, 
members of the opposition, to support these amendments and I 
ask that we move quickly through second reading of Bill 42, An 
Act to amend The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the first question I have is what’s the minister taking 
out of our pockets now? 
 



May 24, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1317 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at deductions of any kind 
— whether it’s cattle, whether it’s livestock, or whether it’s 
grain — certainly producers, right away their ears perk up and 
they say, okay, exactly what am I going to be taxed on now. I’m 
paying enough already. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the minister is saying certainly has 
. . . there seems to be good logic in regards to the need for a 
check off. And if I’m not mistaken, I believe the cattle 
marketing check off as it is today is a voluntary check off and I 
think that’s the way it should continue to be. Producers can 
make application to have the check off refunded if they so wish. 
 
However, having said that, there’s no doubt that the livestock 
sector in our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, currently is doing 
very well. Although if you look at the cycles, say in agriculture, 
if livestock is doing well it tends to . . . grain on the other hand 
tends not to be doing as well or vice versa. 
 
So for a lot of producers, many producers have chosen, and 
we’re seeing even today more and more producers are again 
looking at, diversifying their operations by adding livestock to 
the mix. And as a result of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 
certainly is important that we do take the time to do the 
research, so that we can assist our producers in finding better 
ways to maximize the opportunities they have within their 
industry, within the sector — their sector — and certainly to 
assist them in some of the marketing and the farming operations 
that they face on a daily basis. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it certainly would be important as well 
that we take note of whether or not this piece of legislation may 
have a problem in the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade) negotiations; I think that’s something we need to 
look at very carefully. I think it’s certainly imperative that we 
check with the industry to have their feedback. 
 
And Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, when we talk about 
legislation such as this where you’re going to producers for 
marketing fees, you certainly want to make sure that the fees 
that they’re contributing are actually going into research dollars 
that they are led to believe that is happening with the money. 
 
And as the minister had indicated, certainly there have been . . . 
the federal government has reneged on their responsibility of 
setting . . . setting us . . . or building this national cattle 
marketing agency. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, it would be important 
for us at this time to take the time to review this legislation a lot 
more carefully. And having said that, I now move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 3 — The Health 

Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 1999 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to join in 
this debate regarding Bill No. 3, The Health Labour Relations 
Reorganization Amendment Act, 1999. I was interested in 
speaking to this Bill because it deals with two subjects that the 
NDP have proven itself to be completely incompetent dealing 
with — health care and trade union issues. 
 
This session of the legislature is only the latest example of the 
government being totally out of touch with the average 
Saskatchewan resident when it comes to either health care or 
labour issues. 
 
(1530) 
 
On the one hand, we have a health care system that is falling 
apart and the members opposite seemingly don’t have the first 
clue in how to deal with it. One day we were told that they 
would throw themselves in front of a truck to save a 
publicly-funded system. The next day we hear the Minister of 
Health telling Saskatchewan residents they’re going to have to 
start thinking about what things in our health care system 
they’re willing to pay for. 
 
One day we hear the members opposite say the problem with 
the health care system is simply one of money. They contend 
that simply throwing more money to the system, Mr. Speaker, 
will restore it to the state it was prior to the NDP’s disastrous 
health forum program. And then the next day we hear members 
of the same party saying that the problems can’t be solved with 
money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one day we hear the Premier saying the health 
care system across the country must be reviewed to ensure that 
all the funding that is possible is getting to front-line services 
and not being wasted on useless administration bureaucracy. 
And the next day that same speaker comes out against the 
Saskatchewan Party for proposing to hold such a review right 
here in Saskatchewan where the health care system has 
deteriorated badly at the same time we’re spending more money 
than we ever have in our history on health care. 
 
One day the Premier says he’s a sworn enemy of the so-called 
two-tier health care and will do anything to stop its progress. 
The next day he hires Harvey McLane — a man who has 
abdicated for two-tier health care when he was a member of the 
legislature — to advise the government on health care policy. 
Suddenly two-tier Harvey, as the members I’m told opposite 
used to call him, looked pretty good to the Premier even though 
he did not look good to the people of Arm River. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 



1318 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2000 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the rest of the members of 
the Assembly, the Red Earth Elementary School, grades 8 to 12 
sitting in your . . . in the east gallery, accompanied by their 
teachers, Marcel McKay, Bryon Young, Candice Meston, 
Sandra Trohak, Barry Bear, Florence Koronoski, Roy Rowlett, 
and Judy Mahoney. 
 
And it’s particularly nice to see someone from so far away here 
in Regina to visit us today. And I’ll be spending some time with 
them later. 
 
So I would ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming the group from Red Earth. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Arm River. Order. I apologize to the hon. member 
for Arm River. It’s my pleasure to recognize the Minister of 
Northern Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
acknowledge the guests as well. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would like to join the 
member to also welcome the teachers as well as the students 
from Red Earth. And . . . (inaudible) . . . enough . . . or always of 
course when we talk about Red Earth, we say Ka 
Meegoskiwugak, which is a name that we give to . . . that we 
call Red Earth. 
 
But we also say in regards to the fellow members, welcome — 
ta wow. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 —The Health Labour Relations Reorganization 
Amendment Act, 1999 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s our pleasure to 
carry on debate on Bill No. 3. 
 
On one day the Premier says that the Liberal leader will bring a 
private hair . . . private health care clinics if he’s let near the 
levers of power. And the next day that Premier puts that same 
Liberal leader in cabinet in order to restore the majority of the 
voters this province took away from the NDP. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are just a few examples of the 
complete lack of direction being offered by the members 
opposite when it comes to health care. With the lack of 
leadership we’ve seen so far from the members opposite, it’s 
little wonder they’ve lost their majority in last fall’s election 

and will lose much more in the next election. 
 
Essentially, Mr. Speaker, Bill 3 simply extends the provisions 
of the recommendations adopted from the Dorsey report in 
1996. This of course was another heavy-handed NDP law that 
forced health care workers, who were already in unions, into 
different unions. 
 
The many more health care workers who chose not to be in 
unions were forced to, were forced to join by the members 
opposite when the original Bill was adopted. 
 
That is typical of the NDP, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If . . . disagree 
with what the NDP wants, those members simply force, force 
them through legislation. It’s the same thing we’ve seen over 
and over again since 1991. The all-knowing, all-seeing 
government doing things against people’s will because the 
government knows best. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the original Dorsey legislation 
reduced the number of bargaining units from 538 to 45. This 
was done we were told to bring about better bargaining in the 
health care system, more labour harmony. Well there’s nothing 
wrong with that, but of course it simply didn’t work, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And it didn’t work not because reducing the number of 
bargaining units was necessarily a bad thing; it didn’t work 
because of the NDP’s attitude. The way they approached this 
legislation was the same way they approach everything: act 
now, talk later. Their idea of consolation is to send concerned 
parties copies of the Bill about 15 minutes after they’ve 
rammed it through the legislature. 
 
So of course after the original legislation passed there was 
plenty of sore feelings throughout this province among health 
care workers who did not appreciate the government dictating 
which union they should belong to or whether they should 
belong to a union at all. 
 
But throughout the whole debate, we simply heard the NDP tell 
us that this was a good thing because it would bring about 
labour harmony in the health care field. 
 
Flash forward a couple of years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and what 
did we find? Did we find this has posed labour harmony? Did 
we find a better health care system because of the government’s 
tinkering with bargaining units? Did these changes cure the 
terrible working conditions that our health workers often find 
themselves in? Of course the answer to all this, the answer to all 
of these questions is a resounding no. 
 
What we found was health care workers continuing to be 
frustrated by the working conditions. We found a health care 
system that seemed ready to come apart at the seams due 
mainly to the NDP’s health reform policies which failed 
miserably. And of course we found the province in the middle 
of one of the largest and one of the longest nurses’ strikes in 
Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
I’m sure the Associate Minister of Health, the former nurses’ 
union president, remembers that very well. I believe the very 
first vote she cast in this place as an MLA was to legislate the 



May 24, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1319 

members of her own union back to work. 
 
That was typical, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Instead of taking the 
concerns of nurses seriously and dealing with the issues, such as 
working conditions; the NDP simply chose to ignore them and 
legislate them back to work. 
 
In fact, I believe that party who likes to think of it as the 
so-called party of the workers has brought in two back, 
back-to-back, work orders in the last year. That’s a funny way 
to treat a friend, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It seems to me the NDP’s friends don’t extend much further 
down than the union leadership — the Associate Minister of 
Health for example. The actual workers who are affected by the 
NDP’s heavy-handed approach to the government have a very 
different view of the members opposite than the Barb Byers of 
the world do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So that’s how far we got with this legislation, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Health care got worse, and labour strife in the health 
care sector got worse as the Associate Minister of Health will 
surely agree. Just another typical day at the office for the NDP, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. The well-laid plans fell apart right before 
their eyes. Kind of like last year’s election, it seems to me. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a bit more about the 
NDP’s labour policy since it is related very closely to the 
provisions of Bill No. 3. And once again, just lately we’ve seen 
that this government is more concerned about those people who 
organize unions than they are with the actual workers in the 
unions. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we now have a situation where a very 
major employer in this province is thinking about leaving the 
province, taking those jobs elsewhere, because this government 
refuses to bring about a level playing field in Saskatchewan 
when it comes to labour policy and labour trade . . . and labour 
and trade union policy. Right now we have a situation in this 
province where workers are asked to decide on whether or not 
to form a union with only half the information before them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, union organizers have the right to come 
into this province, to pressure workers, to woo workers, and to 
tell workers how badly they’re being treated and how they must 
form a union. 
 
However, the law of this province now precludes employers, 
the people who sign the paycheques, to tell their own workers 
the other side of the story. They’re not allowed to tell the 
workers that a union may force job reductions or even 
relocations that we’ve seen in the last instance. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is it too much to ask that the workers have 
all the information before they make these important decisions? 
Apparently the NDP believe that it is too much to ask. Just like 
they believe it’s unreasonable to think the workers making these 
decisions should be given the right to a secret ballot. 
 
Now how they could be against that is beyond me, but the NDP 
oppose extending a secret ballot to workers when they’re 
deciding whether or not to certify. The secret ballot, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is the most fundamental foundation to democracy, yet 

the NDP oppose giving the right of the secret ballot to workers 
in this province. 
 
So let’s sum it up. The NDP is against the freedom of speech in 
the workplace. They’re against allowing workers access to all 
available information when they’re deciding to form a union. 
And they’re against granting workers the fundamental right of a 
secret ballot. And those members like to pass themselves off as 
friends of the workers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That must take a 
lot of guts. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in all likelihood we will supporting Bill 3 
as it would cause even more . . . (inaudible) . . . now to undo 
what the NDP did in 1996. However, we are hoping to see more 
from this government by way of both health care policy and 
labour policy, because theirs has failed miserably in the last 
nine years. Their health care policy has resulted in deteriorating 
service: lineups are longer, waiting lists are longer, the deficits 
that the provincial government has shifted to the health care 
districts are getting larger. 
 
With what happened in Yorkton, I wonder what the people in 
Yorkton think about the NDP’s performance in the health care 
that they’ve had to replace their board. Probably about the same 
as most other people think. The NDP has failed miserably when 
it comes to health care. 
 
And they haven’t fared much better in the labour front. 
Employers leaving the province, workers losing their jobs, 
back-to-work legislation on a regular basis. In other words, 
failure for this government on the labour front too. It makes one 
wonder what the members opposite can do right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At any rate we will continue to consult on this legislation. For 
now I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 2 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon.. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No 2 — The 
Animal Identification Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. A 
great privilege today to rise to talk about Bill No. 2, The 
Animal Identification Amendment Act. And after the last hour 
or two, a couple of hours of dealing with labour issues, this will 
be a real refreshing change talking about animal identification. 
 
Many livestock producers have great concerns with the 
direction the government is taking with this document. They 
have some serious questions about animal identification and 
concerns about the lack of direction from this government on 
this issue in the past. 
 
And I think all we have to do is look around at members on our 
side and start looking at the number of members on our side 
that do actually raise, produce cattle, and they have some grave 
concerns. You know, we can poll a number of the producers in 
the province, and there are many, many cattle producers. And 
we talk to them and we talk to members on our side, and they 



1320 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2000 

have some grave concerns. 
 
And I guess . . . you know it would be very interesting to go to a 
caucus meeting on the opposite side and see how many can 
actually talk about animal identification with any sort of 
intelligence. I mean how many times have they been out 
branding cattle? I know a member on our side is going to be out 
there next week, going through this very process with his herd. 
 
And so there are some grave concerns with the whole process of 
animal identification. Many farmers are telling us that we still 
have yet to come up with a sound program. And I think, just 
from my own experience in agriculture and on the farm, and I 
think, although I haven’t been in cattle production directly . . . 
When I left high school I moved out to Alberta and worked on a 
cattle feed lot for a couple of years. 
 
(1545) 
 
And I realize that there can be a lot of problems with certain 
programs that are implemented. And I’ll speak about grain 
farming and some of the different programs that have been put 
into place. 
 
People are hesitant out there to buy into a new program. When 
we hear government coming out and saying here’s a new 
program for you, most everyone of us will stand back and say, 
what’s it going to be now, because we’ve been through so many 
different programs that have been ineffective, that haven’t 
worked, that have been pulled out from under us, and things 
like that. 
 
So it’s a real concern when we hear government come to us and 
say, here’s a sound program and it’s going to work and you 
should buy into it. And we’re finding a lot of producers that 
aren’t ready to do that, especially the producer from Arm River, 
who’s been through a lot of those programs and realizes, after a 
great speech that he’s just given, but also realizes how 
concerning it is when you get into the animal identification and 
whether the program is going to work or not. 
 
Farmers have questions about who’ll be the licenser of the 
program; how far-ranging it would be; who would be enforcing 
it; and exactly how would it work. A lot of the questions that I 
think need to be answered before we go any further with this. 
 
I’ve heard a couple of people talk at one of the ratepayers’ 
meeting in south Qu’Appelle where a person talked about this 
very program — the national program of identifying cattle and 
why it would be such a good idea. And it was interesting after 
the ratepayers’ meeting to wander around and talk to actual 
producers because that’s who it’s really going affect is the 
actual producers. 
 
And they were asking these very questions. Who is going to 
enforce it? Who is going to be in charge of it? How was the 
program going to work and things like that. And there was just 
so many questions that have yet to have been answered that we 
need to do a lot further investigation and study into how this 
program would work. 
 
And a lot of concerns about costs. As we were going through 
some of the different Bills that were introduced today, I listened 

to the Minister of Agriculture talk about another check-off 
program for cattle producers. And it was really interesting to 
hear him talk. He said, well it’s only two dollars — a dollar to 
go to research and a dollar to go to marketing. 
 
But then what about this one? This is just another one. I mean, 
the minimum that we feel that this program is going to cost and 
what was talked about on the opposite side too, was another 
dollar per animal. Well you know, you can one dollar it and one 
dollar it and one dollar it and one dollar it, and when you say 
one dollar it doesn’t mean very much per head. But when you 
do a program like the Minister of Agriculture just mentioned, 
when you add a program like this, it adds up. 
 
And I think if there’s one thing that we’ve noticed in agriculture 
both on the grain side of it, grain sector, and in the livestock 
sector, is the erosion of our net — our profitability. And it’s just 
slowly being eroded away, whether it’s freight rates which we 
talked about last week or the week before, whether it’s crop 
insurance, whether it’s animal identification, whether it’s a 
check-off for livestock, people in rural Saskatchewan are sick 
and tired or seeing their net . . . any sort of a profit line eroding. 
 
And it doesn’t come just bang, with one program. It doesn’t 
come with one issue. It comes with a number of them. And this 
is just one more of those issues. So they have some real 
concerns as to the cost of it. It may only be a dollar, but a dollar 
is a dollar, and it all adds up per head. 
 
I think a number of other producers are really concerned with 
the fact that they do go through this program and their livestock 
is tagged and they have it identified properly, but most 
producers, and in fact I think there hasn’t been a producer that 
has come to me that I have talked to that has said, there’s a 
fail-proof way of identifying animals. 
 
You know, I think all you have to do is go to a feedlot some 
place where there’s a number of cattle tagged with ear tags, and 
it wouldn’t be uncommon to find tags on the ground, in the 
chutes, and wherever else. And now where did that tag come 
from? You’ve bought into this program, you’ve cost . . . it costs 
you another dollar per head. You’ve bought into it. 
 
You send your animal to market, and somewhere in 
transportation the tag has come off — in the lot before it goes to 
market the tag has come off, in the processing yard the tag has 
come off. How do you know? And there hasn’t been a producer 
that I have talked to yet, including members on our side, that 
say there’s foolproof way. And I think members opposite feel 
there is, and maybe there is a foolproof way of tagging certain 
animals. But we haven’t heard of it ourselves. 
 
When I was at that ratepayers’ meeting in south Qu’Appelle it 
was, there was a lady there speaking on the very national 
program. And they had the symbol. It was very nice symbol and 
they had the design of the different ear tags that one could buy. 
But very seldom did she ever get into the point that it’s 100 per 
cent fail proof, because it isn’t. 
 
So there’s problems regardless of whether it’s an ear tag or a 
brisket tag or whatever you want to go to. There are problems. 
And that’s where people get into some real grave concern. 
Whose responsibility is it if that animal has changed hands 



May 24, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1321 

three or four times in its life cycle? Whose responsibility is it 
when the tag comes off and then there’s no background on it? 
 
I mean I realize the whole point of the animal identification 
program, and especially the international program and we’re 
starting to export our cattle around the world especially down to 
the States; if they want to make sure that there’s some 
guaranteed history on that animal, it would be a crime to see 
anything that happened like in Great Britain with mad cow 
disease and things like that. And I mean that’s where this is all 
. . . that’s the genesis of all this. This is where it’s all starting 
from. 
 
But I don’t know if we’ve ever got to the point in our province, 
and especially nationally, that we can guarantee identification 
from calf to slaughter. And that’s where our producers are so 
concerned. Not to mention the cost — it’s going to cost you 
more; not to mention perhaps the bookkeeping — who’s going 
to be the enforcer of such a program? 
 
And so it’s really disconcerting when we hear the members 
opposite at times say, oh, just push it through; I mean it’s 
something that’s good. And we say yes, well, it’s maybe is as 
far as theory-wise, but is it practical and can it be done. 
 
Because one thing that I have noticed more than anything else 
standing on this side and talking to different issues, is the lack 
of common sense coming from that side. You know, and it just 
. . . I agree maybe the theory is right. The theory is right, and 
you write it down with a pen and paper and it sounds really, 
really good, and then common sense it just doesn’t apply. 
 
And I think some of the debate going on today already about 
some of the labour legislation, you know where is the common 
sense to that. And we’ve really, really failed to see it. In fact, 
the minister keeps saying, I don’t understand, every time after 
she’s done answering a question, and I truly believe that now, is 
that she doesn’t understand and the common sense is gone. 
 
And so that’s one reason why we wanted to have a little more 
time to look at this Bill and to research this Bill to see if there 
are things that can be amended and looked at so that the 
program, although in theory is right, but as far as the dollars and 
cents of it we have some concerns with that. 
 
As far as the guaranteeing that the identification will be there 
from calf to slaughter is a real concern. And probably even 
bigger and even better than that is the fact that the government 
is on the other side saying this is a great program, listen to us, 
believe us, here’s another program, heaped on agriculture 
producers. And believe me agriculture producers have had 
enough of this government’s programs heaped on them and I 
think this is just another one. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy, Deputy Speaker, I would like to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 2, The Animal Identification 
Amendment Act, 1999. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 9 — The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 1999 (No. 2) be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 
like to spend a moment or two and discuss some of the items 
that I’ve found when I reviewed this particular Bill No. 9, The 
Child and Family Services Act. 
 
Actually the amendments that I’ve found in there have a lot of 
positive things to them. And I would like to suggest that the 
changing of some of these amendments to include an extension 
of the time when young people who still need assistance after 
the age of 18 are in fact being looked after under these 
amendments. 
 
And I notice that some of the clauses will apply now to people 
up to the age of 21 if that, in fact, was needed in order for them 
to obtain the requirements for further education or assistance in 
training, or for people that are experiencing some difficulty or 
some disability, some impairment, and require some additional 
protection or some programs. 
 
I think all that is very positive. And I noticed also that maybe 
this is very timely because from my experience earlier in the 
school system and talking at some length to people in school 
divisions, I notice that a lot of the problems that are generally 
picked up and looked after by Social Services, for instance, or 
other departments of government are being thrust into the 
education system. And teachers and administrators in the school 
are expected then to be able to try and accommodate those 
students, and in their way try to not only to accommodate them 
and work them into the mainstream but try and solve some of 
the basic problem. 
 
It’s very commendable, but it’s not exactly the right solution. 
And I think some of these amendments do in fact go in that 
direction. 
 
I have some caution though and some concern in terms of these 
particular amendments. If we start down that road of trying to 
add services where we think are needed, I’m really concerned 
that maybe some of these young people will continue to fall 
through the cracks and not get the services needed. Because, as 
you know, there’s an increasing demand placed on our young 
people. I certainly realize that from having completed raising 
my family, and now I’m enjoying the grandchildren as they 
come along and I’m watching them develop. 
 
There is, there’s certainly a lot of opportunity for these young 
people to come up against situations and a lot of stresses in their 
particular life that we never thought was possible when we were 
growing up. The world is becoming much more complex and 
the stress for these young people to compete in our system is 
becoming increasingly onerous on these young people. And 
particularly, if these young people are experiencing some 
disability and need some special concern, the world, I’m sure, 
must becoming increasingly more and more frustrated with 
them. 
 
Fortunately a lot of our young people are very capable of 
adapting to these changes, probably much more so than 
certainly I would have been at that age. 



1322 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2000 

However, the sophistication is putting so much stress on our 
young people that I think there’s an increasing number — at 
least we feel there’s an increasing number — falling away and 
into the cracks and not getting adequate service. 
 
So I would encourage that we try to move away from allowing 
the . . . or requiring the schools particularly to try and solve 
these problems, and in fact having Social Services or 
commitments under this particular Act try to amend those 
problems. 
 
I guess my other concern then becomes the, who is going to be 
able to do this work? And I know we have permissive 
legislation in these amendments, but who in fact is going to be 
able to do that causes me some concern. Because as you know, 
the systems and the programs that we have in place right now 
are completely stressed in terms of their own ability to 
accommodate any additional new pressures that are being put 
on them. And I have some concern. 
 
For instance, criticism that we just heard recently in the annual 
report of the Children’s Advocate highlighted some — very 
graphically — some very distinct problems in Social Services 
and some of the problems that they were encountering already. 
If we are trying to direct more of these problems and these 
programs to those kind of services, I’m afraid we’re going to 
overload those facilities. And in fact the services offered now 
appear to be somewhat underfunded and incapable of coping 
with the numbers that they have there already. 
 
Another concern that I have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is although 
we have permissive legislation in this Act, my concern would 
be that how are these young people, how are they going to be 
identified; who is going to identify them? There’s no mention 
of the subjectivity in trying to allocate who is going to require 
extra service, who is not. 
 
It gives me some concern that this very subjective judgment is 
going to maybe be biased toward . . . maybe it’ll be 
handicapped, maybe it’ll be learning difficulty, maybe it’ll be 
physical. Those kinds of subjective evaluations give me some 
concerns because I don’t know under what conditions, I don’t 
know what circumstances, who will be doing the deciding. 
 
Those kind of things are not addressed in the amendments. 
Hopefully they’ll be coming forward in any regulation so that 
it’s transparent and everybody can see that it’s going to be fair 
and just for these young people. 
 
I can’t overstress how important it is for all young people to be 
developed to their potential. And I think that’s the underlying 
factor in this Bill as I read it. And I have to commend the 
minister for trying to do that. And if that’s the intent, I think 
that’s exactly what’s needed. 
 
All young people certainly have potential. And the ability to 
direct these people, whether it’s through the minister’s ability 
under his portfolio to do it, is yet to be seen. And I really think 
that it’s an important aspect and I would encourage us to move 
forward. But at this time I would move adjournment of the 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote, I wish to remind 
committee members that the Department of Agriculture was last 
here on April 10, and having said that, I’ll invite the minister to 
re-introduce his officials before I call the first subvote. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and 
thank you to the committee members who are present today. 
But with me I have Ernie Spencer, who is seated to my right, 
the assistant deputy minister of Ag and Food, and to my left, 
Hal Cushon, director of policy program and development 
branch. Behind me, directly behind me, Susie Miller, assistant 
deputy minister; and also behind me, Laurier Donais, senior 
manager, financial service administration, and also Ross 
Johnson, manager of operation service and administration; and 
of course from Crop Insurance, Doug Matthies. 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to you and your officials. We wanted to start today by 
discussing some of the issues surrounding crop insurance. 
 
Mr. Minister, let’s start by . . . I wonder if you could provide for 
the House some indication of what level of take up there’s been 
in crop insurance this year. There’s been a number of changes, 
many of which . . . in fact I think all of which we agreed with in 
terms of the changes — most of them were our ideas to begin 
with, I think — the changes that were announced. 
 
Mr. Minister, I hope we are seeing an increase in the take up of 
crop insurance as it becomes more affordable. And that’s an 
issue for producers out there, as you know — the affordability 
of the program in areas where they’re not normally subjected to 
crop insurance concerns. 
 
And as you move further north, as an example, in Saskatchewan 
where drought isn’t as prevalent, crop insurance, it doesn’t have 
the same breakdown of the number of producers. And I wonder 
if you’d provide for the Assembly a breakdown by risk area of 
the percentages of farmers who have taken up the Crop 
Insurance program, and a global number for the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — To the member opposite, I don’t 
have the . . . by risk area. I think there’s . . . Doug, 16 or 17 of 
them in the province, but I will get that for you. 
 
On the issue of how many farmers have contracts, about 75 per 
cent of the farm community have contracts although they 
wouldn’t have all of their crops covered. So it’s a little bit 
difficult to follow. Because while they . . . 75 per cent have 
contracts, not all of those would have 100 per cent of their crops 
covered. 
 
So about 75 per cent have contracts; in the area of 60, 65 per 
cent of all the crops are covered. And . . . of the acreage. And 
that’s up about 2 or 3 per cent, maybe as much as 5 per cent, but 
in the area between probably 2 and 4 per cent increase from last 



May 24, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1323 

year. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Have you or your 
department or Crop Insurance officials done any kind of an 
analysis of the reasons why we don’t seem to get any higher 
than that? I know we . . . it bounces back and forth a little bit 
but goes up at various times and then it starts backing off, 
generally backing off as prices improve, increasing in coverage 
as prices seem to decline. 
 
And I . . . Make no mistake about it; I support the Crop 
Insurance program and have been a participant of the program 
for a long time. I think it’s a good program. The problems that 
are associated with it though are some producers feel that the 
level of premium is still too high for the potential amount of 
coverage that they may have available to them. 
 
So I’m wondering whether your department ever looks at it and 
makes some sort of an assessment or an analysis of the program 
to determine how you can encourage more producers to be a 
part of it. Because obviously as the program, as the insurance 
program grows in size and the amount of acres that are covered, 
it increases the amount of . . . essentially the amount of support 
available to agriculture and reduces the amount of risk for 
farmers. 
 
And included in that analysis, I’m wondering whether you look 
at farm size in any respect with this. Does it make any 
difference if the farm is larger or smaller in terms of the take up 
of insurance? Does it make any difference in terms of a 
diversified operation in terms of crop mix? Does that impact 
upon the likelihood of looking at crop insurance? Does it make 
any difference in terms of livestock diversification as well? 
 
I think we’ve . . . What I’m suggesting, Mr. Chair, and Mr. 
Minister, is I think what we need to do is really get down to 
determining why it is that some people move into the Crop 
Insurance program — which I think is a very good program — 
and why some people don’t accept crop insurance. 
 
And we would be willing certainly to co-operate in terms of 
trying to address this problem. Because as we all know, the 
concern that non-agriculture producers have when it comes to 
support programs for agriculture, particularly ad hoc programs, 
they look at it and they say, well why didn’t they cover 
themselves for disaster in terms of a crop insurance program. 
 
And you know as well as I know, Mr. Minister, there’s some 
very good reasons for that. A lot of the problems associated 
with agriculture right now are not production-related concerns, 
they are price-related concerns. 
 
So it’s with that in mind that I ask these general direction 
questions about the program. And I want your thoughts and 
your departments’ and the Crop Insurance officials’ thoughts on 
it as to how we can address that concern. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — If I could for the member opposite, 
Mr. Chairman, let him know that . . . I guess statistics are 
always difficult to interpret or maybe very easy to interpret 
depending on what you’re trying to accomplish. But in 
Saskatchewan we have the second highest percentage take up of 
crop insurance of any province in Canada, second only to 

Manitoba. 
 
And the analysis that has been done — and I think it’s a good 
question based on the size of farms — whether or not larger 
farmers take a . . . are more prone to take up crop insurance or 
less, and the same with small farmers. In fact in all categories, 
the percentage seems to be almost the same, and go up and 
down in all categories at the same time. And I think in — Doug, 
what year was it as low as 55 per cent? — 1996, it went as low 
as 55 per cent and has bounced back up to 75 per cent. 
 
The one interesting connection that there seems to be to 
whether or not a farm family takes up crop insurance is whether 
or not they are diversified. And it seems like they will use the 
diversification into cattle, or hogs, or other small business as a 
self-insurance. And we do see a correlation between percentage 
of farmers who may have hogs or cattle, fewer of those people 
choose to take crop insurance, which I think logically may be 
explained by the fact that they have a more stable income and 
will take their money that they would normally pay on crop 
insurance and inject it into the agricultural diversification side, 
whether that be hogs or cattle. And we do see some fairly 
significant change on that basis. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. So it’s not, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, 
it’s not an issue of affordability then; in a lot of cases it’s an 
issue of just simple choice. Or these folks that aren’t inclined to 
take it are sort of rugged individualists and aren’t inclined to 
involve themselves in government-related programs. How do 
you determine those kinds of things? 
 
I think it . . . the reason why I think it important is, is as I said 
earlier, we’ve got to develop into the future, not only move 
further along in terms of how we put together a good, 
affordable crop insurance program, but it makes connection of 
course to the whole issue of safety nets in themselves as to how 
we can develop a safety net into the future. And there are a lot 
of people feel that the crop insurance program combined with a 
revenue insurance program might be the way that we can look 
at a long-term safety net. 
 
So I’m interested in your thoughts, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It’s always a little surprising to me, 
especially this year after all of the angst that we had last fall and 
over the winter with the problems associated with agriculture 
and what was obviously a pretty severe cost-price squeeze that 
farmers found themselves in with the costs of . . . input costs, 
fuel and fertilizer and chemicals going up, and the product that 
they were selling, at least in part, for grains and oilseeds going 
down. Although you would know as an active farmer that some 
of the pulse crops actually last year was a pretty good year. 
 
But one of the trends that we follow very closely are 
nonpayment of accounts and cancellation due to nonpayment. 
And I just want to give you some numbers that surprised me a 
little bit because I had expected the possibility of some fairly 
high nonpayments this year. But in 1995-96, the cancellations 
due to nonpayment of their crop insurance premium was 866; in 
’96-97, 1,653; in ’97-98, 597; in ’98-99, 602; and ’99-2000, it 
dropped to 240 which is the lowest level in a long, long time. 



1324 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2000 

And so there seems to be, while there is . . . there are problems 
in agriculture, it is also true that payment of crop insurance and 
payment on most farm loans, whether it’s at the lending 
institution — and this is in a general way — or at Farm Credit 
Corporation, we are not anywhere near the levels of 
non-payment that we were seeing in the mid-’80s. And it’s not 
to say again — and I’m not trying to paint a picture that all is 
well and there are no problems — but the fact of the matter is 
that most farmers are, as you know, are out seeding. I think as 
of Sunday we had 79 per cent of the crop in the ground as 
compared to the 10-year average of 43 per cent. And I would 
expect as of today, this being Wednesday, we probably are 
close to 85 per cent of the crop and well on our way to seeding 
something . . . maybe a million acres above the 10-year average. 
 
So, when you add all of this up — while it’s not rosy and it’s 
not without difficulty — the farm side seems to have stabilized 
a great deal from a year ago and certainly is nowhere near the 
instability that existed as a result of low grain prices in the 
1980s. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Is your department and the Crop Insurance 
Corporation taking steps to try and increase the crop insurance 
coverage levels? Not coverage levels in terms of production 
levels, but the amount of producer uptake that there is? Through 
advertising . . . or are you looking at . . . Do you do things like 
focus testing your programs to see whether or not they are 
meeting the needs of farmers? What kind of steps do you take 
to determine what direction you are going to go with the Crop 
Insurance Corporation? 
 
You made a number of changes this spring, of which we agreed 
with. And I’d like to know if you’re looking at further 
adjustments as we move along in the program. Or what prompts 
decisions about change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to reiterate, Mr. Chairman, 
to the committee again that this year the number of contracts in 
the province has increased by 1,049 which is a relatively 
significant increase in the number of people taking contracts 
with Crop Insurance. 
 
And I think in large part that was some of the changes that 
occurred to the premium and also with some of the winds in the 
last of couple days, the reseeding issue — which I think you 
raised in question period last year — as being not sufficient 
especially for some of the pulse crops. I think that has been 
raised to a high of $30 an acre for the reseeding for the pulses, 
so that has actually increased the number of people who would 
come in. 
 
And I think we’ve had some calls as a result of the wind storm 
although the reseeding claims are considerably lower than they 
were at this time last year. Last year I think in total we had 
several thousand reclaims in total. I think so far this year we’re 
at about 250 so that is . . . We’re having a much better spring so 
far but we’ll keep our fingers crossed. 
 
In terms of some of the areas we’re looking at changing to 
improve the numbers of people and the quality of the product 
that we have to offer, I think there’s three main areas. 
 
First of all to extend them to some of the new crops. As we 

grow different crops, every year we have a new list in front of 
us that farmers would like us to cover. I think this year, Mr. 
Chairman, we’re seeding 50 different crops, 50 different — not 
varieties — but 50 different crops in the province. A number of 
them are not covered by crop insurance but the request is there, 
and as we move in that direction I think that will increase the 
number of farmers who take crop insurance. 
 
Secondly, on the issue of hail insurance you will know that the 
maximum coverage you can get on hail is 70 per cent. There 
have been requests to change that to 80 per cent and we’re 
looking seriously at that. I can’t announce that but we’re 
working on it and hopefully we will have something to 
announce for the next crop year. 
 
And the third main area, which I think has allowed some of the 
producers who are having a difficult time meeting their 
premium needs to become included in crop insurance, is a base 
program where the farmer pays no premium. 
 
This year we lowered the premium level to a minimum of 10 
per cent. We’re looking at a new category possibly for next year 
which would provide a coverage of crop insurance at no cost to 
the farmer. Of course your coverage would be less but it would 
offer up another tool in the tool kit, if you want to look at it that 
way, for farmers who are looking at crop insurance. 
 
So we think those three main changes, if we get them done and 
the consultation with groups is successful, that we will put in 
place for . . . hopefully for next year. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The whole marketing 
of the program is what we are wanting to discuss with you on 
how we can improve the affordability and the marketing of the 
program and move to quickly — or hopefully quickly — 
encourage more producers to become involved in the program. 
 
Certainly in the area of specialty crops, we’ve seen an explosion 
of acreage in many of those crops. And I just noted on the 
weekend when I was at home, some of the information coming 
forward from the Crop Insurance Corporation about changes in 
a number of areas. And specialty crops have become very, very 
important. And as you noted earlier that it has an impact upon 
people’s decision to make . . . people’s decision to involve 
themselves in the crop insurance program. 
 
And so I think the quicker of course that we can bring new 
crops into the list of insured crops, it certainly helps to bring 
more producers into the program. And I see on the weekend 
there was some crops, additional crops like coriander and 
chickpeas that have been . . . are covered now to very 
significant levels. Aniseed is another one that’s confirmed. 
 
And I understand, I’m told by some of the folks in my home 
community that you’re going to be going out to a plant that 
deals with many of those speciality crops — Canadian Select 
Grains at Eston who has a very, very large operation there, and 
I think makes a good contribution to the community and indeed 
to the province as a whole. 
 
And you will note, Mr. Minister, when you’re there, if you 
know the smell of black licorice, well that comes from aniseed. 
And when you’re at that plant, I want you to take note of that — 



May 24, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1325 

the whole place smells like black licorice . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, I know. I’m told by some of the people 
that are involved in that plant that you’ll be going out to that. 
 
I want you to bring that back to the House because I’m having 
some difficulty with some of my members, making them 
believe that that’s actually the case. But just a little aside, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
But I think the important point that I want to make with you is 
that the quicker we can bring those new crops into the program, 
I think will encourage, will encourage many producers to 
become more involved with the program. 
 
So there’s affordability issues. There’s new crop issues. There’s 
certainly how we address coverage levels and how we can 
improve coverage levels. As you know, farmers are taking and 
using every tool available to them, technological tool available 
to them to increase yields and stay ahead of the cost-price 
squeeze in that effort. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m interested in your thoughts about how we 
can continue to make crop insurance affordable and market the 
program even further. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well for the information of the 
committee, I think the member from Kindersley is correct when 
he says this program can never stay the same. It has to be 
ongoing work to look at it and to improve the quality of the 
product in the insurance program. And the reason being that the 
crops change constantly. 
 
And I’d just like to read into the record the planning decreases 
and increases that farmers are making. And I start out by saying 
that it’s not that many years ago that we seeded 20 million acres 
of wheat in this province, and I will just go through this to give 
you a comparison. 
 
This year farmers plan to seed 9.1 million acres of wheat, which 
is down 16 per cent from last year; oats down 5 per cent at 1.9; 
rye down 54 per cent at 95,000 acres; flax down 36 per cent at 
900,000 acres; canola down 18 per cent at 5.4 million acres; 
mustard down 25 per cent at 440,000; sunflower seed down 15 
per cent at 55,000. 
 
And those areas where the big increases are, durum wheat up 39 
per cent at 5 million. The member from Kindersley may be a 
little concerned about the huge increase in durum because I 
know that’s the product that he grows. Barley up 28 per cent at 
5.4 million. 
 
But here are the interesting crops for many of the farmers. 
Lentils up 16 per cent at 1.4 million; dried peas up 45 per cent 
at 2.2 million acres; and canaryseed up 12 per cent at 380,000. 
 
And so you can see that as the crops change, obviously our 
program of insurance has to try to stay in front of that. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, I think it’s . . . we’ve seen this 
gradual shift away from traditional crops. And it’s important, I 
think, from a number of standpoints as we move in that 
direction, the diversification that’s taken place over the last 
number of years in crop mix has increased the stability for a lot 

of farm producers out there. And I think we’re all looking for 
that. 
 
(1630) 
 
No one is more encouraged by that than I and members on this 
side of the House as we see farmers move to non-traditional 
crops and the whole area of marketing becomes a part of that. 
 
And it’s interesting to see that in almost every single case when 
you move into those areas, it’s into crops that are marketed in a 
far different fashion than traditional crops. And I think that 
that’s an important development in agriculture that we are 
witnessing. And it’s something that we are very, very 
supportive on this side of the House, farmers taking more of the 
initiative to control more of a part of the business that they . . . 
and indeed it is a business that they are involved in. 
 
As we see farm size increasing, and we’ve seen that in very 
dramatic fashion over the last number of years, farmers are 
looking at diversification into specialty crops as an avenue of 
financial stability that is extremely important in maintaining 
their operations. 
 
So I think anything that we can do as a legislature and as a 
Department of Agriculture and Food and from the Crop 
Insurance department to help in that regard would be important. 
 
Mr. Minister, that brings us to the whole area of marketing of 
crops. And I think that that’s an important area for producers in 
Saskatchewan these days. I know that a number . . . I note in the 
last number of years we’ve taken a little bit less . . . your 
department has taken a little bit less of an emphasis role on 
marketing and more of an emphasis role — at least I think you 
have — in terms of production. 
 
And I think that that’s something that we might want to 
examine a little bit. As we witness the increase in acreage of 
non-traditional marketed grains, I think we should be doing 
everything we can to increase the marketing focus in your 
department that we can. 
 
And I saw some information the other day from — and it really 
surprised me quite frankly — out of Alberta, that in southern 
Alberta the irrigated area makes up about 2 per cent I’m told of 
the productive land in Alberta and yet produces somewhere in 
the neighbourhood of 18 per cent of the available return. So it 
speaks to the whole area of diversification in non-traditional 
crops. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, what I’m asking from your 
department is the development and the ongoing development of 
programs in terms of assisting producers in marketing that we 
should be looking at, and I’m wondering what your thoughts are 
in that regard and how we can assist farmers in making good 
marketing decisions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Maybe while I’m waiting for my 
staff to get me the information, I just have some interesting 
statistics on some of the crops that are before the Crop 
Insurance board for consideration to be added into the Crop 
Insurance program. 
 



1326 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2000 

Just recently we have added hemp and mint and saskatoons . . . 
no, these are the ones we are looking at: hemp, mint, 
saskatoons, and dried beans. And we have just added alfalfa 
seed, caraway, chickpeas, both desis and kabulis, and also 
sunflowers. And then there’s a long list that are being 
considered, things like borage, cabbage, pumpkins, and many 
other unusual products that are being grown and people are 
making a very good living. 
 
I was talking to a farmer from Radisson who has, I think, 15 
acres of apple trees. And he’s selling them for a dollar a pound. 
And he was telling me fantastic numbers that he’s getting from 
this small orchard of apples that are competing head-on in size 
and quality with the best apples being raised in British 
Columbia. So there are huge opportunities. 
 
The other example that I like to use is the issue of the Hutterite 
brethren, who many people use as examples on one side that 
they’re buying up too much land or that they should be doing 
more. But they own about 1 per cent of the land base in the 
province of Saskatchewan and on that land base they produce 
30 per cent of the hogs in the province. They produce in the 
area of 20 per cent of the poultry and on and on and on. 
 
And not to say that their style of farming or their lifestyle is 
good or bad or indifferent. I mean we’re a very tolerant society 
and I actually think they do a very good job. But it’s just to give 
you an indication of the land use. That you don’t need a 
hundred quarters of land to make a living in the province. There 
may be that on 20 acres of land — growing apples or pumpkins 
or other commodities — that you can actually have a better 
quality of life than you can with huge equipment and a million 
dollars or $5 million worth of land base. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I was frankly looking 
for a little bit more in terms of . . . (inaudible) . . . You have 
some thoughts on the marketing of specialty crops and how we 
can encourage producers to become involved in the marketing 
of their crops, and I’d like your thoughts on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — On the issue of exporting and 
selling the pulse crops for crops in general, it’s been our 
approach — and the member may have opinion on this as to 
how it’s working in his area — but is to support much more the 
associations in their approach to exporting and organizing 
themselves. 
 
So Sask Ag and Food would work with the pulse board and the 
organic growers and the herb and spice association. I know I 
have an opportunity to speak at their convention coming up in 
the very near future. 
 
There’s also at the government level some pretty active work in 
the potato area where we are now working with companies 
exporting seed potatoes into Prince Edward Island. And I know 
at the last Ag ministers’ conference I spent, oh, an hour, an hour 
and a half with the minister from Prince Edward Island talking 
about the need to establish a permanent seed potato base in a 
province like Saskatchewan. 
 
Because in Prince Edward Island, obviously because of the 
disease control and the ongoing production of potatoes, they 
would be very interested in signing long-term contracts with 

producers on an ongoing basis to grow seed potatoes on dry 
land here and exporting them on a regular basis to Eastern 
Canada. 
 
So these are the kind of things that I think we can do in terms of 
partnership and the approach with the associations. 
 
I might add as well that the Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership, or STEP, does a lot of work with agriculture. And 
it would be great if all members of the Assembly had an 
opportunity to see that organization at work because it really is 
a unique attempt to blend the private sector and government 
into an agency that does, I think, some pretty spectacular work 
on putting the products from our province into the world 
market. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I would 
certainly agree with the direction in that area. What we would 
like to see on this side of the House is more of an emphasis on 
the assistance of understanding the marketing of crops for 
producers out there. 
 
We see in some circles a very aggressive approach from 
producers to get involved in the marketing of their products. 
There are many other farmers who choose not to get involved in 
the marketing of their products, primarily in grains that are 
marketed under the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
We’ve seen some adjustments in the program from the 
Canadian Wheat Board to allow some forward pricing and that 
sort of stuff just in one crop, in wheat. I think that was an 
important step forward, and I hope the board of directors is 
looking at some changes in addition to that. 
 
And I would like to know what your government’s thoughts are 
on the changes that were made in the Canadian Wheat Board to 
allow for the pricing of some of your wheat at this time. As you 
know, that’s an available option for farmers right now. 
 
I’m wondering if your government supports those changes in 
that direction and how we can more aggressively get more 
crops involved into those kinds of things. Because you know 
very well and I know very well that younger farmers tend to be 
more involved in . . . and want to be more involved in the 
marketing of their products. 
 
And so indeed these are the future farmers of Saskatchewan and 
in many cases are operating very sizeable operations right now, 
and will be the future of the farmers well into the future here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So while we on this side of the House understand some people’s 
reluctance to get involved in the marketing of their crops, I 
think we also have to recognize the fact that there has been a 
dramatic shift in opinion in this area and that we want to do 
everything we can to encourage farmers in this direction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member opposite will know 
that the Canadian Wheat Board has been very instrumental in 
the grain industry in Western Canada for many, many years, 
and personally I think have done an excellent job of putting 
Canadian grain, both durum and hard wheat, into the market at 
a significant premium to farmers. 



May 24, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1327 

I want to say as well, though, that in the changing world 
economy, obviously, the Wheat Board has as much interest as 
any of us in changing in order to make the services they provide 
to farmers meet the continually changing economy of the world. 
 
And I might add with the changes to the production patterns in 
the province, where we’ve gone from 20 million acres 
production of wheat to nine million acres, this obvious shift has 
meant the Canadian Wheat Board, that they have to do some 
fairly significant adjustments. 
 
It’s my view that the recent changes that allow flexibility for 
some of the producers were not taken up by producers to any 
extent. I think less than 100 farmers have actually — I was 
talking to someone yesterday — I think it’s less than 100 
farmers of the 40 or 50,000 farmers in the province have 
actually exercised the option that has been presented. 
 
So whether it’s relevant or not in the scheme of things when so 
few farmers pick up on it, I think leaves it to the future to see 
whether that change will do much to change and reflect the 
needs of farmers out into the future. 
 
You mentioned the need for more ability for farmers to have 
access to information and do promotion and export. It always 
amazes me how much of that is going on already in quite 
remote areas of the province. 
 
And to use one example — and to refer to my hometown or my 
home area as remote probably isn’t a good example — but I 
was in Frontier the other day, and the Southland Processors, a 
young company, Michael Kirk and a group who have put 
together an exporting company for chickpeas and they’re 
exporting them all over the world. And when I was there, the 
plant was busy preparing not carloads or hundred-train carloads, 
but 100 pound bags to meet the needs of a special religious 
festival in Turkey. And they were loading them in Frontier. 
 
And what’s amazing to me is that our entrepreneurs are out 
there finding this information on the Internet and plugging into 
niche markets and charging a fairly significant premium. And 
they’re doing this without a lot of guidance from government or 
from anyone. 
 
And so the fact of the matter is that when you have a system of 
farming where a few weeks ago the farmers got up, the 
conditions were right, and today we’re getting close to having 
33 million acres seeded without any instructions from the 
Minister of Agriculture — it just happens, it’s like magic — 
this is a pretty innovative group of people. 
 
And I know all of us as farmers like to complain about our 
plight in life, but very few of us would trade with anyone else, 
whether it would be being a lawyer or a consultant or a doctor. 
Many of us choose to be farmers because it’s just a great way to 
make a living. 
 
So whatever we can do in the Department of Agriculture to help 
that shift occur without interfering with the entrepreneurial 
spirit is the way I think we should be headed. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s frankly a 
breath of fresh air from an administration who hasn’t been all 

that supportive of that in the past. I’m pleased to hear you say 
that, and it may shock some of the people that you have 
represented over the last number of years that there has been a 
shift in this direction. 
 
I interpret your comments as being that you would not be 
supportive of expanding the number of crops that are marketed 
under the Canadian Wheat Board then? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — To the contrary. For example, if the 
producers in the province came to us and said that they wanted 
to have a vote on some of these new crops being handled by the 
Wheat Board and it was the choice of the farmers to sell canola 
or any product through the Canadian Wheat Board, I would be 
all in favour of supporting that. 
 
But I think what has to drive it, is it has to come from the 
farmers who would come to us with the idea. What I don’t think 
is a good idea, where people for philosophical reasons either on 
the left or right, drive the agenda from Ottawa or Regina and 
impose that on farmers. 
 
So my view is that, when I meet with the governor of North 
Dakota or the minister of Agriculture . . . the secretary of 
Agriculture, Roger Johnson, or the secretary from Montana, and 
they say we want to review the Canadian Wheat Board to see 
whether we can sell our durum through the Canadian Wheat 
Board because we believe there’s a premium on it; I say good, 
let’s review it. And those meetings are going on at the present 
time. 
 
That’s a big shift from where we were three years ago when 
there were protests at the U.S. border trying to keep durum from 
going into the United States. We actually have meetings going 
on now between the ag-secretary from North Dakota and the 
Canadian Wheat Board to see whether or not the Wheat Board 
would take their durum from North Dakota into the Canadian 
Wheat Board pool. 
 
And so I look at this as all very practical. I don’t think it should 
be a philosophical debate — right wing, left wing. I think that’s 
the way you get economies into trouble. I think it’s what works. 
 
My personal view, although there will be people probably who 
disagree with me — if American farmers want to become 
involved in the Canadian Wheat Board, in the Pool and the 
durum coming out of that area . . . I think about 80 per cent of 
all the durum that moves into export position in the world is 
grown in a small oval of Saskatchewan, Manitoba, North 
Dakota, and Montana, and it’s amazing with what you could do 
with that if you decided you were going to process it all here, 
all of it. 
 
And I’m not talking about a monopoly or something that would 
interfere with international trade. But can you imagine any 
industry in the world controlled in one small area — 80 per cent 
of it — and what you could do with that if you had a vision for 
the future. And I think in that the Canadian Wheat Board could 
play a very, very important role. 
 
But I think both those opposed to the Canadian Wheat Board 



1328 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2000 

and the Wheat Board itself have to change in order to make that 
happen. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — You’re certainly correct, Mr. Minister, Mr. 
Chair, that there is a need for change in that area. 
 
While you are supportive — and I can appreciate your 
comments — you’re supportive of the fact that if there were a 
producer group come forward that wanted to have a vote to see 
whether they wanted to include additional crops to the Canadian 
Wheat Board jurisdiction. Would you also be supportive of the 
converse of that then? 
 
If there were producers coming forward that wanted to remove 
themselves from the Canadian Wheat Board, would you support 
their marketing choice in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — What I do know at this point in 
time is all the market research — and I could be wrong — the 
Canadian Wheat Board could, could probably provide this for 
us. But the majority of farmers in Saskatchewan who produce 
wheat — it’s my understanding the survey is done by the 
Canadian Wheat Board — support the Wheat Board to the 
largest extent. 
 
Quite honestly, I mean I know I hear the hard activists in 
support of the Wheat Board saying the world would end if you 
didn’t have the Canadian Wheat Board, and I hear the right 
wing saying that it’s the end of the world if you don’t get rid of 
the Canadian Wheat Board. My view is neither of those 
positions are, are accurate. 
 
The fact of the matter is the Canadian Wheat Board has been 
hugely successful in protecting the interests of farmers in 
Western Canada and in this province. And I think still in almost 
every instant does a good job. 
 
And I think the balance we have where if farmers want to grow 
pulse crops and market their own grain and yet have the option 
of growing durum and hard wheat that is sold through the 
Canadian Wheat Board. I think we have a very, very healthy 
agricultural marketing and exporting system. I think our 
difficulty is, is that we’re competing with subsidies in other 
parts of the world that make it very difficult for our farmers to 
compete. 
 
So I support the Canadian Wheat Board. I think it needs to 
change constantly just as crop insurance. And I think it’s 
difficult if you have an organization that doesn’t believe in 
change; and I think the Canadian Wheat Board is changing. 
 
I would like to see the Canadian Wheat Board more involved in 
local processing of the grains that they handle. And we can 
imagine what that might mean. But I think they could be much 
more involved in actually being more involved in getting more 
local processing. 
 
And that’s not to say that they’re not at the present time. The 
pasta plant in Saskatoon, which just went through a fairly major 
upgrade and increase in production, all of the grain, the durum 
produced or used there, comes to the Canadian Wheat Board 
and they’re quite pleasantly surprised at the quality of grains the 
Canadian Wheat Board is able to deliver to them on a constant 

basis at a predictable price. 
 
So I think it’s . . . what causes us difficulty is when we apply 
philosophies to agriculture, either right wing or left wing; I 
think it has to be much more practical than that. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — We couldn’t agree with you more on this side of 
the House with respect to that, Mr. Minister. We don’t 
subscribe to the destruction of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
What we subscribe to is the producer’s right to make the 
decision about whether they feel it’s appropriate for them or 
not. 
 
And I think it is far different than what some people would be 
advocating. and it’s far less than what some other people would 
be advocating. I think it’s a position of practicality. I think it’s a 
position that a lot of farmers hold because they believe that they 
should have the ability to make a decision on their own about 
how they market their products. 
 
I cannot see a parallel in any other industry anywhere that I can 
think of. There may be some and you . . . I’m sure your 
department officials will provide you with information in that 
area, but I don’t know of as an example any other industry 
that’s subjected to this kind of very, very strict control in terms 
of how people market their product. 
 
And if you look at very, very significant industries in Canada 
and the United States and elsewhere, the auto industry. There’s 
no one that suggests to General Motors where or when or how 
they can sell their product or for what price that they are going 
to receive it. It’s set obviously by the marketplace and that 
provides them with a very strong market signals and it also 
provides them with a discipline that is necessary in a free 
market economy to make the determination as to where they 
should or should not place their emphasis. 
 
And I think as we see agriculture developing over the last 
number of years, and as more and more younger farmers come 
into this industry — a very significant industry in this province 
— we see them wanting to take more and more control over 
how they manage and operate their operations. 
 
And one of the largest components of their industry is how they 
are going to sell their product. And again, I couldn’t agree with 
you more when we see the exciting developments in specialty 
crops, in exotic crops, in livestock and all of those kinds of 
things where we see people, farmers taking charge of the 
industry and making decisions about how they want to go 
forward in that industry. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m pleased to hear that you don’t support any 
kind of rigid position in this debate, in this what has become in 
a lot of cases a philosophical debate. I think it’s a debate that 
farmers want to engage in. I think it’s a debate that we as a 
legislature and you as a Minister of Agriculture and your 
department officials should allow the industry to debate and go 
forward in terms of making decisions about how we are going 
to advance the industry into the future. 
 
Rather than being afraid of marketing, and that’s what some 
people are, rather than being afraid of marketing, we should be 
doing everything we possibly can to encourage farmers to take 



May 24, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1329 

control of their industry in this area. 
 
And I think that some of the programs that we’ve seen over the 
last number of years in terms of helping farmers assess risk 
through crop insurance and the like, helping farmers to 
maximize production through your department and ag research 
and development that we support very significantly, all of those 
are a part of the puzzle I think that farmers are looking for. 
 
But I think in growing numbers . . . and frankly I dispute your 
thoughts in terms of the amount of support that there is for a 
rigid position, which I believe that is a rigid position of some 
people saying that we will not allow under any circumstances 
some crops, very significant acreage crops, to be marketed by 
individuals, but only it has to go through the Canadian Wheat 
Board. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I think we owe it to farmers and we owe 
it to society who right now are supporting agriculture to the 
tune of very, very significant numbers of dollars — hundreds of 
millions, if not into the billions at the national level — that 
needs to be encouraged to do everything we can as an industry 
and as legislators to advance the industry as much as we can in 
this regard. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m hopeful that we will see some direction 
from your department as to how we can move forward in terms 
of marketing crops. 
 
I think we should be offering courses as we have in the past, 
about marketing crops. There is a little bit of that going on. Part 
of the reason I believe that you are not seeing a big take-up in 
the industry of the Canadian Wheat Board’s latest program, is 
simple. It’s not all that attractive, frankly. 
 
There’s lots of analysis from private individuals out there about 
the, you know, the basis that you have to lock in; the amount of 
flexibility that there is in the program. Really it doesn’t offer 
the kind of marketing choice that I think farmers are looking 
for. 
 
I think it was a step in the right direction. Don’t get me wrong; 
I’m not saying that it wasn’t a step in the right direction. But I 
think it is a very small step to what some producers would like 
to see well into the future. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would encourage your department and your 
government to move in this area to encourage producers to take 
charge in terms of marketing. Just as we have seen I believe 
with the specialty crop industry, I think we would see a very 
aggressive number of farmers out there wanting to take control 
of those kinds of issues within their operations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I agree with the 
member opposite that marketing is a big, important issue. But I 
really can . . . and I suppose this is where we will disagree, that 
somehow the Canadian Wheat Board has stopped farmers from 
developing in this province or Western Canada, and that 
somehow this has been a detriment to the development of 
agriculture. 
 
If you go into rural Montana, which you know well and I know 
well . . . I mean, they have no Canadian Wheat Board, and yet if 

you look at communities along No. 2 Highway which runs 
between Harlem and Chinook and Havre and Shelby, there are 
virtually no people left in that part of the state. And you can’t 
blame the Canadian Wheat Board for that. They’ve had the 
wonderful opportunity to market their own grain. 
 
No, quite honestly, if you look at the population drain from 
rural Montana with the removal of the branch lines, the fact of 
the matter is that Manitoba and Saskatchewan have been able to 
maintain rural population to a much larger degree than those 
areas in rural United States. And a lot of it I think has had to do 
with programs of support and also the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
But we can have this debate for a long time. But the fact of the 
matter is, if it was just the Canadian Wheat Board, you would 
drive south of the border and then you would see all the 
wonderful results of not having a Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
And quite honestly, in North Dakota and Montana, they’re not 
there. The largest city in Montana is less than 100,000 people. 
And so the fact is not whether it was the Canadian Wheat Board 
or not the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
I’ve tracked out and I’ll share with the members opposite the 
graph of population change in the four jurisdictions — 
Manitoba, Montana, North Dakota, and Montana. And you 
would swear that they are all the same. They all track, year by 
year, the depression. 
 
And so to say that it’s some sort of a philosophical thing that 
has created the circumstance in the Great Plains of North 
America, that . . . it isn’t inaccurate. 
 
I mean we all like to do it. I like to blame Grant Devine for all 
the . . . the highest out-migration of young people. And you can 
go through the graphs and you’ll see it. But the fact of the 
matter is it was record low grain prices that were causing a lot 
of that grief. 
 
And you would like to make it that it was our operation. But the 
fact of the matter is it isn’t possible that these graphs that show 
migration off the farm into urban centres occurring at exactly 
the same rate — in North Dakota, Montana, Manitoba, and 
Saskatchewan being the same — it can’t possibly be that they 
all had bad governors and bad premiers all at the same time. 
And the reason Alberta has a booming economy has to do much 
more with the fact they have 90 per cent of Canada’s oil than it 
has to do with agricultural programs. 
 
And so I think there also needs to be a reality check about some 
of the things we say about what the Canadian Wheat Board has 
done and hasn’t done. 
 
And maybe on that note, Mr. Chairman, I would move the 
committee rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 
 
 


