





























































Hansard: June 12, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1705 
 June 12, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions on behalf of citizens throughout the 
Humboldt constituency as well as other areas in the province 
who would like to see improved cellular telephone coverage in 
their area. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Bruno, 
from Prud’homme, from Saskatoon, and I guess that’s it, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today to retain Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are all from Allan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the future of rural hospitals. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Jansen, Govan, Viscount, Saskatoon, and 
Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to present 
a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan people requesting that 
smoking be banned in all public places. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions were collected by the youth of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition in 
regards to the closure of the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Lanigan, 
Drake, Lockwood, and Watrous. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition from Saskatchewan citizens gravely concerned 
about our health care. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks in Lanigan, Drake, and Guernsey. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people from Cupar concerned about health care services in their 
area: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take necessary steps to ensure the Cupar 
Health Care Centre remains open and that physician 
services are retained. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the people from the 
great community of Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
read a petition from citizens concerned about hospital closures. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



1706 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

From the citizens of Drake, Lanigan, and Guernsey. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: —Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here opposed to 
enforced municipal amalgamation. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Buena Vista. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition of 
citizens concerned about hospital closures. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the town of Young. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to present a petition requesting that smoking be banned in 
all public places. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are from the city of Prince Albert, 
and are also signed by residents from Nipawin and Tisdale and 
Melfort and Carrot River, Mr. Speaker. They’ve been collected 
by the youth of Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I have a petition in regards to improving the 
Paddockwood access road and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide the necessary resources to restore the 
Paddockwood access road to an acceptable state. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of 
Paddockwood, Christopher Lake, and Martensville. 
 
I so present. 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present dealing with health services in rural Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Cupar Health Centre remains open, and physician services 
are retained in the community of Cupar. 

 
And the signatures to the petition come from the community of 
Cupar and Dysart. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the 
closure of the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from Lanigan and 
Viscount. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible closures 
of the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The petition is signed by individuals from the communities of 
Lanigan, Humboldt, and Drake. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
responsibility that I rise to present a petition to retain Lanigan 
and Watrous hospitals. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Jansen, Watrous, 
and Plunkett, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition requesting that children be protected from 
tobacco use. The prayer reads as follows: 
 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1707 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
legislation to protect children from tobacco use. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by students and staff at 
Balfour Collegiate in Regina. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province on the following 
matters: 
 

To restore the Paddockwood access road; 
 
To not proceed with the amalgamation of municipalities; 
 
To ensure the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open; 
and 
 
To legislate a ban of smoking in public places and 
workplaces. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 63 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: how much profit was generated through horse 
racing in the last fiscal year? 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 63 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs: how many urban reserves are there in 
Saskatchewan and how many applicants are currently 
applying for urban reserve status? 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a notice of a 
written question. I give notice I shall on day no. 63 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: how 
much money did your department spend in this fiscal on 
purchasing road-building equipment; provide detailed 
information of what was purchased and the cost. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well today 
you notice there’s an exceptionally good looking bunch of 
students up in the west gallery there. And there’s 23 students 
from Sacred Heart Community School, accompanied by their 

teacher Carry Dziaduck and chaperone Allison Norbeck. 
 
And I’ll just mention I was at Sacred Heart school about two 
weeks ago visiting in their community room there, and I was so 
impressed by the artwork in the school and how well everybody 
was behaved. I don’t think they did it just because I was there, 
Mr. Speaker. I think they’re like that all the time. 
 
So I want you to join me in welcoming these people from 
Sacred Heart Community School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 
long-time friend and acquaintance of mine, Mr. Orest Mysak 
who is sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Orest and his wife 
Mary I believe are in Regina for two days doing some 
babysitting for their grandchildren. And Orest has taken some 
time out to come down and view the goings-on of the House 
here. 
 
So I would ask all the members to offer Orest a very warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Duke of Edinburgh Awards 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Saturday the hon. member from Regina Sherwood and I had the 
opportunity to attend an award ceremony. It was called the 
Duke of Edinburgh Awards. This program was founded by 
Prince Philip in 1956 in England and was introduced into 
Saskatchewan in 1970. 
 
This year more than 40 youth from all the corners of the 
province were presented with the Duke of Edinburgh Awards. 
This award recognizes initiative, achievement, and excellent of 
youth persons between the ages of 14 and 25. After 
accomplishing high goals and voluntary public service and 
personal development activities, the participants are presented 
with either a bronze, silver, or gold award. 
 
This year the award winners were presented with their awards, 
by the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, Ms. Lynda 
Haverstock. I would like to congratulate all the award winners 
on behalf of the member from Regina Sherwood, and also a 
strong recognition of the mentors and the leaders of this 
organization. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rainfall Helps Farmers’ Crops 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan. As the member from Regina South said on 
Friday and as The StarPhoenix said today, quote: 
 

“We’ve got jobs all over the place . . . They are all 
full-time jobs and a lot are for youth . . .” 



1708 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

The StarPhoenix headline said, “Saskatchewan job market 
sizzling hot.” And it is. 
 
But there is even more good news, Mr. Speaker, this time 
courtesy of the Almighty. It rained this weekend. It rained all 
weekend. It rained everywhere in Saskatchewan all weekend. It 
rained in the west and the northwest where it was desperately 
needed. It even rained in Kindersley, proving the old saying that 
the rain falls on the just and the unjust. 
 
This is more than good news, Mr. Speaker, as the old saying 
goes, it was a million dollar good news. We’ve all heard the 
joke: what follows two days of rain in Saskatchewan? The 
answer is Monday. 
 
But this Monday no one is complaining, not even we so-called 
citified folk over here who don’t understand rural life, 
according to the member from Watrous. We know that rain 
makes a seeded crop grow. We know as well that there are 
miles to go before the crop is in the bin, but the first major 
hurdle has been cleared. 
 
Good news, Mr. Speaker, for those who want Saskatchewan to 
succeed but bad news for those who depend on failure. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Fox Valley Sports Stories 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sports success stories 
abound in the town of Fox Valley, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The road to success started back in February when Fox Valley 
was featured in a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
production entitled Hockey Day — Grassroots Hockey in 
Canada. As a result of the documentary, Larry Kielo and the 
Fox Valley arena committee were made aware of funding 
available to grass roots hockey projects through the NHL 
(National Hockey League) Players’ Association. 
 
The committee received word in April that their rink would be 
receiving over $48,000 to help defray costs incurred with the 
ice plant and Zamboni room project there. A grand opening for 
their upgraded hockey arena is slated for November 4, 2000. 
 
Stefan Meyer, also of Fox Valley, recently experienced what 
many bantam hockey players can only dream of. Stefan was 
selected second overall by the Medicine Hat Tigers in the first 
round of the bantam hockey draft. Stefan has been playing 
bantam hockey at Notre Dame, Mr. Speaker, and intends to 
continue his midget career there. 
 
From the Fox Valley high school, Nancy and Nicholas 
Garrecht, a brother/sister team were gold medalists in mixed 
doubles at the provincial badminton championships held in 
Melville last month. The boys doubles team of Justin Schmaltz 
and Chad Reinboldt were also successful in their quest for gold. 
Congratulations to these students and their coach, Mr. Dennis 
Franz, on a job well done. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, six young ladies, age 7 to 9, from Fox 
Valley were awarded honours at the provincial dance 
competitions and recipients of the prestigious Sweetheart 
Award for the entire competition. 

We got more to tell you, Mr. Speaker, but it will have to wait 
for another member’s statement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Garment Manufacturing Plant Opens in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I hate to be the bearer of bad news 
for the Saskatchewan Party, but there’s even more good news 
for the people of Saskatchewan today. More good news, more 
jobs, and more confidence in Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Today in Saskatoon, a new garment manufacturing plant 
officially opened its doors. AGM-Sask Ltd. is an expansion 
plant of the Calgary-based Alberta Garment Manufacturing Co. 
Ltd.. They produce uniforms, workwear, and casual wear. 
Among its Canadian clientele are Mark’s Work Wearhouse, Air 
Canada, Canada Safeway, and Levi Strauss and Company. 
 
And more good news. AGM is committed to expanding its 
unionized labour force in Saskatoon and will likely double its 
number of employees by the end of the year, meaning more 
new jobs for the people of Saskatchewan. In fact, Uwe Schiffke 
who is the president of AGM noted the many benefits of having 
a unionized shop. 
 
The government has worked very hard to promote the apparel 
and textiles industry. Last year we provided the apparel and 
textile association with funding to train skilled and qualified 
workers for the apparel and textile industry. This training 
program was one of the reasons AGM decided to locate here. 
 
A company committed to expanding in Saskatchewan and a 
government committed to creating opportunities for all the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. This is good news for all of us, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Political Tax Credit System 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today my question 
is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for three years the Saskatchewan Party has been 
calling on the government to create a level playing field when it 
comes to political donations. The NDP and the Liberals are able to 
offer tax credits for political donations while the Saskatchewan 
Party is not. This is grossly unfair to the thousands of 
Saskatchewan voters who chose to support the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in recent days we have been in contact with the 
government on this issue. It now appears the Premier is ready to 
do the right thing. So I would ask the Premier, what steps are you 
taking to ensure a level playing field for political donations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party, the Leader of the Official Opposition in this 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1709 

House, will acknowledge the fact that on June 12 of this year, 
2000, I wrote to him advising him, in his capacity as Leader of the 
Official Opposition, of the government’s commitment to 
implement a political tax credit system effective January 1, 2001. 
 
Thereafter, later that day, the Leader of the Opposition enjoined 
me with a response welcoming this decision and promising the 
co-operation of the Saskatchewan Party and the co-operation of 
the entire House in putting together the appropriate 
amendments to the Saskatchewan Income Tax Act, Revenue 
Canada forms, and the like. And I am pleased to confirm the 
contents of that letter and the decision in this answer today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier and 
I did exchange correspondence on this matter this morning, and 
I am very pleased with the commitment that the Premier has 
made. 
 
Now being a bit of a pessimist, I have one nagging concern. 
The necessary legislation will not likely be introduced until next 
year, and no one really knows if the Premier is going to be 
around at that time. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, will you still be there to see this through, and 
if not, is your commitment also binding on those people on that 
side of the House who are eagerly eyeing-up your chair? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I know that I give the 
Leader of the Opposition a lot of heartburn in view of the fact 
that there have been so many predictions about my departure, 
imminent departure. But as Twain says, they’re all premature. 
And I expect to be here on or about January 1, 2001, but if 
under some circumstances I’m not, this is a commitment being 
made on behalf of the coalition government to the official 
opposition in this legislature. 
 
I just hope that you’re not gone anywhere on January 1. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Highway Maintenance 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I assure the 
Premier that I intend to be here as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a few more questions for the Premier. But 
these questions are about Saskatchewan Highways. Mr. 
Speaker, it is now clear that the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
has no plans for fixing Saskatchewan highways. So instead, the 
NDP is reverting to its divide-and-conquer strategy — trying to 
pit urban voters against rural voters. 
 
The NDP member for Saskatoon Southeast is trying to convince 
people that no one’s driving on these highways. She says they 
get less traffic than the alley behind her house so why bother 
fixing them? 
 
Mr. Premier, do you support the statements made by your 
member? Do you think her back alley is more important than 

Saskatchewan highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of 
reading carefully the statement made by the member from 
Saskatoon, and I’ve spoken to her on this on many occasions. 
 
The reality is, the reality is, the reality is — when I say this 
matter — the reality is that everybody on this side of the House, 
as I would hope on the other side of the House, believes that we 
have to have the best possible road system that this province 
can afford for obvious reasons — economic reasons, tourist 
reasons, and the like. But as every member in this House also 
knows, the question of where the road construction is located 
depends in some measure on the utilization of roads, trading 
patterns, traffic, and the like. 
 
What the member was trying to illustrate was that fact. It’s not a 
question of saying that the back streets of Saskatoon are more 
important than the streets in the Wood River constituency or 
any other part of the constituency. It simply is a recognition of 
the fact that in advancing a record number of dollars for 
highways construction, together we make the most effective use 
of it for everybody — rural and urban. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier didn’t answer my 
question, and that’s certainly not very pleasing in light of the 
fact that the NDP member from Saskatoon Southeast was so 
ill-informed the other day in the House and on the radio. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this kind of politics is the ugliest kind of NDP 
politics one can image — trying to convince urban voters that 
rural concerns just don’t matter. Well, Mr. Premier, it’s not 
going to work. 
 
Mr. Premier, we know that people in the city pay a lot of taxes 
and they deserve high-quality government services, but so do 
people in rural Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is one community 
and Saskatchewan people are not going to tolerate this ugly, 
divisive type of politics from your government. 
 
Mr. Premier, why are you treating Saskatchewan people like 
first-class taxpayers, but second-class citizens? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the obvious 
answer is that the government does not practise the politics that 
the member prefaced his question by. The principle of this 
government is very simple: we are, as the Leader of the 
Opposition described it, one community. 
 
We’re a large community geographically, but we’re small. And 
we have to have a strong rural infrastructure, a strong rural 
economy. We have to help our farmers at the farm gate. We 
have to have strong villages, towns, and cities. That’s not the 
issue. We’re ad idem here. 
 
And we’re not the ones who get up every other day in the 
House and say look at all the farm people who are on this side, 



1710 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

and all the city people on that side. We don’t seek to divide. 
That happened to be the electoral result. 
 
We have to work harder as a party to get back into rural 
Saskatchewan; they have to work harder to get into urban 
Saskatchewan because we believe in community. 
 
So my answer, Mr. Speaker, as I wrap up this question is: 
nobody on this side of the House believes or practises in the 
politics of conquer and rule and divide by conquering through 
the division of rural and urban. We believe in building a 
community as best as we can. 
 
And as far as roads are concerned, as one example, the largest 
budget for highways ever — that’s what our commitment is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, it’s 
fine for the Premier to lecture on being gracious and 
considerate, but his own member has not apologized for the 
statement she made the other day. Mr. Speaker, as far as we 
know the NDP still thinks Saskatchewan highways have a lower 
traffic count than back alleys in Saskatoon, and that’s simply 
not true. 
 
At the same time, we have seen . . . yes, we have seen some 
decrease in traffic because people can’t drive down these roads 
anymore. They’re in such bad shape people are taking grid 
roads instead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also a lot less people going to the Plains 
hospital than there was a few years ago — since the NDP 
closed it. That doesn’t mean that more people don’t need 
hospital services. 
 
And if the traffic count has fallen on some highways, it’s 
simply because the NDP aren’t taking care of those highways. 
They’re not keeping them in good shape. The NDP neglects the 
highway, it falls apart; and then they use that as an excuse to 
turn it back to gravel. 
 
My question to the Premier: why have you abandoned your 
responsibility to maintain Saskatchewan highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 
Leader of the Opposition, the exact opposite is the truth. 
 
There’s not been an abandonment. There has been the highest 
dedication of tax dollars for highways in the province of 
Saskatchewan ever. And that is the case. And we do it, by the 
way, in the absence of any kind of federal government support. 
 
I’m hoping . . . I noticed the Prime Minister on television last 
night saying that there’ll be a first ministers’ meeting in 
September where highways and infrastructure will be on the 
table. I’m hoping it’ll be Ottawa money, but our money is there. 
It’s there at $250 million or more, and we’re going to continue 
that commitment. 
 
But the fact of the matter is — and he used Plains as an 

example — anything and everything in our society is 
undergoing change now. Health care’s undergoing change. 
Rural Saskatchewan’s undergoing change. Everybody is 
undergoing change. That is a fact of life. 
 
Our job is to make sure that we deliver the best highways 
system for the people of Saskatchewan consistent with those 
patterns of change. And by golly, Mr. Speaker, we are doing it. 
And we’re committed to doing it by the largest amount of 
money for highways ever in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier says he’s 
spending more money on highways. He may be spending more 
money in the department but he’s actually spending fewer 
dollars on highways and road repair, less dollars than last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier says he wants people to fix 
their own highways, the Highways minister says he wants 
people to gravel the highways, and the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast says abandon highways altogether because she says 
nobody’s using them anyway. 
 
Mr. Premier, which one of these dead-end roads are you headed 
down? Are you going to gravel the highways? Are you going to 
abandon the highways? Or are you going to let people fix the 
highways themselves? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I thought I’d given the 
answer earlier but I’ll give it again. We’re going down neither 
of those roads that you outline . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
we’re not. We’re going to the high road. We’re going the high 
road of building the best highway system the province of 
Saskatchewan can afford. 
 
We have enough roads, Mr. Speaker, if you can imagine putting 
them end to end, roughly speaking, which would go around the 
centre of the earth four and a half times, built up at a period 
when Saskatchewan was growing . . . 
 
Everybody knows the change. Everybody knows what 
happened when the Crow rate was abandoned. Everybody 
knows that with the abandonment of the Crow rate there was 
movement from rail onto truck and chewing up the highway 
system. 
 
The reality is, of that record amount of money dedicated to 
highways, the vast majority of the money is being spent in rural 
Saskatchewan. It’s not being spent in urban Saskatchewan. It’s 
not being spent in any constituencies that we represent. It’s 
being spent in the rural parts of Saskatchewan and we continue 
on our commitment by having the highest budget ever 
committed for highways in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sex Offender Registry 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1711 

Justice. Last week, Mr. Minister, I introduced Bill No. 235, An 
Act to establish and maintain a Registry of Persons and 
Convicted Sexual Offences in order to protect Saskatchewan 
Children and Communities. 
 
Mr. Minister, you would not tell us whether or not you would 
support that Bill, but instead you repeatedly stated that our 
current national police information program also known as 
CPIC is all that is necessary. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, CPIC is not perfect, and in fact 
is lacking in many areas key to monitoring the whereabouts of 
convicted sexual offenders. 
 
Mr. Minister, I will assume that you have had a good look at my 
Bill by now and I’m wanting to know will you be supporting 
this legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, let me thank the member for her question and let me 
reiterate, our commitment, both her part and my part of our 
commitment, to address the serious concern of the abuse of 
children. Our dispute is over how that should be done. 
 
I’ve looked at her Bill. I looked at it before; I’ve looked at it 
again. I’ve contacted police chiefs across the province and I’ve 
contacted others, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, we will not be 
supporting her Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the minister last week said that 
Justice ministers and police forces across the country believe 
that CPIC is a system that is good enough. But I would suggest 
to the minister that you should go back to your counterparts and 
those police services, because police services of forces all 
across the country in all provinces are speaking up in support of 
a nationwide sexual offender registry. 
 
In fact at the 1997, annual conference of the Canadian 
Association of Chiefs of Police, a resolution was passed calling 
on the federal government to pass registration legislation and to 
create a national registry of sex offenders. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the province of Ontario has followed 
through with their own provincial legislation to allow for the 
establishment of such a registry. Mr. Minister, will you do the 
same? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the Canadian association of police chiefs is also on 
record as having supported a beefed-up CPIC. 
 
And let me just read to the member the decision by the 
ministers of Justice, all ministers of Justice across the country. 
The ministers endorse the CPIC data system with enhancements 
as a sound basis for screening systems to better . . . to protect 
children and other vulnerable groups from convicted sex 
offenders. 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, the ministers of Justice are supportive 
of the beefed-up CPIC system. That is receiving $115 million of 
commitment and investment from the federal government this 
year. That beefing up is under the supervision of Deputy Chief 
Weighill from here in Regina. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let me also say that from our analysis, from 
the analysis of Justice officials, the legislation she is proposing 
will simply not withstand any challenge. It is outside the powers 
of the provincial government and constitutionally . . . 
consequently unenforceable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to the 
minister. The beefed-up CPIC system as is proposed will take at 
least two to three years, I have been told, to be completed. In 
the meantime we have children at risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week the minister told the media that 
Saskatchewan police agencies supported the view that a specific 
registry to track sexual offenders was not necessary. But, Mr. 
Minister, I have a letter here dated June 9 from Saskatoon 
Police Chief Dave Scott. He says, and I quote: 
 

The Saskatoon Police Service does support a provincial 
registry for known sex offenders. We believe a provincial 
registry would better enhance our capability as police to 
monitor the activities of offenders more quickly and 
effectively. As well, a provincial registry would monitor 
offenders after their sentence is completed. 

 
Chief Scott goes on to say that many sex offenders are released 
in their community from the regional psych centre and he sees 
this registry as a better . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the hon. member to 
kindly go directly to her question. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, do you intend to dismiss the support 
for this legislation from provincial police agencies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what I 
intend to do is listen to my officials who said that this 
legislation is unenforceable. I intend to listen to the facts, Mr. 
Speaker, that one . . . only one in four of convicted sex 
offenders in the United States where these registries the 
member is proposing register their names, Mr. Speaker — three 
out of four don’t comply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I . . . having spoken with Chief Scott and other 
chiefs, it’s clear that the statement he made was made without 
any in-depth analysis and, Mr. Speaker, the fact remains that 
this is not the best system the member is proposing. The best 
system is an enhanced, beefed-up CPIC process which, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re supporting on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if this is 
unenforceable, I would like to know why Ontario is doing it. 



1712 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

The fact is that each province, each province must set up their 
registry in order for it to work in sync with the federal registry. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Federation of Police 
Officers will be meeting this week. They will be discussing this 
issue during their meetings. President Bernie Eisworth does not 
agree with the minister that CPIC works just fine for tracking 
sexual offenders. He says, and I quote: 
 

The fact is that the CPIC doesn’t quite do what they’re 
asking for in the registry. A registry would make sex 
offenders register and be easier to track. 

 
Mr. Minister, you told the media last week that police agencies 
did not support this registry. You are dead wrong. Mr. Minister, 
now that the truth is out, will you support the establishment of a 
sex offender registry in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, my consultations with the 
police services last week confirmed that they were not in fact in 
favour of the member’s registry. It so happens that Chief Scott 
said something rather different on Friday or Saturday. 
 
The point remains, Mr. Speaker, the point remains that this 
legislation is unenforceable according to our officials. Only 
one-quarter of those offenders register. Mr. Speaker, CPIC, an 
enhanced CPIC, is more than a sex registry . . . sex offender 
registry. Mr. Speaker, it is a registry of sex offenders and more 
— in fact all offenders who might adversely affect children. 
 
That’s why it’s a better system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Construction Industry Union Legislation 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Labour. This morning the Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic 
Growth had a press conference in Regina. This group represents 
three-quarters of all businesses in Saskatchewan, and the main 
focus is the development of labour policies that will help foster 
rather than hinder positive relationships between employers and 
employees. 
 
The Alliance for Economic Growth is very concerned about 
The Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 
2000 you are trying to bulldoze through this session. As they 
say, it sends a very negative message to businesses both in and 
outside Saskatchewan. They re-enforce that there’s only been 
consultation with the unions on this issue, not the business 
community. 
 
Madam Minister, will you listen to the majority of businesses in 
this province? Will you put this regressive legislation on hold 
and carry out full and complete consultation with all 
stakeholders in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to put one bit of information in front of the House and 

that’s, according to The StarPhoenix there, that the 
Saskatchewan — and The Leader-Post — the Saskatchewan job 
market is sizzling hot. 
 
And the fact of the matter is during the ’70s, that would have 
been the case as well. And certainly we have never found that 
good and fair labour legislation is an impediment to good 
employers in the province. 
 
I would have to say that we’ve got the lowest unemployment 
rate in Canada. And we certainly are concerned that the 
business community understand that we welcome all the efforts 
to develop Saskatchewan’s economy, but we also very much 
support laws that are the same as the laws in every other 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I’d like to remind the minister that the alliance 
represents three-quarters of all businesses in Saskatchewan. 
They are all job creators. Why don’t you pick the phone up and 
talk to them instead of your union leader friends who are job 
killers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the minister’s main arguments in favour of 
the legislation is that it will put us on a level playing field . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well the Alliance for Economic Growth says 
the minister is either out to lunch, misinformed, or she is 
deliberately attempting to adjust the facts. They say the 
minister, and I quote, “seems hesitant to bring all the facts 
forward.” 
 
The alliance distributed a fact sheet comparing labour laws in 
every province, confirming that the minister’s claims to the 
media and to the public have been false. 
 
My question is for the Premier. Under this legislation, sir, you 
will become the economic development minister of Alberta. 
Mr. Premier, will you listen to the business community; will 
you put the brakes on this legislation and deal with your 
Minister of Labour who insists on paying back her union 
friends? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the basic premise of 
this question is economic development. And I’m just going to 
remind the members opposite that May 2000 versus May 1999 
— 14, 600 new jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — May 2000 versus April 2000, 18,000 
new jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And if you look at young people, 
because the folks are apparently concerned that young people 
are leaving, May over May, year to year, 7,800 new jobs. 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1713 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — So I basically say, Mr. Speaker, that 
there’s no province in Canada that allows spin-off companies to 
exist. And the fact of the matter is we certainly want to work as 
co-operatively as we can with the industry. But there’s no 
evidence to suggest that we aren’t working hard on job creation 
and economic development. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — There’s jobs to be created in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, despite this government, not because of this 
government’s labour policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these business leaders from across the province 
would like the minister to take a good look around. Very 
different, very progressive changes are being made in other 
provinces to develop labour legislation which fosters a 
business-friendly environment. They agree that these 
amendments being proposed by your minister are a throwback 
to the old days of confrontation. As a province, Mr. Speaker, we 
can’t afford that. 
 
The alliance said it’s time for the Premier to step in and 
consider the negative effects this will have on our economy. 
They call these amendments undemocratic and anti-business. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you do that? Will you agree to revisit this 
legislation your government is proposing? And will you meet 
with these business leaders and hear their side of the story? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now I 
know pretzel logic is popular on the other side of the House, but 
the fact of the matter is we have the lowest unemployment rate 
in Canada. Please to tell me how that demonstrates that our 
labour laws don’t work. And perhaps what every other province 
in Canada should do is pass the same labour laws that we have 
and then their economies would be in good shape as well. 
 
The other comment I would make, Mr. Speaker, is the biggest 
outflow of people there’s ever been from this province, record 
numbers leaving the province, was during the years when the 
members of the party opposite and their friends removed this 
law. So I rest my case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the alliance which represents 
three-quarters of the businesses in this province want a voice at 
the table. Why are you unwilling just to sit down with them and 
hear their side of the story, talk to the people that create the jobs 
in this province. Will you talk to them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I reiterate that our 
job numbers speak for themselves. But I will also say that over 
a hundred meetings were held and we would have loved 
nothing better than to have consensus within the industry. 
 
And I just continue to say that we’ll do everything we can to 
work co-operatively together with both the union and the 

non-union sector, but it seems to be working well in 
Saskatchewan. Today we have the lowest unemployment in 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of an open 
and accountable government, we’re very pleased and happy to 
table our response to question no. 170, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question no. 170 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again on behalf of 
an open and accountable government, we’re extremely happy to 
table the response to this question, Mr. Speaker. This question’s 
definitely good news for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 171 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I’m very 
pleased to stand up and, on behalf of a very open and 
accountable government, respond to question no. 172, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s more good news for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 172 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 62 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 62 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 
2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to enter the debate regarding Bill No. 62, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 2000. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are . . . Clearly in terms of this 
particular Bill, it’s basically housekeeping in nature. It repeals 
several Acts that aren’t needed on the books anymore, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some of those Acts include The Grain and Fodder Conservation 
Act which dates back to 1946. There’s an Industrial 
Development Act, Mr. Speaker, which empowered an agency 
called SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development 
Corporation) which no longer exists. There is The Road 
Allowances Crown Oil Act from 1959, Mr. Speaker, and The 
Seed Grain Advances Act which was passed as far back, 1908, 
only three years after the birth of our province. 
 
So this is certainly housekeeping in nature. 
 



1714 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

And other than the very general comment, Mr. Speaker, that the 
need for this Bill speaks to the need on the part I think of all 
governments to look at sunset clauses in their legislation so we 
don’t have all of these outdated Bills on our books necessarily. 
It’s something that we would like to talk a little bit more about 
in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 70 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 70 — The 
Education (Elimination of Business Tax) Amendment Act, 
2000/Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 
(élimination de la taxe professionnelle be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
talk on The Education (Elimination — elimination is the key 
word here — of Business Tax) Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
This consequential amendment has to be made as a result of the 
decision to remove business assessment and tax from rural, 
urban, and northern municipal Acts. A number of changes have 
been made to the municipal Act which will be debated when 
those Bills come back to the agenda. 
 
This change however is being made as part of the 
recommendations made by the 1977 Reassessment Review 
Committee. The government says these changes will further 
acknowledge the autonomy of local governments of having to 
implement their own property tax policies. 
 
This change doesn’t mean that business taxes are not to be 
imposed on either the municipal or education side of the 
municipalities. However it acknowledges that it is up to each 
municipality to decide if it will impose such a business tax. And 
I think that’s where the decision really is to be made, and most 
important at the municipal level, as to whether they want to 
charge this business tax. 
 
It is becoming more common across this province to eliminate 
business tax as communities seek to become more competitive 
— not only with other communities in Saskatchewan, but cities 
and towns across the country. Regina saw the light recently 
when it decided to phase out its business tax, mainly to compete 
with Saskatoon, its sister or brother to the north, which has been 
far more successful and aggressive in recent years in attracting 
business to that city. 
 
Smaller communities are also reassessing the worth of imposing 
a business tax. While some continue to oppose the concept of 
eliminating the business tax because they say it may simply 
shift the tax burden from business to homeowners, many more 
generally accept the fact that getting rid of the business tax does 
make cities and towns with a much stronger, more competitive 
business core. When a community’s business section is 
prospering and strong, that is good for everyone in the 
community. 

In Saskatchewan we must get away from this ongoing mentality 
that anyone who is successful, particularly the business 
community, must be punished through taxation, our taxation 
system. 
 
A strong business centre in any town or city means more jobs. 
More jobs means more wealth is created for everyone. Stronger 
business means direct jobs and many more spinoff jobs. 
 
If we can build a stronger business base in our Saskatchewan 
towns and cities, it is up to those of us who sit here and all those 
who serve on local councils to do everything in their power to 
do so. We believe that getting rid of the business tax does that 
very thing. However, we recognize that it should be up to each 
individual community and the councils that govern those 
communities to decide what is or what is not best for their 
interests. And this Bill does that. 
 
We have some technical questions for the minister which we 
will be pursuing in Committee of the Whole, so we look 
forward to moving this forward. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 71 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 71 — The 
Health Districts Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
with pleasure that I rise to speak on Bill No. 71, The Health 
Districts Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems to me in looking at this Bill that it 
attempts to plug a hole that the Department of Health has 
allowed to exist for the last two years. And I was really quite 
. . . I didn’t know if I should be amused or absolutely terrified 
by what’s going on over at the Department of Health, that I 
looked at what the minister said when she introduced the 
legislation, and she said, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, due to an error that we only recently 
discovered, the Keewatin Yathe and Mamawetan Churchill 
River District Health Boards were never formally 
established as health districts. 

 
You know, we just sort of overlooked this very important item 
of business and for two years these districts were operating 
without legislative authority or the ability, really, in law to 
function appropriately. And of course, Mr. Speaker, we will 
support that this be done properly at this time. 
 
But the question begs, why wasn’t it done right in the initial 
instance and what happens to all the decisions that were made 
in the last two years? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in question period over the last days, we asked 
questions about what was happening at Uranium City Hospital. 
Who’s in charge of this outfit and who is making all these 
horrendous decisions? 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1715 

Well it seems as if the answer, Mr. Minister, is quite clear: no 
one was. And the department didn’t seem to be able to be 
bothered to put in place the proper legislative authority in order 
for it to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is just another clear example of the kind of 
things that are piling up day after day after day that are 
absolutely demanding that there be a proper and complete 
review of health care in this province. 
 
How many other things are sitting there that the Health 
department has not discovered recently that need attending to? 
How many more instances are there where there is not the 
proper legislative authority in order for district health boards, or 
any other people in this province in regard to health care are 
functioning in a vacuum? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we certainly do believe that the proper legislative 
framework should be in place in order for the northern health 
districts to function and we certainly do appreciate the 
opportunity to hear from people in the health system that 
confirmed the fact that this was an essential thing that needed to 
be done. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I certainly have to wonder and hope 
that there are no more outstanding issues that the Health 
department may recently discover. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 74 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Hamilton that Bill No. 74 — The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2000 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for me to speak on Bill 74, The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister mentioned in her opening 
comments on the Bill, these pieces of legislation deal with the 
expansion of off-sale in Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and 
Prince Albert. 
 
This currently happens throughout rural Saskatchewan and what 
it looks like this NDP government is doing is expanding things 
in the major cities as well. What this Bill also proposes is the 
elimination of mandatory hearings under the Liquor and 
Gaming Licensing Commission. It will give the commission the 
discretion to determine whether a hearing is required when an 
objection is filed against a permit or endorsement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are somewhat concerned about this. While it 
may seem well-intentioned, we would have questions if the 
government of this commission would maybe be trying to 
sweep something under the rug if someone brings forward a 
complaint and the commission deems it frivolous. We would 
like to know what rules are going to be set up in conjunction 
with this Bill — rules that will determine what guideline the 
commission will follow, how they will know what is a frivolous 

complaint and what isn’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our office has also received some calls from 
concerned people about this piece of legislation. While they do 
say at first glance that it does seem to be a good step forward, 
some concerns have been raised. 
 
They include: who will be allowed to set up off-sale? Will it be 
a wide-ranging free-for-all or will there be some sort of process 
set up — some way to determine who will apply for off-sale 
expansion; what procedure they will have to follow; how much 
red tape they’ll have to cut through, because as we all know, 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP administration is infamous for its red 
tape and layers of bureaucracy. 
 
There are also a lot of social implications involved in this 
legislation. The long-term effects of alcohol abuse are 
well-documented and are measurable. We would want to make 
sure that this government has a look at the social bottom line — 
something they forgot to do when establishing VLTs (video 
lottery terminal) and casinos. We need to know the social 
impact such a move would have on our larger centres. 
 
Other questions surrounding this Bill involves liquor industry 
regulations. As I mentioned earlier, who will be involved in off 
sale expansion? Will some be left out altogether or will small 
store, mom-and-pop operations or corner convenience stores be 
allowed to or not? These are all some important questions that 
need answering, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So while we have been getting some calls to our office on these 
Bills, we have some concern, and these will be better answered 
in committee, which we look forward to doing at the next 
opportunity. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I see no reason why this Bill 
cannot proceed to committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 75 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Hamilton that Bill No. 75 – The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 
2)/Loi no 2 de 2000 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 
réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de 
hasard be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 76 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 76 — The 
Research Council Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I understand it, 
the amendments, this amending Bill, The Research Council 
Amendment Act, expands the mandate of the Saskatchewan 



1716 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

Research Council to include commercialization of new 
technology which will allow the SRC (Saskatchewan Research 
Council) to make loans to or invest in certain types of 
enterprises having to do with new technologies. 
 
It will make it — the SRC that is — much like SOCO, 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, in that SOCO invests 
in companies throughout Saskatchewan as a job creation 
scheme. 
 
(1430) 
 
This amending legislation will allow the SRC to go beyond its 
traditional mandate of offering technical support to those 
enterprises developing new technologies and will allow it to 
directly invest in or to provide loans to those creating 
innovations in technology. 
 
The exact words in the legislation are as follows: 
 

. . . directly or through any of its subsidiaries, buy, invest 
in, underwrite, subscribe for or acquire by any other 
means, and hold shares of, and bonds and debentures and 
other securities issued by, any corporation, partnership, 
firm or business, where the acquisition of the shares, 
bonds, debentures, or securities is, in the opinion of the 
minister, consistent with the duties of the council; 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, without cabinet approval, the SRC will, 
under this legislation, be able to provide financial assistance of 
up to $1 million to any one particular entity. And the SRC will 
be able to make up to $2 million of equity investments in a 
single entity without cabinet approval. The Act is vague as to 
any limits that may be in place with cabinet approval, but we 
assume there are none. 
 
Other changes outlined in this legislation would allow the SRC 
to engage auditors other than the Provincial Auditor to look at 
its books. This may be a good thing as it will provide SRC the 
ability to be more flexible and may enable it to react quicker in 
a business environment in some circumstances. However we 
insist that the Provincial Auditor must be able to trace every 
nickel of taxpayers’ money that flows through SRC and the Act 
is vague on this. 
 
We’re dealing with quite a large change for SRC and one that 
we’re not totally . . . (inaudible) . . . the importance of research 
and development, and we appreciate that, Mr. Speaker, to our 
province and everyone wants to encourage the growth of 
research and development here in Saskatchewan. 
 
However, while we’d like to say that this change appears to be 
turning SRC into another SOCO, there are some major 
differences as well. SOCO gets most of its money straight from 
the public purse, and therefore much of this money it puts into 
business is public money at risk. However, a majority of the 
$19 million that SRC generates in revenue is self-generated 
through private contracts. 
 
So while we’re not totally comfortable with government once 
again getting directly involved in other places — would-be 
investments made by the private sector — we do recognize the 
difference between this and what the Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation is involved in. 
 
That’s not to say we’re happy with the thought of another 
government agency — even one that does generate revenue — 
being bought in to make investments to enable certain research 
and development projects to go ahead. Our hope is that one day 
soon, Mr. Speaker, we’ll live in a province where the 
government does not feel it necessary to invest in projects to 
make them succeed. We hope to see a province where 
government doesn’t have to coax and cajole the private sector to 
invest in projects and to build them with taxpayers’ money. 
 
We hope to see a province where the private sector will take 
these initiatives and risks themselves and do so in their own 
self-interest in a province where they think investment is in 
their interest. The key to success in this province is to have a 
private sector and investors investing totally private money in 
important business or research projects because they want to in 
their own self-interest, not because they’re cajoled or bribed 
with taxpayers’ money to do so. 
 
However, in order to create such an atmosphere, we believe it’s 
going to take a change in government. Something that I suppose 
we’ll have to wait for. 
 
We do have a great deal of respect for the work of the 
Saskatchewan Research Council and we understand the 
importance of research and development in this province. And 
in a former life, as the director of a corporation that worked 
very closely with the SRC at one time, I can say that I have 
nothing but respect for their research capabilities and their 
business acumen in judging how to link their research efforts 
with the business community. 
 
We do have some reservations with this Bill, just as we have 
with anything that appears to be a further direct government 
investment in what well could — and should — be the affairs of 
private enterprise. 
 
After the work we’ve seen the government do in other 
investment projects such as SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company), I’m sure most residents of 
Saskatchewan and, hopefully, all members of this House will 
have some reservations as well. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I believe that most of these questions 
can be answered in committee and I move that this matter move 
to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 77 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 77 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2000 
be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise in the Assembly today to speak to Bill 77, An 
Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. 
 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1717 

Mr. Speaker, it is my understanding that a lot of the 
amendments that are proposed in Bill 77 stem from a report that 
was released by the Human Rights Commission in 1996. 
Basically the gist of that report was a strong indication that the 
code needed to be updated, that it had become outdated in fact 
since the volume of complaints had reached overwhelming 
numbers. 
 
And I think we all agree, Mr. Speaker, that the number of 
complaints and inquiries to the Human Rights Commission 
clearly has been going up in recent years. And the need for it to 
be current and updated is clear to all members of this Assembly, 
including members of the official opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as elected representatives for the taxpayers in our 
respective communities, and for people, families in our home 
areas, I think it’s our duties to . . . our duty to ensure that all of 
our citizens, all the citizens of Saskatchewan, are treated 
equally and have every opportunity to have the kind of life . . . 
the best, the absolute best possible quality of life that’s possible 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And a part of that equation, a part of the challenge of ensuring 
that, I think, is to have bodies like the Human Rights 
Commission in place to provide protection for people and 
redress for people who perhaps have suffered in terms of their 
quality of life through discrimination or some other area that the 
Human Rights Commission can look into on their behalf. 
 
And so you’ll notice in the Bill, Mr. Speaker, in Bill 77, that the 
amendments that are proposed to The Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code are fairly wide-sweeping and they involve a 
number of different areas from clarification of the duties of the 
Chief Commissioner, Mr. Speaker. In addition to that . . . And I 
think the minister in his speech summarized it perhaps best 
when he said the amendments streamline and add flexibility to 
the complaint process, create a human rights tribunal, and make 
changes respecting some of the grounds of discrimination, and 
enhance the remedy and enforcement provisions. 
 
And as innocuous and positive as that sounds, Mr. Speaker, I 
think we also should be . . . we should be very concerned when 
we look at any particular piece of legislation as it relates to the 
Human Rights Commission in our province. We should be 
concerned, Mr. Speaker, that the regulations that we pass in this 
body . . . that the amendments that we pass in this body and 
regulations that may be passed by cabinet don’t fly in the face 
also of common sense and the common sense application, I 
think of what is fair and neat and right for people who deserve 
to have their human rights protected. 
 
There have been some specific instances, Mr. Speaker, that 
people across the province are aware of. And I’ll even touch on 
one particular instance in my community. And I think to the 
extent . . . and we’ll be interested to ask questions in committee 
on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, because to the extent that we can 
determine whether these amendments might address some of 
these concerns will go a long way towards helping those of us 
on this side of the House support this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the case of local Regina entrepreneur, Mr. 
Ripplinger, certainly comes to mind. There is an instance where 
someone had, in the course of renovating their particular 

establishment, had done absolutely everything within their 
power and everything according, by the way, to legislation to 
comply with accessibility regulations that we have in the 
province in terms of making sure that his business was 
accessible to disabled people in our community. 
 
He had complied with all the legislation and regulations 
pertaining to the construction to his art gallery and restaurant. 
But in that case, Mr. Speaker, the Human Rights Commission 
demanded that he make further renovations that weren’t 
required by legislation that could jeopardize the viability of his 
business in terms of the costs of those renovations. 
 
And I think any time a quasi-judicial organization like the 
Human Rights Commission, or any other for that matter — we 
had some debate earlier this session about the Film 
Classification Board — makes decisions that can affect 
people’s lives in a very direct way, and also frankly, that make 
decisions that really are . . . should be the sole purview of the 
legislators of the province of Saskatchewan — for example, the 
laws of our province — any time an organization can do that, 
we ought all to be concerned; because it infringes on this 
venerable institution to be the duly elected legislators of the 
province of Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, to expend tax 
dollars on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
On a cursory look initially, and then more recently on a more 
detailed look at this Bill, I don’t see any of the amendments in 
The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2000 
that address that particular concern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll point out one more example and it occurs in my 
constituency of Swift Current. There is only one year-round, 
stand-alone restaurant on the south side of Swift Current where 
I grew up and where I currently live, Mr. Speaker. It’s called 
the Golden Garden Restaurant, and it has been there for many, 
many, many years. It’s been operated successfully as well, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a valued part of the entire city, and certainly a very 
valued part of the fabric of the south part of our community. 
 
It’s currently operated by an extremely hard-working family of 
Chinese Canadians with a long history of contribution to our 
community. They have an excellent restaurant and they do their 
very best to offer great food and good customer service. 
 
Not long ago, Mr. Speaker, I believe it was due to an inquiry by 
someone who wanted to frequent the restaurant but couldn’t 
access it, the Human Rights Commission took action. And in 
fact throughout that process, throughout the inquiry to the 
Human Rights Commission, the restaurant went to a great 
expense, one arguably — and I don’t know, I’m not privy to 
their financial statements, Mr. Speaker — but one you could 
argue that they couldn’t afford, to build an excellent wheelchair 
ramp into their restaurant. 
 
And subsequent to that, because of the very stringent rules that 
are in the Act, they were also required to make some major 
renovations to their washroom facility. And this particular 
renovation, the latter . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Why is the member on her 
feet? 
 



1718 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

Ms. Harpauer: — To introduce guests, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
introduce, on behalf of the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, a classroom from Raymore School. It’s 
a class of 20 grade 4 students who have come to visit us from 
Raymore School. 
 
They’re accompanied with their teacher, and some chaperones, 
Lorraine Hordos, Randy Fidler, Marty and Yolanda 
Hachkewich, Blair Bentz, and Brenda Thomas. 
 
And they neglected to give me the name of the teacher, but I 
welcome them all here, including the teacher. So thank you so 
very much for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 77 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
Amendment Act, 2000 

(continued) 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the restaurant is 
forced, if this small family-run enterprise is forced to complete 
the latter part of the renovations, they’re very truly concerned 
about whether they can continue in business. 
 
And I guess that’s my point, Mr. Speaker, about this Bill. We 
need to ensure that common sense is at work with respect to the 
Human Rights . . . the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission. They do have provisions, I know, that will help 
sort of ameliorate their requirements of businesses and of 
individuals if it would cause undue financial duress. 
 
But that does not apply to washrooms for example in this case, 
Mr. Speaker. And I guess the point is this: what good is it if this 
restaurant is unable to survive? Nobody will be able to access it 
then. 
 
And I guess that underscores my concern and our concern about 
this particular Bill, the amendments we’re making to the 
Human Rights Commission that as far as we can tell don’t 
address some of these practical, common sense concerns. 
 
(1445) 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, we will have some very specific 
questions for this Bill in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Leave to introduce guests as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, I would like to join the member in 
regards to welcoming the teachers and particularly to Randy 
Fidler. Randy’s from Green Lake. He was part of the northern 
teacher education program and it’s good to see him back here. I 
think I’ll go upstairs and have a little visit with him. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, please welcome the teachers again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 9 — The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 1999 (No. 2) be 
now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
rise again today and this time to speak on Bill No. 9, An Act to 
amend The Child and Family Services Act (No. 2). 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened with great interest to the minister’s 
second reading speech to this Bill where he pointed out that the 
main point for these amendments is to help children out that are 
in foster care. 
 
When a child turns the age of 18 they have reached adulthood. 
But as every parent knows, the job of parenting is still not 
complete because they still need support, either financially or 
emotionally, from their parents. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this is not necessarily all the case 
for . . . always the case for those in foster care. As I understand, 
the amendments are there to assist those in foster care that are 
planning to continue their education, those that are not 
furthering their education immediately but need interim 
support, and those with intellectual challenges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to see that this government is taking 
steps to ensure that all of the children in our province have an 
equal opportunity to further their education and become active 
participants in our society, as everyone knows in this Assembly 
the importance of higher education in this day and age. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some questions that I have regarding this 
Bill but those will be best addressed in committee. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 9 be now moved to the 
Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1719 

Bill No. 6 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 6 — The 
Mentally Disordered Persons Amendment Act, 1999, be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 6, The Act to amend The Mentally Disordered 
Persons Act. And several of my colleagues have spoke to the 
Bill; I’ll keep my remarks fairly brief. We do have some 
specific questions when it . . . when we get into the Committee 
of the Whole process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize, I think, that this Act is an attempt to 
streamline the process for families and for those involved in 
applications to certify incompetence, or competence, as the case 
may be, Mr. Speaker. And there is some specific changes in this 
Act that are proposed to do that. 
 
I guess a couple of things we want to make sure. One of the 
reasons for the changes in this Bill was to allow the process to 
be sped up, to move more quickly through the process. 
 
One of the problems in the current system is an application can 
be made, it can be ruled on by a panel, and an appeal can then 
go to the Court of Queens Bench, but if they don’t make a 
ruling, it has . . . the process has to start again. And that process 
can take quite a bit of time, Mr. Speaker. And so the intent of 
this Bill is to speed that up by allowing that appeal to the Court 
of Queen . . . or to the Court of Appeal rather. 
 
However, I guess our concern is that, is that process going to be 
longer than restarting the application for the certification in the 
first place. So that’s one of the questions we have, and we’ll 
certainly have more for this Bill when it gets into the 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No 5 — The Parks 
Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to enter into debate on Bill No. 5, The Parks Amendment Act, 
1999, and as we indicated in our original response to this Bill, 
we were going to be consulting with a number of the 
stakeholders involved with the development of a couple of 
protected areas that are defined in this Bill. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to report that in this case, the 
government maybe, just maybe, they got it right. The input that 
we have received so far indicates that, for all intents and 
purposes, there is a fairly broad degree of support for the 
development and establishments of these protected areas. And 
the definitions — the land descriptions — appear to be for the 
most part accurate and in order with what those affected 

understand they were to be. 
 
There are a couple of other smaller changes, some corrections, 
to legal boundaries here where some errors are being corrected, 
and some boundary changes to allow for some smaller-scale 
development such as road improvement and that kind of thing. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, it appears that we have a fairly 
good broad base of support for some of the changes that are 
being proposed in this Bill. And we feel that any further 
clarification that we require can be done through Committee of 
the Whole. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 17 — The 
Child Care Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure for me 
to speak on Bill No. 17, The Child Care Amendment Act. For 
the most part, Mr. Speaker, these amendments are housekeeping 
in nature, but it is important to look at these amendments very 
carefully since they will affect the care of children by those 
outside their home. 
 
We are pleased to see that this government is amending 
portions to the Act that restrict those from providing child care 
services other their primary residence. In the minister’s second 
reading speech he brought up a very good point of farm 
families; that they are extremely busy during seeding time, 
making it very difficult to provide adequate child care. 
 
These amendments will take some of the pressure off the 
parents so that they will not be concerned with the well-being of 
their children while they are out farming. 
 
These amendments are also looking at the number of children 
being cared for in group family child care homes and I 
understand that this legislation will continue to enforce the limit 
of eight children with further limits by age. Although we do not 
disagree with any of these changes in principle, we certainly 
have concern with this government’s ability to care for our 
children, particularly with the tabling of the Child Advocate 
report. 
 
There’s much to be said about the NDP’s track record on child 
care; unfortunately they are not positive things, Mr. Speaker. As 
legislators and parents it is our duty to ensure that the most 
vulnerable members in our society are protected and that, Mr. 
Speaker, of course is our children. 
 
Since the budget was released we have heard this government 
talk about their renewed commitment to children and the future 
of our province. And that all sounds well and good, but it is one 
thing to be providing for our children with a safe environment 
in which to grow up and foster, but it is another thing to be 
giving them any hope for the future. I have seen too many of 
our youth who were born and raised in Saskatchewan leaving 
for the greener pastures west of this province. 



1720 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

I find it rather disconcerting that the members opposite talk 
about this commitment to our youth as if they are doing 
something wonderful by acknowledging the needs of children. 
Over the years we have heard some horror stories of how 
children have been treated in care homes. I am pleased to see 
that this legislation recognizes this and will ensure that none of 
the children being cared for in a group home will be neglected. 
 
There are some concerns regarding the licensing aspect of this 
legislation. For example, section 3.2, paragraph states that a 
person may operate a family child care home either with or 
without a child . . . or pardon me, family child care licence. This 
concerns me in light of the fact, as I mentioned earlier, that 
some of the children have been abused in some of these homes, 
and if the operators of these facilities are not permitted to carry 
a licence, there may be some difficulty in holding them 
accountable. 
 
But those are questions that I have no doubt the minister will be 
more than happy to respond to in Committee of the Whole. And 
all in all, Mr. Speaker, this is a good piece of legislation. 
 
As the official opposition that represent a majority of rural 
communities across Saskatchewan, I am pleased to see that this 
government is finally acknowledging the needs of farm families 
and has some of the constraints that they have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some questions that I have regarding this 
Bill, so at this time I would move that Bill 17 be now moved to 
Committee of the Whole. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 59 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 59 — The 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 
2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
enter into the debate on the Bill No. 58, the construction labour 
relations Act, and there’s been much talk on this Bill and much 
controversy when it comes to this legislation, and it is a 
privilege to enter into it. 
 
You know, when we were campaigning, and we were talking 
. . . many times when I got to talk about the CCTA (Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement) and things like that, and I 
talked to people in the construction industry, in the small towns 
that were doing construction, and everything else, they had 
some real concerns about the CCTA, and as I did too. 
 
And it is really interesting to watch. You better watch what you 
hope for because you just might get it. And they’re talking 
about eliminating the CCTA, which is what I was hoping for, 
not realizing that they put in some legislation that is far worse 
than the CCTA ever imagined about being. 
 
The point of really forcing — and this is coming from the 
construction companies — forcing them into unionization, 
know that members in the open shop won’t be forced in right 

away but as soon as they’re laid off and have to enter back in, 
they have no option but to enter in, if its with a company that 
they are working for before, in through the union process. 
 
And there’s some real concerns. And especially over the last 
number of days, quite a few days, we’ve been asking questions 
on this very Bill. And listening to government’s answers, it just 
really didn’t answer any of the questions that I really wanted. 
Where is this going to be better for our province? How is it 
going to improve our province, throughout the province. 
 
You know, we’ve talked to a number of farm manufacturers and 
you know, I just think back of a couple of meetings that we had 
with some of the city organizations that were going to be 
affected by it. And not one of them were saying where this is 
going to improve things from their perspective. 
 
You know, the government will argue that it will need to 
promote labour harmony in the province. And so I ask, where 
was the disharmony? Where was the problems in labour before? 
We haven’t . . . especially in this industry, there hasn’t been a 
strike for decades. And so you really question whether there is a 
need for increasing labour harmony. When you talk to a number 
of the companies that are going to be directly affected by this, 
they feel that there will be much less labour harmony once this 
law is put into place. 
 
And so there’s some, you know, real questions with the answers 
that we’ve been getting day in and day out asking questions on 
this labour Bill. 
 
The government will state that these changes are needed to 
promote fair wage policy. That’s an argument that they have, 
and that’s not necessarily, doesn’t necessarily hold water either. 
You know, there are many situations where, depending on the 
position, whether it’s an apprenticeship or not, that one will be 
higher than the other or vice versa. So I think there is a large 
majority of fair wage policy out there and letting the private 
industry look after it. 
 
(1500) 
 
I think a lot of times when you look at some of the companies 
that are going to be involved, that are working; they feel that 
it’s going to affect, perhaps their efficiency and a number of 
other things — their amount of business that they’re going to be 
doing. 
 
And when you start eliminating and limiting the amount of 
efficiencies the companies try and achieve and the amount of 
business that companies are trying to increase on, it’s going to 
affect the workers because there isn’t enough money coming 
into the company to maybe bring the wages up. 
 
And so, I really think that a fair labour policy is letting the 
market take care of itself, letting the people increase the 
efficiencies, and letting the people, the companies, increase 
their business. And that takes care of a lot of the problems when 
it comes to a fair wage policy. 
 
Certainly many, many years ago when unions and movements 
like that came into the province there was a huge need for it and 
a demand for it many, many years ago. But I think it’s like a lot 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1721 

of things, when the pendulum is moving perhaps it was way too 
far one side many, many years ago. But this legislation puts it 
extremely too far the other way. It’s just unfair and really 
uncalled for. 
 
And I think when we talked to the questions today that were 
asked in the House today regarding this very thing, the answers 
again really didn’t justify why we are doing it. They talked 
about all the jobs that are going to be created and have been 
created in the province. And I, you know, compliment the 
government for that. It’s not all government but if we have job 
creation that’s great. 
 
This does nothing for job creation, absolutely nothing. And if 
they’re hanging their hat on that, why then the next statement 
they’re using is to where they’re hanging their hat to promote 
this legislation. And the two can’t be connected at all. 
 
The government will state that these changes are necessary to 
stop companies from getting around the spirit of the rules. You 
know and in reality there are very few of these companies, or 
none of these companies, that have had any grievances filed for 
the Labour Relations Board, alleging these . . . you know, 
whatever the problems that these companies are . . . 
 
So a lot of the reasoning behind this Bill and a lot of the 
excuses for why this Bill must go forward can be disputed and 
disputed very, very well. We really question the whole fact of 
why you have to force people that . . . employees that could join 
the union very, very easily if they want to. They could even stay 
with the same company and join the union if they wanted to. 
 
If all those employees wanted to start their own union they 
could if there was an agreement. But they are working in an 
open shop because they choose to work in an open shop. And if 
they choose to work in an open shop and that’s being taken 
away from them, what’s the point of it. It’s really taking a 
number of steps backwards. 
 
So I really . . . it really looks, you know, when I look at the 
reasons why this legislation would be put in place as when you 
look at why the CCTA legislation was put in place, it really 
looks like a bit of a pat on the back from union to government 
or government to union. 
 
You know, last year the NDP brought in about $300,000 from 
union contributions, and you know I think it’s more than a 
coincidence that you would get legislation like this. Now I don’t 
know how much, whether the legislation would have been put 
in prior to the contributions or after the contributions, but it 
really is more than a coincidence that the NDP . . . and there’s 
different answers that the minister has given. 
 
She said we are affiliated . . . we are connected directly with 
union. Well that’s very obvious. When she asks the questions 
. . . tries to answer the questions on why this is put in place, she 
said well we’ve had hundreds of meetings around the province. 
How many meetings did they have with Bourgeault and 
Doepker and Degelman, and whatever, Doepker, and whatever 
company out there. I would bet that very few of those hundred 
meetings that have been held around the province were with the 
people that it’s going to affect the most — the manufacturers, 
the construction people, and that type of thing. 

So it really takes a step back. And I think when you look at 
building our province and you look at small business and 
construction people and manufacturers, that they will say that 
one of the hardest things to keep business going and improving 
in our province is some of the labour legislation that we have in 
our province, and this is just one step that is going to make it 
even that much harder. 
 
So I would like to adjourn debate on this Bill right now until we 
have a chance to debate it with more time. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Chair: — I will invite the hon. minister to reintroduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Right 
behind me is Steven Pillar, the associate deputy minister. To my 
left is Carol Klassen, assistant deputy minister. To my right is 
Marlene Smadu, assistant deputy minister. 
 
Behind we have Kimberley Wihnan, assistant to the deputy 
minister; Kevin Wilson, director of pharmaceutical services, 
drug plan and extended benefits; Bert Linklater, acting 
executive director of district management services branch; Jim 
Simmons, executive director of community care branch; and 
Lauren Donnelley, acting executive director, acute and 
emergency services branch. And Rod Wiley, executive director, 
finance and management services. 
 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
welcome, Ministers, and officials who, as the Deputy Speaker 
said, this is our third session in Health estimates. 
 
Ministers, I would like to try to stay focused one area at a time, 
but as you can appreciate there’s a number of topics that I think 
are important that we touch on, so it will probably be a little 
less focused on one issue than we’ve been, or two, as we have 
in the past. 
 
First of all, Ministers, I would like to start on administration 
which I believe is the department administration. I notice by the 
full-time equivalents of your department staff component that 
it’s exactly the same number of people as what you had in last 
year’s budget, but there is a noticeable increase in the actual 
expenditures. 
 
Minister, can you please outline and explain that fact. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is that this 
represents a 3.3 per cent increase. It is for salary increases, 
benefit increases. As well, I can tell the member that over half 
of the amount for administration is directed to programs that 
benefit all of Saskatchewan people. 
 



1722 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

And let me give you an example. The Provincial Laboratory 
would benefit all Saskatchewan people and immunization 
programs. So it’s not as though we have a number of officials in 
the Department of Health that are purely administrative in 
function. We actually do deliver direct services to the public in 
the Department of Health. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Out of your . . . The 
budget increase then is in some measure at least 
across-the-board salary and benefit increase for department 
members. 
 
I’m interested as well, you mentioned that the department 
directly is involved with the immunization program and things 
of that nature. Minister, could you break that down a little more 
detailed. Do you provide the vaccines for the school 
immunization process? I believe the districts supply the public 
health nurse personnel that actually would administer the 
immunization. Can you break that down in terms of how it’s 
done? 
 
And I’m also interested in the fact that I believe that some of 
your immunization program requires a bit of looking forward in 
terms of anticipating how many people — students or children 
— are going to be immunized; that you have to purchase certain 
batches or numbers or doses of vaccine and things of that 
nature. I’d like a little more clarification on that program. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Let me give you an example. Eight 
million dollars is for the Provincial Lab; $4 million is for the 
provincial immunization program which includes vaccines; $4 
million is for contracts with physicians to provide services for 
northern Saskatchewan; $6 million supports medical services 
programs, including physician fee negotiations, maintenance of 
the central registry which indicates which Saskatchewan 
residents that are eligible for health care benefits; $5 million to 
administer the prescription drug plan and extended benefit 
program; a million dollars for tuberculosis screening, diagnosis, 
contact facing, treatment, training, prevention programs; 
800,000 for the provincial registration of vital statistics or vital 
events like births, marriages, deaths. 
 
As well we have money that’s being spent on research and 
analysis into the pharmaco-epidemiology unit. We have 
$600,000 going to the regional psychiatric centre and other 
mental health and addictions related contracts for the direct 
provisions of services to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, maybe you 
can help me then? Where in the line budget things would be, 
where would it be accounted for — for example, out-of-country 
or out-of-province medical services? For example, when there 
was a labour problems, we were flying people out and those 
kind of things. Where do those types of expenditures be 
accounted for? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It’s under medical services in the blue 
book. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, moving on then . . . Oh, before we leave this area, I 
believe you said in the list, and would it be possible to have that 
detailed list of that breakdown of specific subclauses, if you 

like, of the department’s spending? 
 
But I believe you had a category that said, physician services or 
the administration of physician contracts or negotiating 
physician contracts. I believe there is a process that also tracks 
physician utilization of the system, etc. Is that out of this or 
would it be out of the general fees for physicians? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — No, that’s out of that amount of money. 
It’s $6 million, and it supports physician services. And there’s a 
group of people that work in the Department of Health that send 
remuneration to physicians out of the fee-for-service schedule 
under the medical services commission. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, that department then would sort of be the guardians, if 
you like, to see if there was patterns of inappropriate billing or 
repetitive billing and things of that nature. Can you, do you 
have a report from that type of activity? Can you outline to us, 
have there been incidents of what the department has felt are 
inappropriate billing procedures? What they would break down 
to being? There might be errors and that sort of thing happen. 
What are errors, and what things other than that that might 
cause you concern? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’ll send you a summary of all of the 
activities in this area. Obviously there is . . . we regularly look 
at those kinds of things, and there is a joint professional medical 
review committee that looks at utilization and whether people 
are billing appropriately. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I understand then that this department looks 
at it and would flag what they see as maybe irregularities, etc. Is 
there then, from your answer, a committee that looks at them to 
break it down further to understand the details and to determine 
if this is errors or confusion or analyzes it in terms of what the 
problem may be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There is a joint medical review 
committee that looks at this, plus there are a number of other 
audit processes in place, and we’ll outline that for you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister. Moving on 
to accommodations and central services, I see as well that that 
amount has not increased very significantly. 
 
Would you please outline what in general that these services 
cover? Are they for department facilities? Are there facilities 
that the department has ownership that actually provide the 
delivery of front-line health care? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It includes things like accommodations. 
We pay a fee to Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation which runs the building down here on Albert, as 
well as we have accommodations in various, you know, places 
across the province, and we would pay almost like a lease fee or 
a fee to SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation). 
 
As well, we have things like postage and that comes out of that 
area as well. So any kinds of mail outs to the public would 
come under the accommodation fee. 
 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1723 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister. Madam 
Minister, I would like to move on to the district health services 
and support category if I may. And I see that there’s, you know, 
a fairly large breakdown there or somewhat of a breakdown 
already. 
 
I would like to look at them in a little bit of detail in each line. 
The acute and rehabilitation services that are listed there, would 
this be the payments to district health boards? Or what does this 
general category entail? And would you please give us an 
overview of it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, I can give you that. That would 
include payments to district health boards for acute and 
rehabilitation, long-term care, home-based services, community 
services, emergency response services, health facilities, capital, 
as well as . . . like last year there was the millennium fund, 
those kinds of things. 
 
And then there’s the district support branch in the Department 
of Health which are a group of people that work to support the 
districts in terms of their relationship with the Department of 
Health. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Perhaps it was my 
fault in asking the question; I realize the sub-programs that are 
there. I was focusing firstly on acute and rehabilitative services, 
proposed amount of $701 million. 
 
Is that the direct transfers to the district health boards for their 
provision of acute care? Is that all it is? Is that the total or are 
there other services that are provided and would you outline 
them please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — That is transfers to the health district 
for acute and rehab and what could be included in there would 
be targeted initiatives like the waiting time reduction fund, 
where we had monies allocated last year and they’ll be allocated 
again this year. 
 
As well, we’re transferring some money to the districts for the 
kidney program, kidney transplant program in Saskatoon. 
That’s money that would be included in there. As well as there 
are some specialized programs like renal dialysis units, and we 
anticipate that we’re going to announce two additional sites in 
the province that money allocated for that would be under acute 
and rehabilitation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, in a general 
sense, could you outline of the $700 million, how much is going 
to . . . Is it all going to the health districts in one way or another, 
either by way of the special programs, etc.? 
 
I see you nodding, so I’ll move on to the second part of it. Over 
and above the special programs that you outlined in terms of 
renal dialysis and the kidney initiatives and things of that 
nature, how do you establish how much money goes to the 
health districts? What is the system in terms of saying there’s so 
much goes to district A or B or C and on? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, this is a population needs-based 
funding formula, which means that we look at the most recent 
district populations. And the district populations are usually 

available June 30 of the previous year. 
 
Then we have an age-gender adjustment because we know that 
older people require health services. So it’s based on a 
provincial age-sex curve which uses institutional supportive 
care data, because you look at your long-term care, your home 
care, your acute care. 
 
Then there’s a needs adjustment which looks at census material. 
This is very complicated but it’s . . . we use census material. 
 
And then there’s the service flow adjustment. Because some 
people don’t necessarily get their health services from . . . even 
. . . or health providers inside their district. They may go to 
other districts. And then those . . . the actual service flow data is 
adjusted as well. 
 
So I guess basically if you stay in your own district and use the 
services in your own district, that is recognized by your district 
in terms of funding from the Department of Health. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. So there would be 
some statistical analysis that sits down and starts off and says 
that there is, you know, there is a population demographic 
profile of a health district. And on the basis of having so many 
people of different age categories, etc., there would be that base 
formula that would be established. 
 
Is that then applied to all of the districts based on their 
particular data, is my first question. I understand that if that’s 
skewed by having a higher percentage than the average in terms 
of age or gender or high cost, or at least potentially high cost 
population groupings, that that would be changed. 
 
You also said that there would be institutional, I believe, data. 
And I assume by that would be the levels of people staying in 
hospital long term or acute care or whatever, home care, 
whatever, that gets adjusted by the fact that there might be 
particular anomalies within a population group. 
 
In terms of the service flow, I understand that the concept there 
is an adjustment that recognizes that the dollars should follow 
the procedures, if you like, to some extent. And I think that 
that’s one of the arguments that the larger centres, if you like, in 
the province identify as part of, at least part of their financial 
difficulties, and in many instances more and more people are 
moving to the larger health centres, rural and urban, but 
primarily you know, our tertiary centres. 
 
Does that adjustment fully recognize the extra costs for services 
that are provided or is it a mathematical kind of a thing that 
attempts to provide some kind of adjustment? Or does it 
correspond pretty accurately to actual service cost . . . service 
delivery cost figures? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It’s not a procedure-based funding 
formula where you look at each procedure that was provided to 
a citizen from outside of the district and then they pay for those 
procedures, the funding formula. It’s based on the population of 
the people who are using that service. And there are a number 
of assumptions that are made. 
 
So it’s based . . . let me give you an example. If you were acute 



1724 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

care — and it’s needs-based — so you would look at mortality, 
you might look at low birth weights, you might look at the 
fertility rate data for the previous five years, and then you 
would adjust your funding based on all of that information to 
that particular health district. 
 
I guess the other point I would make is that when I was the 
Minister of Education, we had a funding formula called the 
foundation operating grant and it was a fairly simple formula to 
understand. I think part of the confusion, and I know what 
you’re talking about, you’re talking about, Saskatoon for 
instance, saying the money doesn’t follow the people that we 
serve. 
 
Part of the difficulty is that you almost have to be an economist 
working with formulas to understand the age-adjusted criteria, 
the sex of the population criteria, and all of the factors that are 
taken into consideration. And I think part of the difficulty is we 
all don’t have a collective understanding because it’s so 
complex. And you have to almost be a, I don’t want to use the 
word rocket scientist to understand it, but practically. 
 
(1530) 
 
But if you look at who’s being served, it does seem to make 
sense, and the kinds of services that are being delivered. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I’m a little nervous but by your definition 
that may exclude 90 per cent of your own department from 
understanding it. And then you have to ask yourself, who really 
knows what’s going on. 
 
Madam Minister, there was a case that we raised in the House 
some time ago where an individual was being sent to the Mayo 
Clinic in Rochester from Codette for a condition of T-cell 
lymphoma and that we indicated, and we had the paper 
documentation, if you like, that this procedure was costly, it 
was repetitive, occurring over an extended period of time, and 
was indeed in this client’s best interests. 
 
And I would assume that the fees or the costs of that kind of 
out-of-province service would be covered under . . . would it be 
covered under this allocation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It 
isn’t. Okay. Then I would ask you clearly where would that be 
covered then? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It comes out of the medical services 
branch. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Okay, thank you. I see a category there 
where it says out of province, 40-million-odd dollars. I’m 
assuming that that’s where it’s covered. 
 
Anyway, you know the rest of the story, Madam Minister. We 
made you aware of the issue, and part of the dilemma was that 
for a relatively small amount of capital purchase at the 
University Hospital in Saskatoon the actual equipment that was 
needed in order to provide this service, which currently is not 
available in our province, could be installed in Saskatoon. 
 
And the reply to the letter that was written said that while this 
may make sense on the surface of it, that’s not how the things 
work in the real world. I’m assuming then that the cost of this 

equipment comes out of another part of your budget and that 
one part doesn’t talk to the other part. Could you please explain 
that anomaly? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — One of the things that you should know 
is that we have not, we have not historically paid for equipment 
in health districts. We have not bought provincial equipment. 
There are allocations within the health district budgets which is 
some recognition that they should be able to buy equipment. 
 
We began to change the process somewhat last year. We bought 
a provincial CAT (computerized axial tomography) scan that is 
being used between Moose Jaw and Swift Current. And we 
indicated that we would pay for equipment for a second bone 
density testing centre here in Regina. But if you look at, for 
instance, renal dialysis clinics that are being set up, the 
communities are raising the money for the actual equipment and 
then we provide the operating funds. 
 
In the case of . . . the case that you’re talking about, there are 
two cases and what we have done is when there are very 
low-volume cases or not many people that have a particular 
ailment or disease, we have been prepared to send those people 
out of province for treatment because of the operating costs that 
might be associated with purchasing a piece of equipment that 
may be utilized very rarely. 
 
But we’re always analyzing things. And I’ll give you an 
example. We were sending cancer patients, breast cancer 
patients, to I believe it was Edmonton for stem cell transplants. 
We are now funding that program at the Saskatoon Cancer 
Centre, and women who have breast cancer who require stem 
cell transplants can now get that service in Saskatchewan. But 
initially because it was a new treatment for breast cancer, we 
were sending people I believe to Edmonton, and now we’re 
providing that service here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So you always . . . with the new technologies you always track, 
track it to see whether or not it makes sense to provide that 
service here. And the breast . . . the stem cell transplant is one 
example of that. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, as you recall . . . and by confirming that there’s not 
only one individual with this critical condition, there’s two, 
makes the situation twice as obvious in terms of a solution. 
 
The costs — and again from the top of my memory I don’t want 
to quote the exact costs — but they were pretty significant in 
Canadian dollars. And the treatment for the one individual 
where we had the documentation on had gone on over a period 
of some 20 months. So certainly not exactly a one- or a 
two-term time treatment allocation. 
 
And in addition to that, the cost of the machine was also 
identified as being the equivalent of about three or four months 
treatment cost that could have been provided. And what you’re 
saying now is if there is two individuals, that just cuts the cost 
in half, and that the disposables were something like $1,000 a 
month. Again, a very minute amount in comparison to what was 
being paid. 
 
And the letter from your official that came back and said, well 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1725 

this does make sense; however, it’s not the way things work. Is 
that because you don’t have enough rocket scientists in your 
department? Or is it actually because you have no ability to 
look at things as the bigger picture, and that capital projects are 
something looked entirely in a different mindset than 
operational expenditures? 
 
It seems to me to just be logical if you could save a huge 
amount of money, that would make sense on its own. But you 
also have the physical problem of these families going to the 
Mayo Clinic, or I believe in your answers in question period 
you said, well now the good news is we’re sending them to 
Calgary. There’s also a physical disruption that goes on in terms 
of where the families have to go and their own personal 
expenses to do it. 
 
Madam Minister, it sounds to me as if you’re saying that there’s 
no way of doing it. Certainly as well, if the Saskatoon District 
Health Board made application to you through their budget 
process for the machine that’s required, you would have the 
ability in your review of their budgets to say this is a good idea 
and make sure that it’s funded. Is that not correct, Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can say to the member, and if 
you . . . just in order that we get our story . . . we’re both 
operating under the same set of facts. 
 
This province was the only province that was sending people 
outside of the country for that treatment. No other province 
was; nor was . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It does matter . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well just a moment; it does matter 
because this was a new technology, a new procedure. No other 
province was sending anybody anywhere. People with the same 
condition were not being sent anywhere outside of Canada. And 
the equipment was not available in this country. And it’s still 
not available in this country. 
 
Calgary — we’re working with Calgary — is in the process of 
perhaps getting this equipment into their health authority. 
 
You know, I just have to say this to the House and to the public 
that might be watching this, that this was the only province and 
is the only province that was paying for that kind of new and 
enhanced treatment. And we were prepared as citizens of this 
province to send this particular individual that you’re talking 
about, outside of this country for treatment. If this individual 
was located in Alberta or Manitoba or Ontario, they would not 
have been sent anywhere for treatment, because we were the 
only province that was sending people outside of Canada for 
this treatment. 
 
So I think that we should be thankful for that. We should be 
thankful for that. Now you can say this is a waste of money. 
This is a new procedure; it’s a new treatment; it’s a new 
technology. No one else in Canada has brought this technology 
to their health region. 
 
Calgary is in the process of considering that, and we’re going to 
work with them in order that our people can have access to that 
treatment. And it’s not . . . you know, people say, well set up a 
program, set up a program. But when you set up a program 
there’s not only the cost of the capital equipment, but there’s 
also the ongoing cost associated with running the day-to-day 

operation of that equipment. 
 
Let me give you just . . . I want to make one other comment. 
We provide pediatric cardiac care in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And there are little babies that require that kind 
of treatment, that come from other provinces to the University 
of Saskatchewan because they don’t have that treatment in their 
provinces. There’s a lot more co-operation and collaboration 
that’s going on between provinces, because not only are there 
specialists, but there are sub subspecialists within those 
specialty categories. 
 
And if you want to provide the very best care to your citizens, 
then we need to be prepared as provinces in this country, to 
share human resources, because we can’t all attract the same 
people to our particular region. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Well I would also like 
to say I do support the fact that these individuals are getting 
required treatment. That’s not the argument. The argument is, is 
could we provide that treatment in Saskatoon in the University 
Hospital as per the letter of the head of the department who said 
that his department was not only capable of doing it, they could 
do it without an increase in manpower and personnel. That was 
in the letter that I gave you a copy of, and I’m sure that you had 
anyway, Minister. 
 
The point is not about do we provide the service for our citizens 
or not. The point is, can we provide it at a more reasonable cost 
in this instance. And in this instance clearly we could have. And 
we could certainly provide it in Saskatchewan at a much 
reduced cost to what we were doing in the Mayo Clinic, and we 
were doing it over an extended 20-month period in time, and 
the doctor in Saskatoon had written the department. It isn’t as if 
it was some idea that was being put from the department down 
onto these individuals. They had looked at it. 
 
And the fact that Alberta funds it or doesn’t is not the point, in 
addition. They don’t fund it. But yet all of a sudden they’re the 
ones putting the machine in their hospital because that they can 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well why not put it in here, 
Madam Minister, so the people that are requiring this procedure 
here can be here. 
 
It just is an indication of the fact that I think that your 
department’s budgetary system does not allow for that 
innovative, logical thinking, because if it did, something 
different would have happened. 
 
Madam Minister, I want to move on to another topic as well in 
this subprogram category — long-term care services. Madam 
Minister, as I’m sure that you’re aware, the demographics you 
spoke of in terms of the way funding is going to district health 
boards, those same demographics are pointing to the fact that 
there is an increase in our aging population if you like. And 
unfortunately, we are all part of that process, and as we get 
closer to it, it becomes more and more something we’re all 
needing to be sensitive about. 
 
Minister, do you have a long-term projection as to the estimated 
requirements for long-term care beds and facilities? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — While the minister responsible answers 



1726 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

that question, there’s some people in the gallery that I want to 
acknowledge. I’m supposed to meeting them right now, but we 
changed the times, I guess, that we’re doing estimates. I’d like 
to introduce . . . 
 
The Chair — Order, order, order. Is this . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m sorry. Can you ask for leave? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Representatives of the Saskatchewan 
Emergency Medical Services association are in your gallery. 
They are Dennis Nelson, president of the Saskatchewan 
Emergency Medical Services association; Gerry Shriemer, 
vice-president; Ron Dufresne, secretary treasurer; and Mike 
Androsoff, who is an emergency medical services consultant. 
 
So I’d welcome these four gentlemen to our Health estimates. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
provincial average right now in long-term care beds is, for 
people over 75, per thousand, it’s 118 beds now. The national 
average is 108 per thousand, over 75. When the district health 
plans have come in, we’ve looked at all of them and 
individually looked at their projections for their demographics. 
Like is their population over 75 going to peak in a certain 
amount of years? And each district has done that and put their 
projections forward. 
 
So we do have a district-by-district look at how they’re 
reaching those targets and the national average, and watching 
how we actually plan where we build and if we build, and those 
sorts of things. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. When we’re on the 
topic, can I ask you how many years forward these projections 
go? Are they three-year, five-year, ten-year? What timeline are 
you looking forward into? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We’ve done some work up to 20, 40. So 
that’s 40 years out. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. And I appreciate that 
the information that’s coming from the districts, while you’ve 
looked at it, I don’t expect that you’d have it analyzed in any 
detail at this relatively short notice. But I wonder in general if 
you can tell me, is there any difference in terms of the number 
of beds allocated per thousand between urban centres and rural 
centres? 
 

And I’m thinking that it might be possible, at least theoretically, 
that people in an urban centre may have more family support 
groups or things of that nature. I wondered if the statistics 
would indicate any differences at all. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — In general, there are more beds per 
thousand over age 75 in rural Saskatchewan, in the whole 
province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Could you give me a bit of an indication — 
you gave the statistics in terms of what the average is — could 
you give me, you know, the urban numbers and the rural 
numbers in general that lead you to give that comment? How 
much difference is there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’ll get it for you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, in terms of when you do make commitments 
to replace facilities or add facilities based on the needs that 
would be identified, on the capital side, what is the process in 
terms of identifying the project that’s needed, outlining exactly 
how much expenditure there’s going to be per bed? 
 
I’m always mindful, it seems to me in the past when facilities 
came up, it would sometimes seem that each one was an 
attempt by the architectural firm to outdo the previous project. 
 
And I also always look back to the days when I was a kid, when 
we looked at the CNR (Canadian National Railways) model of 
building facilities, you sort of had the same basic one no matter 
where it was, and then you added on one or two modules, and 
that’s the way the system worked. 
 
How does the system work, and is there an effort made or 
guideline set by the department in terms of, you know, how 
grandiose do these facilities need to be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — One of the things that you should know 
about our capital, how we do capital, we have moved to have a 
capital process that’s very similar to what we did in education 
in that all projects were rated based on, you know, fire safety, 
the needs of the people in the community. 
 
There’s a technical tool that we used to determine whether or 
not a project goes ahead, and then they’re put on a list so that 
it’s transparent. So everybody sees where their project stands in 
relationship to other projects, so that there’s no political 
interference in the process and so that every health district 
knows where their project is, relative to other projects in the 
province. 
 
And that was very important. Because we are dealing with some 
situations where projects may have gone ahead in the late ’80s 
or whatever, that weren’t really . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No, I wouldn’t say that at all, that didn’t need to necessarily go 
ahead. I mean let’s face it, there were a lot of political projects 
in the 1980s and those days are over. And we have a transparent 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No there hasn’t been any since, 
and there certainly hasn’t been in Education. 
 
And it’s based on a tool; it’s a technical rating tool. And then 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1727 

it’s transparent so those districts can see where their, where 
their project stands relative to other projects . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well you shouldn’t be too concerned about it, 
given that you don’t . . . you’re not former Conservatives. I’m 
just talking about the former Conservative Party and what they 
did in terms of projects. And they were political projects, and 
that’s recognized. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I appreciate the comments and the commitment to a 
capital replacement process that’s based on identified need by 
an independent set of criteria. And I think that that is indeed the 
way to go and we’re very supportive of that. 
 
Madam Minister, one of the other issues out there of course are 
the funding ratios or the contribution ratios, if you like, between 
the province and individual health districts. And I believe, if I 
could speak in generalities at least, it would strike me there 
could be indeed projects that your independent criteria 
methodology has identified as an important project. And in 
order for the health district to implement that project, under the 
current funding ratio on capital funding, it could actually be 
very onerous and very difficult for an individual district to 
come out with the 65/35 ratio that I believe is in effect. 
 
Are there circumstances that could be entertained whereby the 
need of the project takes more priority than the ability of a 
small district necessarily to fund as much of it as in other cases? 
I could see in a situation that if you stick very strictly to the 
ratios, that the projects could get skewed by the ability to pay 
rather than the actual need. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I would say this: that when the district 
is offering a provincial service, 100 per cent of the costs of that 
capital construction project is funded by the province. And 
when the districts have an inability to raise local shares, like in 
northern Saskatchewan, those projects are funded 100 per cent 
by the province. 
 
But when the service is for people in the local area or the 
region, that district is expected to come up with about 35 per 
cent of the cost of that capital construction project, and the 
province puts up 65 per cent. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I know that 
you’re aware that there were some districts that ended up 
assuming provincial facilities. And I’m thinking of the regional 
hospitals in particular where they actually moved from what 
was a regional care provision system in the district and the 
facilities were and I believe might even still be owned by 
SPMC in terms of the current facilities. 
 
And now as replacement and/or major upgrading of those 
facilities are required, the magnitude of the project could be 
larger than that individual district to cope with, given the fact 
that this facility was there serving a larger population, if you 
like, because of the nature of it. 
 
Do those kinds of projects warrant individual consideration in 
terms of the funding ratios because of the nature of the way 
they originated? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can assure the member is that 

we did do a study of who actually is in the four regional care 
centres that you’re referring to, and the information that we 
have indicates that basically the people in those facilities come 
from the district that those facilities are located in, or from the 
. . . Yes, the individuals who are in those facilities come from 
the districts that those regional care facilities are located in. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So I take it that they no longer serve a 
regional service delivery need as they did when they were 
owned and operated I guess under the provincial Department of 
Health per se. 
 
The other issue with it of course is that the facilities because of 
their nature, the way they were, were pretty expensive and 
probably pretty expensive to renovate. I think there’s an 
argument being made by those districts where these regional 
facilities are in for a modified funding contribution ratio. And I 
wondered if because of the nature of the way this all evolved, if 
that is something you’d consider or that you have everything 
sort of written in stone — north, south, and that sort of issue. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — No. I think that the four districts of 
which the four regional care centres are located in have given a 
reasonable argument — the argument that you make. And it’s 
an argument that we’re considering. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I would like 
to continue on this topic, but I have some colleagues that would 
like to put some questions to your department. So on my behalf, 
thank you to you, Ministers, and to your officials. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
just a couple of short questions to do with the ambulance 
services out there. I’m not sure . . . I guess my first question is, 
are you aware about the Canora Ambulance service and the 
Duck Mountain Ambulance service in Kamsack? The 
suggestion has been made by the CEO (chief executive officer) 
of the Assiniboine Valley Health District at a meeting that we 
were present at and has been followed up with more 
suggestions like that; that the health district may be in the 
position, in order to save money, to take over these two 
ambulance services. Were you aware of that, Madam Minister? 
And would you care to comment on that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m aware of this suggestion, but it’s 
not something that we have given any consideration to. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess I can 
only ask you a couple of questions because of the time. 
 
Madam Minister, there’s great concern out there from both of 
these ambulance services, and I would think from actually 
ambulance services from all over the province if they get wind 
of what may happen there, is this a trend that may happen down 
the line all over the province? And I guess not being an expert 
in this field at all but sharing the concern that these people have, 
that these private businesses are running as efficiently as I think 
they possibly can. And I think the CEO at the time at the 
meeting that we were at said they’re in the neighbourhood of 
$200,000 they thought they could save. 
 
And I wonder, Madam Minister, has there been any work done 
in your department or has anybody in your department done any 



1728 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

work to back up that kind of numbers and see if that saving is 
there? Because I think the people involved, the private business 
out there, would really question where this kind of dollars could 
be saved for the Assiniboine Valley Health District because of I 
believe it’s Meadow Lake has already possibly gone that route 
and that the savings they don’t think was there, that was 
supposed to be there. 
 
So, Madam Minister, that would be my last question in the 
essence of time, but would you care to comment on that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — One of the things that we need to do, 
and I’ve said this to certainly people in the ambulance industry 
and also people in the EMS (emergency medical services) 
industry, is that we need to develop a provincial emergency 
medical service. 
 
And if you look at how we structure our EMS in the province, 
we have 32 districts who have various arrangements across the 
piece and what we have is — because there are many, many 
private operators — we have varying kilometre rates, varying 
wait-time rates, and varying basic service rates, and we also 
have, I would say, varying levels of service. And what we need 
to do is to create a provincial EMS service that has, you know, 
consistent rates, consistent wait times, consistent kilometre 
rates, consistent inter-facility transfers. 
 
And we need to make sure — and I’ve also said this publicly as 
well — we need to make sure that we have district coverage 
because a lot of the ambulance services are used to transport 
people who . . . not necessarily in an emergency situation, but 
transport them to get diagnostic services provided or whatever. 
 
So we’re looking at the notion of a provincial dispatch system 
so that we know where all of our ambulances are in the 
province and to make sure that areas are covered. We also need 
to make sure — and this is another thing that we’re discussing 
— there’s a lot of downtime in EMS and is there a way to 
integrate some of those people into our health facilities to 
provide extra hands to people in the health centres or in the 
long-term care home or in the hospitals. And we’ve had some 
experience using paramedics through M D Ambulance Care 
Ltd. in Saskatoon on our air ambulances and it has worked very 
nicely. 
 
We also had some experience during the nurses’ strikes . . . 
strike, with paramedics in our emergency rooms, so there’s a 
whole . . . there’s a whole undertaking that we need to engage 
in with the EMS services in the province to move towards a 
provincial EMS system. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, it 
won’t be a surprise to you most of my questions are concerning 
Living Sky Health District. The questions being asked of me the 
most is why was Living Sky Health District required to submit 
their budget two weeks prior to any other health district. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There are three health districts in the 
province that have undergone huge financial stresses and 
strains. The East Central Health District, of which we now have 
a public administrator; the Regina Health District, of which we 
appointed some additional board members with some business 
and financial and union resource backgrounds, as well as a 

special advisor to myself on that district; and Living Sky. 
 
I think it’s fair to say — and I’ve certainly shared this with the 
board of Living Sky — that their district, relative to other 
districts in the province, have some serious financial 
difficulties, and those financial difficulties need to be addressed 
in order that services can continue to be provided in that 
district. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, in light of the fact that in question period on May 16, 
you stated that you would not approve the Living Sky Health 
District budget — proposed budget — because you would not 
allow the closure of all the hospitals on Highway 16 from 
Saskatoon to Yorkton. 
 
Would you also not have the same concerns with the closure of 
the Watrous Hospital due to the fact that this hospital . . . if this 
hospital’s closed that there’ll be no hospitals on Highway No. 2 
from Moose Jaw to P.A. (Prince Albert)? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, for the member, I mean this is 
. . . I gather this is now public information because a letter did 
show up. My understanding is that Living Sky, as part of phase 
two and phase three, would look at closing Wynyard and 
Watrous, should they not be able to get their financial house in 
order. 
 
I don’t think that . . . That’s not something they’re considering. 
It’s something that they’ve had to look at given the level of debt 
and deficit that they have. But my sense is that this is something 
that would be done only in the worst case scenario. It’s not 
something that they’re going to be doing. And I think that’s 
important to say to you — that it’s not something they’re going 
to be doing unless they’re in the worst case scenario and I don’t 
think they have to be. 
 
Ms. Harpauer — Thank you, Madam Minister. Another 
question that has come to me and mostly from the Watrous area 
because of course the proposal is to change that to a health 
centre, is they would like a criteria or a definition of what is a 
health centre. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Health centres, first of all, still provide 
acute care services. There are health centres that are 24-hour 
health centres across this province that provide acute care, 
observation care, respite, rehabilitation care, and palliative care. 
So they are 24-hour, in essence, hospitals, and they tend to be 
associated with a nursing home. So it’s an integrated facility 
that has a long-term care facility and a health centre. And it’s a 
way of structuring services. 
 
As well they have X-ray, they have lab services, they have 
physio services — all of the other services that one would find 
in a hospital. But they’re called health centres because they are 
not separate and apart from the long-term care facilities. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. My next 
question sort of deals with something the member from Melfort 
was talking about, just clarification for myself. If a doctor is on 
the edge of a health district and his patients or the majority of 
them are outside of the health district, is the health district 
receiving funding for those patients? 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1729 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What’s important to understand here is 
that in essence most physicians in the province are almost like 
private contractors. They don’t work for the health districts. 
They are private individual physicians that bill the Medical 
Care Insurance Commission on a fee-for-service basis. It does 
not . . . Their billings do not come out of the health district 
budgets. 
 
Now if their patients receive services like acute care or rehab or 
palliative care at the local health centre, or lab services or X-ray 
services, those kinds of things, there would be some 
acknowledgement from the Department of Health in terms of 
the funding that there are people from outside of the district that 
are receiving services in that district, if those services are 
provided by the health district. 
 
But if you go to see a physician, and you come from another 
district and you don’t use any of the services of the health 
district, then that would not be acknowledged in the funding 
that’s sent to the health district by the Department of Health. 
 
Do you understand what I’m saying? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So in this 
particular case, we’ll get particular because I know you also 
received a letter from this doctor, and it’s Dr. Lim from 
Nokomis. And he is probably the ideal doctor for the wellness 
model that we’re trying to achieve in this province. 
 
He does a total study of his patients. And he wants to hopefully 
pinpoint any problems that may arise and have them corrected 
prior to that patient becoming an acute care patient. He’s a very 
conscientious doctor and he’s brought to me attention by 
phoning me, and through the letter that you also received, that if 
the lab services are cut back, then he can no longer carry on his 
practice. And he is dedicated enough that he feels that if he 
can’t do his job well, he will move on. 
 
So the concern is that these patients, he has now approximately 
2,500 patients, and so the majority of those would be outside of 
the district, coming into the district to use the lab facilities. But 
they’re proposing to cut his lab facilities and that is in phase 
one of their budget. 
 
So here’s a doctor who is doing everything that we have 
encouraged the health system to do to go into a wellness model 
of health care. And yet he won’t have the facilities to do exactly 
that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well first of all, I have not indicated 
whether or not we’re going to accept the health plan put 
forward by the district that you speak of. We obviously need to 
take into consideration the impacts of any change to that district 
and the impact it might have on other health providers in that 
district. 
 
So I certainly understand his point. And it’s something that we 
certainly will consider as we review all the health plans in the 
province. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So we go back 
to the original question then. These patients are coming in for 
the large part, if he’s serving 2,500 patients, they’re coming in 

from outside of the district. And he is very reliant on his lab 
services. 
 
So is Living Sky Health District given extra budget for that or is 
it just based on the population within Living Sky Health District 
itself? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What the member should know is that 
the district does receive money from the Department of Health 
for the Nokomis Health Centre. And that is recognized that the 
amount of service that is provided by the health district in the 
Nokomis Health Centre is recognized by the Department of 
Health in terms of its transfers of funds to the Living Sky 
Health District. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I move that the 
committee rise and report progress. 
 
The Chair: — I believe you want to report progress, not rise. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the Minister of 
Agriculture to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My 
officials with me today: the acting deputy minister of 
Agriculture and Food, Ernie Spencer, seated to my right; to my 
left, Hal Cushon, the director in policy program development 
branch; and seated behind me, Susie Miller, assistant deputy 
minister of Ag and Food; as well as Jack Zepp, the director, 
administrative services branch; and a little bit further to my 
right, Ross Johnson, manager, operational services, 
administration services branch. 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, welcome to 
you and your officials here this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, in Agriculture, your government made a number 
of commitments to the farm people of this province in your 
Throne Speech that I would like to discuss with you this 
afternoon and see what progress you are making on those 
various areas. And I’ll touch on them in general terms and then 
we can be a little more specific. 
 
They are with respect to a farm input cost monitoring program 
that you committed to, and I want a little bit of detail on that. 
Your program that is to be . . . or was put in place to deal with 
farmers who are facing difficulty with farmland, leasebacks, 
and any crop insurance arrears that they may have, the 
development of extended payment terms for those programs 
and what kind of progress you’re making with respect to that. 
 
The other area is with respect to the Provincial Action 
Committee on the Rural Economy — we would like to talk 
about that a little bit. And then the last two would be AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) and the farm safety 
net program. 
 



1730 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

Maybe we could begin with the introduction of a farm input 
cost monitoring program. What kind of monitoring are you 
doing, how extensive is it, how widely reported to the farm 
community is it, and what kind of reaction are you receiving 
from both the farm suppliers, and as well, farm people in 
general? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The first question, to the member 
opposite, the member from Kindersley, I just have a briefing 
note here that basically says the Saskatchewan Ag and Food has 
implemented the farm input price survey as we have committed 
in the Throne Speech. And as of today we have approximately 
200 producers who have enlisted as data collectors or reporters. 
 
(1615) 
 
This information then goes into a common web site and 
information is included about 160 different products that have 
been reported by producers to date. And the first results of the 
farm input price survey will be released . . . I believe it’s in the 
process of being released at the present time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, how well advertised is the 
information, and what is the intention of the program? Is it to 
provide farmers with the opportunity to see where your cost 
monitoring folks have determined is the lowest cost supplier for 
various farm inputs — fuel or chemical or something of that 
nature — is that what the nature of the program is to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well the interesting thing that we 
found is it works both ways, both for the suppliers as well as for 
the farmers. There’s an advantage for suppliers who are more 
competitive because it puts their information onto the web site. 
And also for the consumer or for the farmer, it’s their price after 
discount. 
 
So it gives an opportunity to get I think a much clearer picture 
of the circumstance related to the actual cost. So it works both 
ways and we’re getting fairly positive comments both from the 
suppliers as well as from farm families. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Am I to assume, Mr. Minister, that it is being 
widely advertised to the farm community? Or is it on your 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food web site? Or where is it? I 
haven’t seen anything myself on it. I’m just wanting you to 
outline where people would be able to access the information 
on it. 
 
As you know, the spraying season is upon us right now. 
There’ll be large amounts of product being consumed, being 
purchased right as we speak these days, so it would be helpful if 
we had knowledge of price information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — To this point we haven’t advertised, 
and we don’t actually have a budget for advertising. But it has 
been pretty widely circulated through the media, both electronic 
and print. But we are analyzing now whether or not it would be 
appropriate and a good exercise in spending some money on 
advertising of the program. 
 
Because it’s a new program, we want to monitor it and make 
sure everything is working before we get too far out front in 
what might be perceived to be overpromoting the program. But 

to date we are getting, I think, almost total positive response to 
the program and then we’ll see whether or not we . . . what kind 
of advertising we back it up with. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well I think you’re pretty safe in that regard, Mr. 
Minister, because I haven’t heard of anything, or very few 
people it seems would be . . . Where is it advertised and what 
extent of advertising are you pursuing? 
 
The other area that you might want to look at is supplying the 
information, at least the web site information, through the crop 
insurance program or various publications that you put out. 
Agriculture and Food puts out information on it. If it is in that, 
I’d ask you to please point that out. 
 
As I said, there are farmers that are making large purchase 
decisions as we speak, about crop inputs, and have to this point 
already. And I’m sure they’d be interested if their dealer is 
competitive with dealers elsewhere in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, the member should know that 
the Ag review report, for example, that goes out from the 
department, includes information on the program. 
 
In the first month — well not quite a full month — there have 
been almost a thousand hits on the web site of people accessing 
information. So that’s not . . . it’s not huge, but in terms of sort 
of a first month program with no advertising . . . And again I 
say to the member opposite, we want to make sure we have all 
the systems up and running. 
 
I would expect by this fall you will see some relatively 
inexpensive advertising program that will go along to back this 
up as we go into harvest time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — One last question on that. What is the intention 
of it then? Is it to be very active in terms of price discovery for 
farmers into the future? Is that the intention of the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think that’s correct. It may turn 
out to be wildly successful in terms of people having access and 
lead to more than that in terms of an active Internet site where 
people can have discussions. But at this point in time it’s 
basically focused on pricing alternatives and options. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With respect to your 
government’s commitment in the whole area of extending 
provincially administered farmland leaseback, what areas are 
you addressing in that program? There are, as you know, many 
people are working and completing the last year or years of a 
leaseback program. And I’m wondering the extent of the 
program, where you’re headed with it. Are you looking at 
further extensions in the future? What is your government’s 
plans with regard to the leaseback programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — My understanding is that on ACS 
(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan), there has 
been an extension of three years on the leases. And as it would 
relate to lands branches, it’s a year-by-year extension. And over 
a period of three years, they’re expected to catch up on any 
arrears that they may have. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — With respect to crop insurance, you’re looking at 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1731 

extending payment terms as well. I’m wondering what kind of 
arrangements are being made and the results of those 
arrangements. Have they been successfully concluded with 
farmers who are seeking to stay within the crop insurance 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, we have a pretty good 
program for those people who find themselves in arrears in their 
crop insurance because we’re struggling to make sure that the 
maximum number of farmers who want to have crop insurance 
are actually able to access the program. 
 
And I might add that in a way surprising I’m sure to yourself 
and to myself, the number of people in arrears in crop insurance 
has actually gone down very significantly even as the number 
insured has gone up by about a thousand. I think this year we 
have something in the area, and I’m just trying to find the 
numbers, but a little under 300 people . . . contracts in arrears. 
And they have been given the opportunity of extending it even 
though they’re in arrears by giving a postdated cheque for the 
end of June for one-half of the amount in arrears. And I think 
this has come down, and I’m going off the top of my head here, 
but something like 5 or 600 last year. 
 
So I think given all of the angst there was last winter and last 
fall, and concern, we had worried that the number of people in 
arrears might go up from the 5 or 600, and it’s actually come 
down nicely. And so it’s our anticipation that with the increased 
number of people in crop insurance, there is building some 
security in that farm economy. 
 
That’s not to say that all is well. There are difficulties and 
problems and issues, but I think as long as our programs are 
determining that more and more people can buy coverage, 
we’re probably that much better off. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We are getting a fair 
amount of inquiries with regard to the forage and seeding land 
back to grass programs that are being looked at. Now this was 
something that your government committed to as well I believe 
for next year. Is that still indeed the plan, and what amount of 
resources will be dedicated towards that? Could you provide us 
with some detail as to how the program will work for the farm 
community? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, we are committed to spend the 
next number of months consulting with the various stakeholders 
that might use a program of permanent cover. I must say at this 
time it’s getting mixed reviews. There are a number of 
organization  
groups who think this is a very positive thing and we should be 
moving forward with it. 
 
But I attended a stock growers meeting, I think two weekends 
ago, where they actually passed a motion saying this is not the 
direction they want to go. So this will take some work to make 
sure that when the program is developed it is actually hitting the 
mark and meeting a need in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I might also add that we would be very receptive to the Ag 
committee of your caucus taking a look at it in . . . I’m not 
talking about a public profile way, but if you want to have 
involvement in taking a look at what we’re doing with this 

work, it could be helpful as well. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Could you explain what the nature of the concern 
is with the program? Why there would be . . . for example as 
you said, the stock growers may or may not be inclined to want 
to support something of that nature, and what would be the 
reasons why or why not? We hear generally speaking from a lot 
of farm people wanting to move in that direction. Perhaps you 
could help us with an explanation as to why that might not be 
something that they would agree to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, I think it’s not so much that 
they don’t want us to do it, but having come through the 
R-CALF (Ranchers-Cattlemen Action Legal Fund) problem, 
their concern is whether or not anything we do on the side of 
subsidizing the seeding of a permanent crop might be 
interpreted by Americans or others as being an artificial 
subsidy. 
 
And so it’s not so much that they don’t like the program. They 
just want to be absolutely sure that before we make a move in 
that direction, that we’ve looked at all the potential trade 
implications to make sure that we don’t get into another round 
of very costly trade disputes as a result of a program that may 
be positive at one level, and put a few million dollars into a 
very good program, but costs tens of millions in terms of a trade 
dispute. So that was their main concern. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that a number of their members also 
believe that the money that we’re looking at putting into a 
permanent cover crop could be much more ably used in terms 
of research and development as well as encouraging trade and 
trade activity. 
 
And so these are the kind of discussions . . . exactly as we 
wanted them to be before we move into a program where 
everybody gets a shot at giving their opinion and view on the 
program. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — With respect to Crown lands, Mr. Minister, what 
is the policy of your department in terms of payments for it? 
Are payments made in advance similar to a cash rental on farm 
land, or are they after the growing season is complete that 
farmers and ranchers would make their payments on that? Do 
they pay first or after the growing season? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The standard format is that payment 
is made after the growing season. So unlike I think what would 
be a more standard policy in, let’s say in the private sector, at 
least the contracts I see where normally you would pay half 
before the growing season and probably half after, under our 
policy at the present time it’s full payment after the growing 
season. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, with respect to the AIDA program, 
as you know it was a program that started with a fair degree of 
controversy. I think your government can take a fair bit of 
blame in that area. You didn’t have input into the program 
because your minister, the minister of the day, Mr. Upshall, 
didn’t want to participate in the program. And as a result of that 
we really didn’t have a lot of input into the start-up of the 



1732 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

program. 
 
And it’s been a program that has had a great deal of . . . 
surrounded by a great deal of controversy and people that feel 
the program isn’t meeting their needs. Now I understand that 
there has been some changes made within the program. There is 
still some concern in a number of areas about the program 
surrounding a whole host of areas. 
 
In general terms, Mr. Minister, can you provide us with detail 
as to how the ’98 program eventually worked out, and what 
kind of changes are being made in the ’99 to ensure that we 
don’t see the same kind of difficulties with the AIDA program 
that there were in ’98? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think the AIDA program being 
brand new in 1998, it was obvious that there would be some 
pretty serious growing pains with it — not unlike other farm 
programs that the member opposite would know about and 
realize when they were starting, like NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account), that there was a lot of concerns and 
worry in the farming community. But after a number of years I 
think it’s become a pretty well accepted program — that being 
the NISA program. 
 
And so I expect some of the same changes to . . . or some of the 
same problems with AIDA will be worked out over this year, 
and in the subsequent program that will run three years after the 
1999 program that has been agreed to. 
 
But you asked about the changes for 1999 year. First of all 
there’s a choice of reference margins, making the preceding 
three years average or the Olympic average, where the middle 
three of the last five years are used — that’s an option. 
 
Treating family labour as an eligible expense. Previously family 
labour was not an eligible expense and became part of the 
producer’s margin. 
 
Inventory valuation change. Producers will be allowed to 
choose on a commodity-by-commodity basis whether they want 
to value the change in inventory using the end-of-the-year price 
only, or a two-price system where the beginning inventories are 
valued using the beginning-year price, and ending inventories 
are valued using an end-of-year price. 
 
And also, finally, the adjustment for expanding farmers, which 
was a problem because of the acres and the . . . or the amount of 
land that was included in their operation. And so where 
producers expanded their farming operations in either of the 
reference period or the claim year or both, the AIDA 
administration will adjust the program margins in the reference 
periods to take that into consideration. 
 
So those are the main changes that have occurred, and I can 
send those across to the member, and then you could have them 
if people are calling about that. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, there is a tremendous amount of 
distrust in the program in the farm community. Farmers just 
don’t feel that it has met their needs. I’ve had occasion to speak 
with many, many farmers over the last number of months and 
they basically have given up on the program. A lot of them got 

nothing more from the program than a bill from their 
accountant last time around and they’re not going to . . . they 
feel they’re not going to make that mistake again and enter into 
the program. 
 
Now I understand that ’99 applications are beginning to come 
in. And I’m wondering . . . Well first of all let’s back up onto 
’98 with the negative margins part of the program. Has the 
negative margins part of the program been addressed? 
 
Now I understand the federal government has made a 
commitment on that. I don’t believe that you’ve made a 
commitment in the ’98 program yet. Is that something that 
you’re intending to do, or do farmers in Saskatchewan only 
have access to the federal portion of negative margins in the 
AIDA program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, on the issue of negative 
margins, you’re right. None of the Western provinces have 
taken part in the negative margin program although it is being 
provided by the federal government. I think Quebec and one 
other province are the only ones that are funding the negative 
margins. 
 
I think you’re right about the problems with AIDA. And one of 
the biggest problems is the comparison that’s now being made 
with the Canada-Saskatchewan’s program which paid out 
money very, very quickly. I think the turnaround time was 10 
days, as to AIDA where the turnaround time is five or six 
months. And this is causing a lot of people to wonder why it 
could possibly be that long from the time the people doing the 
analysis would get an application to say yes or no. 
 
I mean it seems to me — and I had this problem in spades — in 
the office where people would say: look, it took me a few days 
to fill out; surely once they read it and do the calculation, how 
can they possibly be studying this for six months? And if they 
are studying it for six months, how much is that costing the 
taxpayers? 
 
Why don’t they just look at it and a few hours later, if it takes 
two hours to analyze it, then tell me yes or no and send a letter 
back? 
 
And so the concept that none of us can understand, farmers or 
Saskatchewan politicians — I include you in that, sir — is how 
it could be possible that an application can sit on somebody’s 
desk for six months before they make up their mind whether 
you’re eligible or not? 
 
And I think that one element has done more to discredit the 
program than anything else. And we have lobbied hard with our 
federal partners in this program to say: look, you’re 
administering this, isn’t there some way to tighten up the 
timeline? 
 
Here again, it’s not even so much of whether you’re being told 
yes or no, but the concept of taking six months to tell us 
whether we’re eligible or not is just absolutely unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well I certainly couldn’t agree with you more, 
Mr. Minister, with respect to that program. Anything you can 
do to move the time frames along I’m sure would be welcome 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1733 

in the farm community. 
 
Because there is tremendous numbers of stories out there — 
and I’m sure you’ve heard thousands of them yourself — of 
farmers phoning down, being told one day they’re going to get 
a cheque for $20,000 and thinking, well that’s pretty good, and 
the next thing you know, they phone back and want additional 
information. And they’re told . . . phoned back again from the 
AIDA administration and told, no, they’ve made a 
miscalculation, it might be only $10,000. And then they get a 
letter a few weeks later, or a few months later in a lot of cases, 
and it’s zero. 
 
And it’s that kind of complexity that the program . . . and 
comedy of errors that the program has resulted in, that farmers 
have basically written the whole thing off in a lot of cases. 
 
Certainly there are pockets — and the southeast part of the 
province is a very good example of that — where they may 
stand to benefit pretty well. But there are, as I understand it, at 
least a finite number of dollars was in the program. And so even 
though the calculation may show you’re going to get a huge 
amount of money, in the end they may be factored back 
considerably if applications come in to the point where your 
program would run over budget. So there certainly are some 
problems with respect to that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to move on to the C-SAP 
(Canada-Saskatchewan Adjustment Program) program. We 
have been getting some inquiries with respect to that about 
people who have different than what might be considered active 
or full participatory farming arrangements — crop share, 
custom farming, and those types of arrangements. 
 
As you know, Mr. Minister, being a farmer yourself, there are 
literally hundreds of different arrangements that people make to 
have their farmland either custom farmed, crop shared, all of 
those kinds of arrangements that are out there, including the 
member from Regina speaking up from behind you there. So 
there are all kinds of arrangements. 
 
How are those kinds of differing kinds of arrangements being 
handled, Mr. Minister, to ensure that there is both fairness in the 
program but ensure that the maximum number of dollars go to 
actual producers and not to far-off landlords, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well first of all before I start, I 
want to say — and the member opposite may want to consider 
this — but I just signed a letter off to our Crop Insurance staff 
congratulating them on what I think everybody in the province 
thinks is one heck of a job. 
 
I think oftentimes the people who work in our civil service, 
we’re hard on them when they do things poorly. I think this is 
one example where they deserve a lot of credit and so I just sent 
off a little note to them thanking them and offering them 
congratulations because a lot of farmers have used that money 
to good effect. Now obviously there wasn’t enough or it maybe 
took a few days longer than they thought, but overall these 
cheques were being turned around in very short order. 
 
The number of appeals we have on the issue that you talk about, 
where there are different rental arrangements and where there 

might be some confusion or dispute, I think so far we have 70. 
The appeal board has just been established and will start 
hearing these 70 appeals. I think in total we dealt with more 
than 43,000 claims, something in that area, over 40,000 claims. 
 
And so when you have 70 in dispute, all the money paid out 
except for 70 in that short period of time — while I wish there 
weren’t any — I think this is very, very acceptable kind of rate 
of problems in any program that you establish. 
 
So again, I wish there weren’t 70 problems, but we hope when 
the appeal board gets working that these too will be sorted out 
in a very efficient manner. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — What advice would you give to people out there 
who have those kinds of arrangements who haven’t made 
application? Because I think the reason why you only have 70 
appeals to this point is because they’ve looked at the application 
and they’ve determined on their own whether or not they 
qualify. 
 
But I think there are many, many extenuating circumstances. I 
spoke with a farmer just the other day who has . . . largely 
makes the cropping decisions within their particular operation 
and then finds that the questions that are asked there, he feels, 
may exclude him. 
 
So I’m asking what kind of advice would you offer to people 
out there that find themselves in those types of circumstance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I would really urge them to 
. . . I mean they’re obviously eligible in one way or the other for 
something out of the program, I would expect. I would urge 
them to phone Crop Insurance with the issue as it . . . you know, 
take it to them, say this is the circumstance, and they will work 
out what’s best . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I don’t 
think it would help much. I would just send them to the 
professionals anyway. So if they don’t want to be confused they 
probably shouldn’t talk directly to me. 
 
But the seriousness of the issue is that I think anyone who 
hasn’t already sent in their application, the deadline is the end 
of June. I would urge them to phone the Crop Insurance and we 
will be as helpful as can be in making sure that if they are 
eligible they get the proper attention. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure in the future 
when we hear from people in those areas we’ll certainly pass on 
that bit of advice from your comments here this afternoon. I’m 
sure that if they have any difficulties further you would want 
them to contact your office directly with respect to that. And 
we’ll pass that piece of information and advice to them as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want some information on the education tax 
rebate program that is going to be put in place — how that will 
work and how it will benefit the farm community —because it 
is indeed a modest benefit for the farm community and we 
would want to give you opportunity to provide some detail with 
respect to it. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — For the member opposite who 



1734 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

indicates that he’ll be flowing problems through my office, I 
say again, probably best to go directly to the professionals at 
Crop Insurance. 
 
But on the other hand, I have to say after the period of six 
months ago when the phone was ringing off the hook, our office 
feels a little bit like the Maytag man right now — it’s pretty 
quiet so a couple of calls wouldn’t hurt. But on the other hand, I 
think in all seriousness, they would be better off to deal with the 
professionals at Crop Insurance. 
 
I want to indicate to the member that the program of rebating a 
portion of the land tax that you refer to will be handled by a 
unit, which is just being established, which will include some of 
the ACS people. So we won’t be setting up and hiring a whole 
new operation. It will be trying to use the staff who are very 
efficient in a number of areas and during a period of time where 
they may not be as busy as they are at another time. 
 
And my expectations that the forms that they will need to fill 
out will be as simple, straightforward as possible, and they will 
be available as people are paying their property tax; application 
will be made, rebates will come out. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — So this is the process — let me get this straight 
with you — the process will be they will pay their tax and then 
they will make application for a rebate on that tax? And will it 
be the landowner themselves that’s only eligible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well in general it will be the 
landowner, except in those cases where you may have a rental 
agreement where the renter pays the land taxes. In those cases, 
it will be the renter. 
 
I think the simpler way to put it is whomever pays the land tax 
will be eligible to get the rebate. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Having called your 
office over the years for a number of cases, and I found your 
staff, frankly, to be very courteous and very professional. And 
so we would want to pass that along to you. 
 
We also would feel that when people have the kind of concerns 
that they have, certainly we would want to — I think you would 
want them as well — to know that your office is available for 
comment and assistance in these types of situations where they 
have concerns either with the AIDA program, the CSAP 
program, education tax rebates, or any of those kind of things. 
And we will endeavour to help you work your way through 
those calls that inevitably you’ll be getting. 
 
Mr. Minister, with respect to fuel rebates, your government has 
committed to that as well. And now we’ve heard it many times 
that — from the Minister of Finance — that farmers no longer 
pay fuel tax. Well indeed they do pay fuel tax. There is the 
commitment from your government that it’ll be rebated back a 
year from now approximately. 
 
Why did you move in that direction in your program rather than 
striking it at the source, so that farmers had actual lower prices 
right now rather than having to have it rebated into the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think the main reason was, is 

because, as you know, the diesel portion of a farm operation is 
just exempt and it’s a very simple process and works very well. 
 
But traditionally we have had a rebate program for the gasoline 
portion. And the reason we went with that this year, it was just 
the easiest way to continue the program. But I have to say that 
we will be looking at the options as we go forward into next 
year as to other ways that might be more straightforward, let’s 
put it that way, where you wouldn’t have to have the red tape of 
a rebate. 
 
Just so we have the amount of cost of the program in 2000 and 
2001, like for this fiscal year, the fuel tax rebate or exemption 
will amount to about $123 million for the farming community 
in Saskatchewan. So it’s a significant amount. 
 
But as to why it’s done that way, as a total exemption on diesel 
and a rebate on gasoline, that’s been the history. But again, we 
will really want to look seriously if there isn’t a simple way of 
doing it for gasoline the same as we do for diesel. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, the last two areas that we want to 
touch on are your government’s commitment in terms of a 
Provincial Action Committee on the Rural Economy that will 
be made up, reading from your Throne Speech, which: 
 

. . . will include the rural and farm leaders who made up 
Saskatchewan’s delegation to Ottawa. 

 
What kind of progress are you making on that? I have not heard 
of a meeting being scheduled or has been scheduled with 
respect to this. I also understand that they were going to be 
putting in place a spokesperson or someone to head up the rural 
action committee. 
 
What kind of progress are you making and how soon can the 
farm community expect to hear announcements with respect to 
this area of commitment from your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member, I believe, attended the 
farm forum last fall where we . . . it was the beginning or the 
starting point for what’s becoming known as ACRE or the 
Action Committee on Rural Economy. 
 
My thinking is at the present time that the final draft of the 
proposal for this committee will be approved by our cabinet 
within the next few days or, let’s say, a couple of weeks. So I 
would expect that there will be an announcement probably by 
the end of the month. Don’t hold me exactly to that, but I would 
expect in the next few weeks we’ll have an announcement and 
then the initial meeting will be set up. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The last area is the area 
of the farm safety net. We’ve seen nothing to date from your 
government with respect to this. The crop is in the ground now, 
farmers have expended large amounts of dollars. They are 
committing to spending large amounts more to provide a spray 
. . . pesticide protection for their crops. 
 
So we are, I think in the farm community, looking at this as 
certainly an area of great interest to the farm community, 
wondering where the discussions are with the federal 
government at this point. At what point will you be in a position 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1735 

to make announcements with respect to this? Is it prior to 
harvest? Is it after harvest? Or is it before the legislative session 
concludes, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member will know that we 
have in place now a three-year agreement with the federal 
government — that is, after this year, another three years added 
as a program extension of AIDA. It’s not quite clear whether 
that program name will change or whether it will be simply 
improvement and changes. But basically for the next three years 
what we’re talking about is AIDA or its replacement — 
hopefully, much improved — improvements to NISA, which 
are being talked about; and of course changes to Crop Insurance 
as well as the changes to cash advance. 
 
So if you talk about the safety nets that will be in place for the 
next three years, it’s basically those four components. 
 
Now some will argue that that isn’t enough and that it should be 
much larger. But the fact of the matter is, I think the seeding 
that has gone on this year would indicate that farmers have at 
least enough money to get the seed in the ground. I might add 
as well that at the ag ministers conference, I believe the first 
week in July, the structure and framework for the ongoing 
improvements and extension of these programs and what will 
follow after the three-year period, hopefully, will be signed off 
at the meeting in Fredericton sometime in early July. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — So that’s the extent of it then as far as the farm 
community is concerned. We’ve got Crop Insurance, NISA, and 
AIDA; for a three-year period, the AIDA extension. Would you 
confirm that that is all that there will be this year and the next 
two? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes. On an ongoing basis those are 
the . . . And remember the changes to the cash advance which 
added to the . . . easing the problem with farmers seeding. 
 
Now I mean obviously some will argue that we needed $6 
billion to get the crop seeded and I think those people, and I 
think the member opposite would agree, were absolutely wrong. 
We didn’t have to pump $6 billion of other people’s taxpayers’ 
money into agriculture in order to get the crop seeded. The 
program that we put in place got about 34 million acres seeded 
in the province. 
 
I think the balance is — in agriculture as in any industry — how 
much money do you need to put in to make it work and survive 
in the tough times? And I think for this year and on an average 
year, these programs are going to work just fine. The problem 
will come if you have a drought in a large area of the province 
— touch wood, hopefully not this year or any year — but I have 
clearly indicated to the Minister of Agriculture, even though 
we’ve signed onto this three-year agreement that if we have a 
disaster of one type or the other we’re going to be back in a big 
way as a province, demanding that a program be set in place to 
take care of special situations that might come up. 
 
These programs, we have indicated, are good enough to take 
care of us in an average year, as we know it today. But if there’s 
a disaster of some type in agriculture these programs will 
simply not be sufficient, and we’ve made that more than clear 
to our federal counterparts. 

Mr. Boyd: — All during the debate, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, 
last fall I think it was clear that the farm community was of the 
view that there was a need to enhance the safety net program. 
That there was a need to put in place measures so that farmers 
had, as I recall people talking, about a bottom line guarantees or 
looking at ways to ensure that the amount of money being 
dedicated to agriculture support programs was adequate. 
Frankly I think that the farm community will look upon what 
you have said here this afternoon as failing to make the mark in 
a big, big way. 
 
Your commitment was to enhance the farm safety net program. 
It was also, and has been over the years, to put in place 
programs to make sure that the farm communities’ support 
levels were matched with other countries. 
 
You had said that on many, many occasions that if the 
Americans and the Europeans were going to put support 
programs in place of that nature that both yourself, in 
conjunction, yes, with the federal government, would have to 
certainly be there to make sure that the support levels were of a 
similar nature. And I think the Premier went as far as to say, 
match the levels of support with the competitors that we have 
on a worldwide basis. 
 
And as you know, we are nowhere even close to that, Mr. 
Minister. So while your, what I would call, your rhetoric during 
the debate and your rhetoric during . . . in the Throne Speech 
comes no where close to matching your commitments to date or 
your program delivery to date, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I think farmers across this province will be very, very 
disappointed. I think they’re looking for something further. I 
think they thought your commitment in the Throne Speech for 
an enhanced farm safety net program was indeed that, and was 
not a further commitment to a son-of-AIDA type program that 
many of them felt was a huge flop to them; that many of them 
felt was simply inadequate, many of them felt did not meet their 
needs. Many of them felt it resulted in only increased cost to 
them for accounting and filling out applications for them. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, this is not going to meet the needs. This is not 
going to address the problems that the farm community is faced 
with at this point, and I don’t think meets the commitment that 
you put forward in your Throne Speech. 
 
Mr. Minister, I can’t help but think that the farm community is 
going to be disappointed today when they hear that the 
approach of your government is only to add the AIDA . . . to the 
AIDA program that is already in place that many farmers feel 
has failed to meet their needs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I agree with the 
member opposite that when we went to Ottawa our hope 
certainly was that as a federal, national government that there 
would be more money to meet the expectation that farmers had 
and still have — I would agree with the member — in terms of 
subsidies that are being paid in Europe, particularly in the 
United States. And the federal government is committed to 
working as fast as they can to get the trade policies of the other 
countries changed to bring the subsidies down. 
 
(1700) 



1736 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

But having said that, there’s a sense in rural Saskatchewan — I 
know the member opposite will sense this and feel it as well — 
that it’s not a unanimous voice that calls for more taxpayers’ 
money into agriculture. There are many, many farmers and farm 
communities that I talk to that say very large subsidies of any 
type are exactly what isn’t needed in rural Saskatchewan. They 
say that putting in more than is needed to get the farm through 
the next year, those who are in tough shape, that all you’re 
doing is wasting taxpayers’ money. You hear that view. 
 
You hear another view that I talked to you earlier about, of 
those farmers who said we needed $6 billion, and if we didn’t 
get $6 billion of taxpayers’ money into the hands of farmers, 
they were predicting that half of the farms in the province 
would go broke and wouldn’t be able to seed the crop. 
 
Well the issue is that I don’t think it’s an issue of extremes. I 
don’t think you have to and nor do I think that we ever thought 
that we could match the European subsidies. That was never a 
commitment by, I think, your caucus or our caucus. Our 
commitment was to support farmers to see that the crop got 
seeded in the spring. 
 
And with 34 million acres seeded, something slightly above the 
10-year average, I think the commitment that was made by 
taxpayers in Canada and in the province has been met to 
support farm families. 
 
And if I could to the committee, report progress, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Government House Leader is 
withdrawing his motion? Yes. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, Mr. Minister, 
and officials, just two very quick questions. I noted in one of 
your responses to the question I think on the property tax 
rebate, Minister, was your reference that ACS would be 
administering that program. And I guess I’d just like to clarify 
that or get an answer from you on that, because of course in 
Swift Current we’re aware that ACS is being wound down. 
 
One element of ACS that appears to be ongoing is the Ag 
equity fund — agri-food equity fund. That was spun out of the 
ACS and I think is headquartered, despite the city’s 
protestation, I think it’s headquartered in Saskatoon. 
 
And so I’m wondering if you could clarify: what is the status of 
ACS? Is it still being wound down or will it continue in one 
form and another? And if it is going to continue, Minister, could 
you please tell me in what city it will be headquartered and 
where those jobs will be located? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Just so you know, the ACS is being 
wound down, not because of any ill intent but because we’re 
running out of work to do. As that program, the debts are 
collected and worked through, it simply needs fewer and fewer 
people. 
 
And while it obviously is a negative thing at one level — for 
your community — for the people of the province it’s a very 
positive thing as we settle our accounts and get as many people 
through the . . . farmers through the hoops as we can. 
 

And I think the organization’s being very lenient and supportive 
of farm families. In fact that announcement was made, what — 
two or three years ago? Four years ago. And so that’s just a 
continuation of that, so you’re right. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Just one final question to the minister, Mr. Deputy 
Chair of Committees. Though I thought I heard you say that it’s 
going to have a role to play — ACS or its successor — are 
going to have a role to play in some other programs not related 
to its original intent. And we know that it did because the 
agri-food equity fund, which is a program currently offered by 
your department, was spun out of ACS, but the headquarters for 
that program I believe is Saskatoon. 
 
And I guess that would be the concern I’d have as the MLA for 
Swift Current, and that our community would have. If ACS is 
continuing in whatever form to do things other than what it was 
originally set up for, why couldn’t it continue to be operated as 
it has been successfully headquartered in the city of Swift 
Current? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, the program won’t be 
administered by ACS. Some of the staff who have previously 
worked at ACS will be brought into the unit that’s doing the 
rebate. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would report progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 


