





























































Hansard: April 20, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 837 
 April 20, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this morning to 
present a petition opposed to the private sales exemption of $3,000 
on the purchase of used vehicles. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to provide 
a $3,000 exemption for dealers in addition to private sales, 
therefore providing a fair tax break to the consumers of this 
province wherever they choose to purchase a vehicle. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by citizens in such diverse communities 
as Esterhazy, Melville, Yorkton, Moosomin, Kelvington, and 
Ebenezer. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition that’s opposed to the government’s system of taxing 
private sales. And I read the petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to provide 
a $3,000 exemption for dealers in addition to private sales, 
therefore providing a fair tax break to the consumers of this 
province wherever they choose to purchase a vehicle. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by the good people from Yorkton, 
Churchbridge, Spy Hill, all around the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of people who would like to 
see the exemption of the PST (provincial sales tax) on private 
sales under $3,000 to be extended to all dealers throughout the 
province. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to provide 
a $3,000 exemption for dealers in addition to private sales, 
therefore providing a fair tax break to the consumers of this 
province wherever they choose to purchase a vehicle. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
city of Swift Current. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 
regarding a fuel tax. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 

government. 
 
The people that have signed this petition are from Naicam and 
Lintlaw. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the high price of fuel. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are mostly from the 
community of Melfort, but also from Brooksby and Kinistino. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well I rise to present 
a petition. This one deals with the tax on used vehicles. Reading 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
grandfather vehicles that were tax paid on budget day, 
therefore providing these dealers the opportunity to pass on 
the savings to their customers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals from 
the communities of Rosthern and Warman and mostly from 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise also in regards to 
the taxation on used cars . . . vehicles, and the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a $3,000 exemption for dealers in addition to 
private sales, therefore providing a fair tax break to 
consumers of this province wherever they choose to 
purchase a vehicle. 
 

And this petition is signed by people from Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, I stand again today to present a 
petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens concerned about the 
high cost of fuel, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 



838 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2000 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
This is signed by the citizens of Estevan, Torquay, and Regina. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people in Swift Current who are concerned about their hospital. 
And they’ve signed a petition whose prayer can be summarized 
as follows, that the provincial government should assist in the 
regeneration plan for the Swift Current Regional Hospital, 
providing approximately 7.54 million and 65 per cent of the 
funding, allowing the Swift Current District Health Board the 
opportunity to provide improved health care services in Swift 
Current. 
 
And it’s signed by residents of the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on 
behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the PST on 
used cars: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
grandfather vehicles that were tax paid on budget day, 
therefore providing these dealers the opportunity to pass on 
the savings to their customers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
And it’s signed by constituents of Humboldt, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a $3,000 exemption for dealers in addition to 
private sales, therefore providing a fair tax break to the 
consumers of this province wherever they choose to 
purchase a vehicle. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina, 
White City, Sturgis, a number of communities in Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a $3,000 exemption for dealers in addition to 
private sales, therefore providing a fair tax break to the 
consumers of this province wherever they choose to 
purchase a vehicle. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Debden and 
Canwood areas of the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I rise too on behalf of citizens 
of Saskatchewan concerned about the tax paid inventory on 
used cars. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
grandfather vehicles that were tax paid on budget day, 
therefore providing these dealers the opportunity to pass on 
savings to their customers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed from residents from around the Regina 
area. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I would also like to rise to read a petition 
opposed to no exemption for tax paid inventory: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
grandfather vehicles that were tax paid on budget day, 
therefore providing these dealers the opportunity to pass on 
the savings to their customers. 
 

Signed by the good people from Regina, Regina Beach, 
Punnichy. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here from the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. A petition to reduce fuel tax: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
People are from the town of Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to read 
a petition about citizens concerned about the PST on sales of 
vehicles. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a $3,000 tax exemption for dealers in addition to 
private sales, therefore providing a fair tax break to the 
consumers of this province wherever they may choose to 
purchase a vehicle. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever humbly pray. 
 

And the petitioners are from Fort Qu’Appelle, Regina, and 



April 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 839 

Hague, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
in regards to the tax paid inventory for used cars. The petition 
. . . prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to grandfather vehicles that were 
tax paid on budget day, therefore providing these dealers 
the opportunity to pass on the savings to their customers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present the 
petition on behalf of citizens concerned with the PST on used 
vehicles. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a $3,000 exemption for dealers in addition to 
private sales, therefore providing a fair tax break to 
consumers of this province wherever they choose to 
purchase the vehicle. 
 

And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the good citizens of 
Yorkton, Preeceville, MacNutt, and a number of other 
communities in Saskatchewan. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today for to bring forth a petition regarding private sales 
exemption of $3,000. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a $3,000 exemption for dealers in addition to 
private sales, therefore providing a fair tax break to the 
consumers of this province wherever they choose to 
purchase a vehicle. 
 

And this petition is signed by the good people of Yorkton, 
Grayson, and Canora. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition regarding forced municipal amalgamation. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the community 
of Drinkwater. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition requesting exemption for tax paid inventory. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
grandfather vehicles that were tax paid on budget day, 
therefore providing these dealers the opportunity to pass on 
the savings to their customers. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by the good citizens of Wynyard and 
Mozart. 
 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

They are the petitions of citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan petitioning the Assembly: 
 
To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To provide funding for Swift Current hospital; 
 
To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes. 

 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 
Municipal Amalgamation 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In light of 
yesterday’s ruling by the Speaker, I would like to read some 
excerpts from the statement the Premier issued last night. 
Following his meeting with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), the Premier said, and I 
quote: 
 

My government’s intentions in these negotiations is clear. I 
want to stick it to all the people who didn’t vote for me in 
the last election. You took away my majority. I’m taking 
away your local governments. By the time I get done with 
you . . . You’ll be able to hold your next convention in a 
phone booth. That’ll learn ya. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t believe the Premier would make a 
statement like that. It shows his true agenda in this municipal 
amalgamation debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



840 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2000 

Celebration of Passover 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sunset tomorrow 
marks the beginning of the Jewish week-long celebration of 
Passover. This is the time during which Jewish people the world 
over observe and remember the preparation for and the flight 
from oppression in the land of Egypt as told in the Old 
Testament Book of Exodus. 
 
As Jews prepare for this most solemn ritual, it is instructive I 
believe for all of us to remember with them both the historical 
and moral significance of this event. The migration, which 
began thousands of years ago, still influences our religious and 
civil institutions. 
 
The escape from slavery by the children of Israel led to the 
creation of laws which are the basis for our legal codes today. 
The Ten Commandments delivered to Moses during the flight 
are, some say, all the law we need. 
 
This migration, perhaps the most significant in the history of 
mankind, was the direct result of one group of people being 
oppressed by another. The event that led directly to the 
establishment of what we call Western Civilization and to the 
creation of two of the world’s great religions was initiated by 
racial and economic exploitation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in essence, this is what Passover represents. The 
belief in tolerance, in freedom, in the collective struggle for the 
rights of people. 
 
On this important occasion I say to everyone, shalom and be 
well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Budget 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In light of yesterday’s 
ruling, I’d like to quote from the 2000 budget address tabled on 
the 29th of March by the Minister of Finance. The Minister of 
Finance said and I quote: 
 

This budget is meant to send a cold and clear message of 
revenge to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. Many of you 
are still wasting money on luxury items like food and 
clothing. That money belongs to me. I didn’t earn it, I’ve 
done nothing to deserve it, but I’ll not rest until I’ve sucked 
every possible dollar out of Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Besides, Mr. Speaker, I’ve now won three consecutive 
elections. I’ve got a big fat pension coming and those 
aren’t cheap, you know. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think this budget speech sends the wrong 
message to taxpayers and I’d urge the Minister of Finance to 
reconsider his remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

On-line Events Guide 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, more good news and no fiction 

unlike from the other side this morning. Many Saskatchewan 
families will be gathering together to celebrate this holiday 
weekend. According to Tourism Saskatchewan more people 
may be visiting our province than ever before. A new tool will 
help tourists research and plan a visit to our province. 
 
People from around the world and across the province can make 
the most of Saskatchewan events and attractions by using a new 
on-line events guide. By combining the databases of Tourism 
Saskatchewan and the Anniversary Secretariat a comprehensive 
listing of more than 1,100 Saskatchewan events occurring 
during 2000 has been created. 
 
The electronic events guide is now available on the web site of 
Tourism Saskatchewan, the Anniversary Secretariat, and Sask 
Culture Inc. at the following web addresses: 
www.sasktourism.com; celebrating Sask.com; and 
SaskCulture.sk.pa. Sask Culture Inc. and Sask Sport Inc., both 
community-based organizations, will work with Tourism 
Saskatchewan and the Anniversary Secretariat in this joint 
venture, and will be encouraging their members to use the 
on-line events guide to promote their own activities. 
 
Last year inquiries to Tourism Saskatchewan reached over 
450,000, a 67 per cent increase over the previous year. This 
huge increase is being driven mainly by inquiry to Tourism 
Saskatchewan web site as more and more people are travelling 
for information. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member’s time has 
expired. 
 

Liberal Election Platform 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In light of 
yesterday’s ruling, I’d like to read some excerpts from the 
so-called Liberal platform from the last election. The platform 
said, and I quote: 
 

This platform is simply election rhetoric. Don’t count on us 
to really believe this stuff. Truth be told, after the election 
we’ll fold in with the NDP faster than a cheap tent because 
we really need the money. We’ll even be so blatant as to sit 
on our tongues and allow real NDP members to answer 
questions for us. This campaign is all about using the next 
four years to pad our pensions and have staff carry our 
bags. It’s all about getting patronage jobs for our Liberal 
buddies. If anyone tries to tell you anything different, don’t 
believe a word about it. It’s just rhetoric. 
 

Mr. Speaker, with a platform like that, it’s no wonder the 
Liberals did so poorly in the last election and it’s obvious why 
they won’t survive the next. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I just want to remind all hon. 
members to please . . . the Speaker ought not to be entered into 
the debate. 
 

Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Week 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the year 
2000 we are fortunate to have many life-saving procedures that 
were unheard of even 10 years ago. Thanks to organ and tissue 



April 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 841 

donations, many people are given a second chance at life. 
Sadly, many lives are still needlessly lost because of the 
shortage of donor organs and tissues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this week of April 16 is — through the 22 — is 
Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Week. This past Monday 
morning the Minister of Health along with a coalition for organ 
donor awareness officially kicked off Donor Awareness Week. 
This year the local theme is Thank You, Donor Families. It is a 
fitting time, for without the donor families’ generosity these 
medical miracles could not take place. The decision to donate a 
loved one’s tissues and organs takes courage. Often donations 
do not take place because of lack of communication between 
the donor and his or her family. We must continue to raise 
awareness to address this problem. 
 
Our appreciation is extended to the Saskatchewan Coalition for 
Organ Donor Awareness and their associates for the important 
work that they do. It is fitting that Donor Awareness Week take 
place so near to Easter — Easter celebrates renewal and new 
life. This is exactly what organ and tissue donation can do — it 
can give the gift of new life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Use of Quotations in the House 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure everyone is 
aware, all the quotes in the previous three Saskatchewan Party 
member statements were fabricated to conform to and in 
accordance with yesterday’s ruling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members are under no obligation to tell the truth, 
even when they’re quoting from documents. This morning’s 
member statements were meant to illustrate how dangerous this 
could potentially be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we continue to adhere to the Assembly 
rules, we still believe the Premier should know better. He 
should stand in his place and apologize for misrepresenting and 
misquoting a public document. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I give you the assurance that this is the one 
and only time you will hear Saskatchewan Party members 
deliberately misquoting a public document. 
 
The Premier often talks about maintaining traditions and 
decorum of this House. In fact, just the other day he was talking 
about members setting an example for the children in the 
gallery. Apparently, this applies to everyone but him. Mr. 
Speaker, if the Premier is sincere he will rise in his place, 
withdraw his earlier remarks, and make a similar commitment 
that his members will be accurate and honest when quoting 
public documents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Diabetes 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Diabetes is a growing 
public health concern in Saskatchewan with more than 40,000 
of our residents having this disease and more than 3,000 new 
cases reported every year. 

To combat the growing number of diabetes cases, I’m pleased 
to say that the government has targeted a quarter of a million 
dollars towards new initiatives for diabetes in recommendation 
of the Saskatchewan Advisory Committee on Diabetes. This 
new money will go towards planning a province-wide approach 
on diabetes education, prevention, and treatment, as well as the 
creation of a diabetes advisory body. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care and community leaders are already 
favourably commenting on this new plan. Christine Smillie of 
the Canadian Diabetes Association said: 
 

The creation of the provincial advisory body is pivotal to 
the implementation of other advisory committee 
recommendations that will lead to better care and treatment 
for people with diabetes. 
 

And Linda Cyr of FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations) calls it a positive step to ensure culturally appropriate 
care and treatment is available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend the government and the 
Saskatchewan Advisory Committee on Diabetes for their 
commitment to addressing this growing problem. This new 
provincial-wide approach will go a very long way into 
educating the public and preventing and treating this disease. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crown Corporation Earnings 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan). Well, Mr. Minister, your gouging continues — 
another $216 million in profits for the Crowns. Profits may be 
down this year, but that’s not because of lower revenue. Crown 
revenues are actually up. You’re actually gouging 
Saskatchewan taxpayers more than ever. You’re just spending 
more of it. And now you’ve raised SaskTel and SaskEnergy 
rates by another $40 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can you justify hammering taxpayers with 
more rate hikes when you’re actually making huge profits? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think all 
Saskatchewan people should be proud of these corporations and 
how well they’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We need to thank all of the people who 
work in these corporations and provide us with some of the 
lowest rates for our utilities in the whole country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We need to thank them for the service that 
they provide. We need to continue to work to make sure that all 
of our Crowns remain commercially viable, because that’s how 



842 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2000 

we will keep them as important parts of our economy. 
 
We brought forward a very good budget a few weeks ago by 
having also a very strong Crown sector. We are building for the 
future of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we just had a 
little list of . . . a short little list that he said ought to be thanked 
for what’s going on. You missed the key group of people, Mr. 
Minister. That’s the people of Saskatchewan that you raised the 
rates on, the people who are paying more — those taxpayers. 
You forgot to thank them. 
 
The NDP (New Democratic Party) family of Crown 
corporations gets richer. You pay dividends; you make profits. 
The Saskatchewan families get poorer. I guess the Finance 
minister didn’t raise enough taxes. The CIC minister has to 
make sure he’s grabbed every last dime out of the taxpayers’ 
pockets. 
 
Mr. Minister, instead of raising rates all the time, why don’t you 
look at cutting costs? There are more people working in the 
Crowns than ever before. They are spending more than ever 
before. Instead of reaching into the taxpayers’ pockets again 
and again, why don’t you look at tightening your own belt first? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to say that 
our Crowns are operating very well. They continue to look at 
their sources of revenue, their costs, and also the services that 
they provide, and they do that in a balanced way so that we can 
have the best services and the lowest rates in the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on average we have the 
lowest rates right across the board. I would like to remind the 
members opposite — members of this Alberta-envy party — 
that since 1994 the increase in the average utility rates in 
Alberta has been $811; in Saskatchewan it’s been half that, 
$409. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the minister 
just had a quote over there and we know how trustworthy those 
are from that side of the House, so we’ll leave it at that. 
 
He again talked about what they pay attention to. And you’ll 
want to note, Mr. Speaker, the very first thing he says that 
Crowns pay attention to are sources of revenue. In other words, 
you pay attention to where you get the money — that’s the 
taxpayers. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party caucus, Mr. Speaker, will be moving a 
series of private members’ Bills to improve the accountability 
and management practice of your Crowns. This includes a new 
Crown corporation rate review Act. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is now clear that your system doesn’t work very 

well. The interim panel, the interim panel really said they didn’t 
even consider the rate of hikes on the consumer — didn’t even 
consider that. Nor do they look at whether the Crown could do a 
better job of controlling their own expenses. We do need to 
broaden . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the hon. member to 
please go directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, will 
you support the Saskatchewan Party proposal for a permanent 
rate review panel with a broader, more meaningful mandate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as everybody knows, we’re 
working on the rate review panel matter, and that will continue. 
 
But what I would like to say to the member opposite, the 
Conference Board of Canada has come out with a report that 
says our Crown corporations and their governance models, their 
accountability models, are in the top quartile — the top 25 per 
cent in the country — comparing both Crown and private 
companies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We have a system of corporations of 
which we can be proud. And they provide us good service at a 
reasonable cost and they also provide us with dividends on the 
investment that we as taxpayers have in them. 
 
So what we’re going to do is continue to operate these 
companies in a way that will make sure that they’re never in 
danger like the members opposite put them in danger in the 
’80s. And we’ll never let that happen again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

Potato Industry 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well not every 
Crown corporation made a profit. The Minister for Sask Water 
managed to blow $10 million on his hare-brained potato 
scheme. That’s because even the NDP hasn’t figured out a way 
to jack up the price of potatoes. In fact the government’s little 
venture into the potato industry destroyed the price of potatoes 
and destroyed the provincial potato industry. 
 
It cost taxpayers $10 million and left hundreds of creditors out 
in the cold. And what does the minister say? What does the 
minister say? It’s not his fault, it’s the potato market’s fault. Mr. 
Minister, you just don’t get it. You destroyed the potato market; 
you lost millions of dollars; when are you going to take 
responsibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I find 
first of all this to be an incredible irony. We listened to the first 
member questioning and he’s talking about the profits and 
complaining about the profits. And now the next member 
complains about the losses; so it’s got to be one or the other. 



April 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 843 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I want to report that we 
have a very strong industry in the potato sector in 
Saskatchewan. As recently as yesterday . . . actually I pulled off 
the Canadian Press wire this morning, Mr. Vanclief our federal 
Agriculture . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order please. I’m siting fairly 
close to the minister and I can’t hear his response, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the wire 
this morning I pulled off this bit of information, the federal 
Agriculture minister yesterday signed an agreement with China. 
And Canada is now the only country in the world — in the 
world — Mr. Speaker, to be able to export seed potatoes. And 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we have a very good market and 
a very good environment for growing seed potatoes. 
 
Dianne Moebis of the Saskatchewan Seed Potato Growers says 
that growth in the seed potato industry in Saskatchewan looks 
positive this year with up to 1,500 additional acres grown in the 
coming year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know 
it’s interesting, a year ago the member for North Battleford was 
calling for a full investigation into the demise of the Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato Corporation. 
 
But now that he’s a member of the NDP, you don’t hear a word 
from him. In fact when you pick up a copy of the Sask Water 
annual report, the first thing you see is the minister sitting there 
smiling with his new friends who just blew $10 million on 
potatoes. 
 
I’d like to ask the member for North Battleford, the new 
Vice-Chair of Sask Water — why have you changed your tune? 
Will you support the Saskatchewan Party’s call for a full public 
inquiry into SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I just want to 
remind the member — I referred to it in my last answer — that 
Saskatchewan really has a very strong developing seed potato 
market. And by the way, Mr. Speaker, we are exporting those 
. . . many of those potatoes to Conservative Prince Edward 
Island, so I thought they might be interested in knowing that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well the member refers to the fact that there 
were losses within the potato corporation’s . . . within the 
division of Sask Water SPUDCO. And in fact that’s true. Over 
the last three years there were accumulated losses but I remind 
the member, it was over three years. 
 
If I look at the record of what that party did over 10 years of 
accumulated losses, if we had $10 million, they had $10 billion, 
Mr. Speaker — 10 billion losses over their term in government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I would say 
to the minister, I would say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would say to 
the minister responsible for Sask Water, will he listen to his 
colleague and bring about a public inquiry because taxpayers 
deserve answers? 
 
Mr. Minister, you blew millions of dollars on SPUDCO, 
creditors are out millions more, you almost single-handedly 
destroyed the potato industry. And now instead of taking 
responsibility, you’re transferring what’s left of the assets over 
to CIC, so you can bury your mismanagement even deeper. 
 
Mr. Minister, taxpayers deserve answers. The people in the 
Lucky Lake area who lost thousands of dollars deserve answers. 
The last thing we need is another NDP cover-up, Mr. Minister, 
with your Liberal Vice-Chair supplying the whiteout. 
 
You’ve lost $10 million. Will you now hold that independent, 
public inquiry that your colleague is asking for into your 
mismanagement of SPUDCO? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, this is indeed a hard group 
of individuals to please. Again I remind them the first speaker, 
the first member was critical of the profits and now this one is 
critical of the losses. It’s very . . . indeed, very hard to please. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remind the member that as of yesterday, with the 
tabling of the annual reports, that is now the third, clean, annual 
audited report that’s been tabled by our Provincial Auditor. And 
additionally, Mr. Speaker, additionally, the Provincial Auditor 
is engaged in a special audit of Sask Water which specifically is 
focusing on SPUDCO and that, I am to understand, will be 
tabled in this legislature close to the end of May, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, it’s 
my understanding that your officials have been out in the Lucky 
Lake area signing contracts, enticing farmers to grow potatoes. 
In fact, you’ve given them marching orders to fill those empty 
storage bins no matter what. No matter how much it costs 
taxpayers. No matter what it does to the market. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that true? And if it is, haven’t you learned 
anything from your first potato fiasco? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’m even more confused 
now than at the very beginning. And I’ll freely admit that based 
on that question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is he saying that it’s better to have the potato 
storage facilities empty? I don’t understand. He’s absolutely 
correct. We are trying to fill those storage facilities so that there 
is revenues raised through leases for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 



844 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, again I remind the member, as well, that with the 
release of this information yesterday from the federal 
Agriculture minister, Canada is now the only country in the 
world permitted to export seed potatoes to China. And 
Saskatchewan has a very strong industry in seed potatoes. 
 
We’re very proud of that. And, of course, Mr. Speaker, we will 
try to sign up as many agreements as we can. We don’t deny 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite just made light of losing $10 million — $10 million 
that education could have used desperately. 
 
My question is for the Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, we 
posed questions to you on Tuesday regarding the education 
budget and how many school districts will be forced to cut 
services. And as usual from this government, we received no 
answers. 
 
CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio reported the 
very same day that 11 school districts would be suffering 
budget cuts and would be forced to close schools. We 
questioned what the source of that story was and you know 
what the answer was? Your department. 
 
Mr. Minister, your own department is confirming to the media 
that 11 school districts have had their budgets cut by at least 
$100,000. Mr. Minister, will you table a list of those districts in 
the House today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly as I’ve told the members opposite on numerous 
occasions in the past week, the increase to the budget for K to 
12 education was substantial this year. With regard to the 
increase we’re looking at an additional $18.5 million on the 
foundation operating grant. 
 
But I must remind the members opposite that there are two 
parties here who made education a priority in the last election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The member’s opposite party did not 
make education a priority. And the fact is that these parties 
respect the autonomy of school divisions to make decisions 
within their jurisdiction. We will not change that. And I ask the 
members opposite, do you intend to tell school divisions what 
to do? We don’t believe in that. We believe school divisions 
make decisions and they make decisions based on their 
enrolment, based on their assessment, and the services that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 
minister just broke another promise. If you had promised it was 
a priority and you have to increase mill rate, it’s not a priority. 

Mr. Speaker, at least 11 school districts are facing extremely 
difficult decisions right now. This NDP budget is having a 
devastating effect on schools, on school districts, on staff and 
families, and children in this province. The boards will had to 
consider mill rate increases at a time when tax revolts are on the 
mind of most people. 
 
School boards are considering cutting staff, they are considering 
cutting back on building maintenance, school supplies, and 
programming. And when faced with no other way to turn, they 
are even considering closing schools, Mr. Minister. You are the 
reason they are closing schools in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you table the school districts facing massive 
budget cuts and will you table your hit list of schools for 
closure this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly, as 
we said in the past, we respect the autonomy of school divisions 
to make decisions. And we provide through the foundation 
operating grant an increase this year of $18.5 million dollars 
calendar over calendar. 
 
But I must remind the members opposite that the zero that they 
would have provided would have provided nothing for school 
boards this year. And then when they talk about lists, what 
would those lists say? And are you telling me that school 
divisions cannot have the autonomy to make decisions? Do you 
want to take over school divisions like they have in Alberta? 
Answer that question. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to decide if the minister 
wants to hide behind or blame school divisions right now. The 
NDP Minister of Education supports the provincial budget that 
continues to download costs to local school boards. 
 
We’re hearing from people all around this province who are 
unhappy with the tax increases in the budget, and now they’re 
even more unhappy because they have to have an increase in 
education mill rates. But they know what the problem is — it’s 
this NDP’s and minister’s passion for taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association) warned everyone in a press release yesterday that 
if downloading continues, we’ll be facing a crisis in education 
very soon. In fact, Mr. Speaker, last year there was three school 
districts in this province who received less than a hundred 
thousand dollars. 
 
Mr. Minister, in light of this provincial budget and the cuts the 
school districts are receiving, how many school districts this 
year will receive a pittance of funding from this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
members opposite are having some difficulty in understanding 
the foundation operating grant. 
 



April 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 845 

The foundation operating grant is an equalization formula, and 
every year the provincial government provides a sum of money. 
And every year that sum of money is distributed based on 
equity, transparency, and unconditionality. And this has been 
agreed to by all the stakeholders, including the trustees 
association, representing all school divisions. 
 
And when you talk about some school divisions who’ve had 
declines in foundation operating grant this year, they’ve also 
had declines in enrolment. 
 
But just to point out to the school divisions that have had 
significant increases: Kamsack got 7.7 per cent; Indian Head, 
up 6.2 per cent; Saskatoon East, up 6.5 per cent; Outlook, up 
7.5 cent; Nipawin, up 6.4 per cent; and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, maybe the minister himself 
doesn’t understand the equalization factor. When you increase it 
from 15 to 16, that means local people have to pick up more 
money before you even start talking to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP knows that education is living in a 
bubble . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Hon. members, 
kindly allow the questions to be asked. And please respect the 
opportunity for members on their feet to be heard on both sides, 
for the question and the answer. I ask you to please respect your 
rules, the rules of the House. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP Minister of 
Education is living in a bubble if he thinks the problems school 
boards are facing right now aren’t serious. But the problem is, 
Mr. Speaker, that bubble is going to burst. 
 
Because the legacy he’s leaving our education system will be 
one of staffing cutbacks, crumbling buildings, and school 
closures. That’s your legacy for schools for this province. 
Because the school districts face the decisions forced on them 
by this budget and they look ahead to next year, they’re even 
more discouraged. 
 
Mr. Minister, you campaigned on a promise to cut education 
taxes. But what have you done as Minister of Education? You 
have a massive tax increase to everyone. All boards can try to 
do is maintain the status quo. They can’t even try to improve 
the situation. 
 
Mr. Minister, if it was such a great budget for education, why 
are people from Saskatchewan now having to face another mill 
rate increase? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, again they’re having 
trouble understanding the foundation operating grant formula. 
 
You know, when you talk about the increases in this budget — 
$28.5 million budget over budget; $18.5 million on the 

foundation operating grant; $14 million increase for special 
education; an additional $2 million for learning technology; an 
individual grant per student increase of $263; an increase in 
special education in disabilities two category of $3,000 — and 
when you add in the property tax rebates of 25 million, we’re 
looking at this provincial treasury providing over $50 million to 
the K to 12 system this year. 
 
And the fact of the matter is that some school divisions that 
have high assessment . . . And I’ll give an example. Weyburn 
Central has an assessment of $720,000 per student. They will 
get little or no grant this year. Ile-a-la-Crosse has an assessment 
of only 18,000 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hospital Waiting Lists in Saskatoon Health District 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, yesterday it was released that despite an extra 
$5.5 million injection into the Saskatoon Health District to 
reduce waiting lists, waiting times indeed have grown. This 
cash injection was supposed to help with the reduction of 
waiting lists, but instead it obviously isn’t working. 
 
Madam Minister, when will you come to realize that just 
throwing money at a problem is not the answer? When will you 
support a value for money audit, Madam Minister, to see that 
the money is being spent efficiently and effectively? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, for the information of all assembled, 
Saskatoon was able to provide an additional 1,000 surgeries to 
the citizens of this province. 
 
I just want to remind the member, and I quote from a 
Leader-Post article, Monday November 17th, 1997, which 
includes the policies adopted by the members opposite, the Sask 
Party, who want to go the Alberta route. They want to allow 
private surgical clinics to open in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The noise level is just beyond 
acceptance. Please, hon. members. I would ask the minister to 
complete her response. Kindly allow her to be heard. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — They want to allow private surgical 
clinics in this province and I can say to the people of this 
province that we will never allow the Saskatchewan Party to 
privatize publicly funded, publicly administered health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 



846 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2000 

The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it hasn’t taken long, one day after your ruling, already 
the minister’s fabricating quotes out of the paper and attributing 
them. This is not appropriate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. members please. That is a 
direct allegation, accusation. I would ask hon. members to 
please respect one another. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
seems already clear that the minister does not realize that what 
she is currently doing is simply not working. Madam Minister, 
you’ve been wandering around aimlessly for some time now. 
When are you going to get a handle on what’s going on in the 
health care system in Saskatchewan? 
 
Health care workers are under increasing stress. People are 
leaving the system. They’re finding themselves increasingly at 
odds with your policies, Madam Minister. And now as part of 
the agreement you have stated yourself that it’s possible that 
you may claw back some of this money from the Saskatoon 
Health District. 
 
Madam Minister, will you assure the Saskatoon Health District 
that you will not claw back the money that you have given them 
in an attempt to reduce your ridiculous waiting time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, every day in this 
legislature we listen to the members talking about Alberta as 
though somehow Alberta is the envy of the country and this 
province. 
 
Every day they stand in this Assembly and talk about young 
people leaving this province to go to Alberta when we have 
evidence in terms of a labour market study that more young 
people are coming here with outside credentials than people that 
are leaving. Every day they stand up here and they hammer the 
people of this province because of what the people of this 
province have built. 
 
Well, I want to assure the members, and I quote from The 
Leader-Post which outlines the policies of the members 
opposite on the founding of their party, November 17, 1997, 
and they say they want to “allow private surgical clinics in 
(this) province.” 

 
Well, the people of Alberta are marching by the thousands 
against Ralph . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 205 — The Accountability of Subsidiaries of 
Subsidiary Crown Corporations Act 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I would give notice to move 

first reading of Bill No. 205, The Accountability of Subsidiaries 
of Subsidiary Crown Corporations Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 212  The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 

2000 (Appointment of Directors) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
that Bill No. 212, The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 
2000 (Appointment of Directors) be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 222 — The Crown Corporation Managers’ and 
Permanent Heads’ Salaries Act 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move the first reading of Bill 
No. 222, The Crown Corporation Managers’ and Permanent 
Heads’ Salaries Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 225 — The Crown Corporations Amendment 
Act, 2000 (Foreign Investments) 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 
pleasure I move first reading of Bill No. 225, The Crown 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2000 (Foreign Investments). 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 226 — The Crown Corporations Rate Review Act 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to move first reading of Bill 
No. 225 — 226, sorry Mr. Speaker, The Crown Corporations 
Rate Review Act, 2000. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 228 — The Crown Corporations Disclosure Act 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to 
move first reading of Bill No. 228, The Crown Corporations 
Disclosure Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 230 — The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2000 (Referendums) 

 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of Bill No. 230, The Crown Corporations Amendment 
Act, 2000 (Referendums) be now introduced and read a first 
time. 
 



April 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 847 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill 29, The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2000 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Decorum in the Assembly 
 

The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day, I just 
have a brief comment to make. Members know that the essence 
of my ruling yesterday was to remind members that they are 
responsible for accuracy and truthfulness of their remarks in 
this Assembly. I ask members to remember that they are 
responsible for maintaining the public trust. 
 
The type of behaviour we have witnessed during members’ 
statements only adds to the cynicism, the public cynicism. 
Order. Order, please. 
 
Members are also aware that they must not comment on or 
debate a ruling of the Chair. And I ask . . . The behaviour of 
certain members during members’ statements today shows the 
reason for this rule. And I ask members to respect the Assembly 
and its traditions in this regard, and one another. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Based on earlier 
consultation with the opposition, I would request leave of the 
Assembly to make a statement of interest to members. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Best Wishes to Donna Bryce 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My purpose today 
is to stand up and say thank you and to say happy trails to a 
visiting officer of this legislature. One of the good things that 
Ontario has done for us lately, Mr. Speaker, is that they’ve 
authorized Donna Bryce to be made an attachment to the 
Clerk’s office here in our legislature. And she actually became a 
very integral part of our legislature over the last two months. 
 
Donna comes to us from Queen’s Park, where she sits as a 
committee Clerk. While here, Donna worked with us in the 
House, and even more importantly, she worked with the 
Tobacco Control Committee, of which I was Chair. She was in 
charge of the itinerary. The only person out of Saskatchewan on 
the itinerary and we put her in charge of getting us around here. 
She said it was easy because it was flat and was all nicely 
squared off. 
 
But in the short time that Donna was here she saw much of 
Saskatchewan. We took her to the four corners of 

Saskatchewan, from Maple Creek to Estevan, all the way up to 
Nipawin and all the way to Beauval, several places in between, 
and ended up in the good city of Prince Albert. 
 
I have to say that Ms. Bryce took excellent charge of logistics. 
She was in charge of seven MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly), two sound crew, two Hansard people, one 
researcher, Tanya Hill. No equipment was lost and no members 
were lost. Perhaps even more significantly, Mr. Speaker, during 
the meetings she competently and professionally kept the Chair 
in line. 
 
Donna will be leaving us, going back to her home in Toronto. 
She’ll be home for Easter, home with her family. We want to 
thank you, Donna, and we want to wish you much success in 
the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — With leave, to respond, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with the Government Whip to wish Donna well on 
behalf of the member for Estevan and Weyburn-Big Muddy and 
myself, who travelled many miles with Donna and members 
from the other side to many communities, some I’d never even 
been to before, Mr. Speaker, and had the pleasure of visiting. 
I’m sure many that Donna had never even heard of before. And 
she was the one, as the member opposite said, planning how we 
got there. And even had the occasion to freeze in a number of 
planes, sitting with Donna. An experience I’m sure that she’ll 
never forget. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party we want 
to wish Donna and her family a Happy Easter. We want to wish 
her a safe trip home. And we want to wish her the very best in 
the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, by your leave, I also would 
like to express my appreciation and take the opportunity to say 
thank you and farewell to Ms. Donna Bryce. Donna’s been here 
on loan, as has been mentioned, from the Ontario Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
She agreed to leave her husband, home, and career when she 
was given the opportunity to come to Saskatchewan and spend 
three months as a Committee Clerk for the Tobacco Control 
Committee and as a Table officer as our House sits. Despite the 
disruption to her personal life, she was enthusiastic about the 
opportunity to expand her knowledge about parliamentary 
practice in our country. 
 
Donna’s decision exemplifies the professionalism and 
dedication of those individuals whose careers are dedicated to 
the service of our parliamentary process. We are truly fortunate 
in Canada that in every province, including Saskatchewan, we 
are able to rely on Table officers and legislative staff to provide 



848 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2000 

first-rate service above and beyond the call of duty. 
 
We truly appreciate the assistance you provided Donna. And I 
hope we were able to provide a number of learning 
opportunities for you to observe our parliamentary traditions. I 
know your work with the committee provided an opportunity to 
travel throughout our great province and see a bit of 
Saskatchewan’s traditions and cultures outside the political 
arena. And I hope that you have some good memories and 
stories to take back to your colleagues in Ontario. 
 
I know the Ontario legislature and your family are eager for you 
to come home. We will miss you, Donna. Thank you for 
agreeing to come here and for all the assistance you have 
provided for these past three months. On behalf of the 
Legislative Assembly, I wish you all the best in your work at 
Queen’s Park. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
TABLING OF REPORTS 

 
The Speaker: — Also before orders of the day, hon. members, 
I would like to table the report of the Provincial Auditor to the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan on the 1999 financial 
statements of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) Subsidiary Crown Corporations. I so table. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Ombudsman and Children’s 
Advocate Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise to move second reading of The Ombudsman and 
Children’s Advocate Amendment Act. 
 
It’s an honour to rise in the House, Mr. Speaker, to recognize 
the important contribution that the Ombudsman and the 
Children’s Advocate make to our province. These officers of 
the Legislative Assembly provide a valuable service to the 
people of Saskatchewan. And I’m pleased to move second 
reading of an Act that will clarify their important role. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will ensure that provisions 
respecting the Ombudsman and the Child’s Advocate are 
consistent with those governing other officers of the Legislative 
Assembly. The amendments will clarify that the Children’s 
Advocate acts independently from the Ombudsman, and update 
provisions respecting these officers of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments provide that the salaries of the 
Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate will be determined by 
the Board of Internal Economy, and that they will receive 
allowances for travelling and other expenses incurred in the 
performance of their duties at rates approved by the Board of 
Internal Economy. Similar provisions, Mr. Speaker, as you 
know govern the Conflict of Interest Commissioner and the 
Chief Electoral Officer. 

Amendments will also provide that the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council may suspend the Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate 
while the legislature is not in session on grounds of incapacity 
to act, neglect of duty, Mr. Speaker, or misconduct. These 
provisions are in line with those governing other officers of the 
Assembly such as the Information and Privacy Commissioner 
and the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. 
 
These amendments will also provide that the Ombudsman and 
the Children’s Advocate file their annual reports in accordance 
with The Tabling of Documents Act, 1991. And this represents 
the standard for government accountability, and similar 
provisions govern other officers of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Advocate operates independently 
from the Ombudsman. Therefore the amendments will repeal a 
provision that states that the Ombudsman in consultation with 
the Children’s Advocate is responsible for the administration of 
the office of the Children’s Advocate. The present provision 
does not reflect the current practice, as the offices are separately 
administered. 
 
The amendments will also provide that the Ombudsman and 
Children’s Advocate file separate annual reports to further 
emphasize the distinctiveness of these two officers. Separate 
annual reports reflect the different emphasis and audiences for 
these reports. Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Advocate is 
responsible to the Legislative Assembly rather than to the 
executive branch of government. 
 
The amendments will remove a provision that allows the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council to assign duties or functions to 
the Children’s Advocate. The Act already appropriately 
provides that the Lieutenant Governor in Council may refer 
matters to the Children’s Advocate, and that the Children’s 
Advocate shall report on those matters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will also clarify a number of 
other points. For instance there’s a provision that ensures that 
the Children’s Advocate has jurisdiction to conduct 
investigations respecting wards of the Minister of Social 
Services, aged 18 to 21, who continue to receive services under 
The Child and Family Services Act. This amendment will 
ensure that all wards of the Social Services minister have access 
to the assistance of the Children’s Advocate. 
 
Another amendment will clarify that the Ombudsman’s right of 
access to documents relevant to his or her investigation includes 
the right to copy such documents. 
 
Another amendment, Mr. Speaker, will allow the Ombudsman, 
in appropriate circumstances, to waive the requirement that 
complaints to the Ombudsman be in writing. This amendment 
will ensure that the Ombudsman’s office is fully accessible to 
the public. 
 
Another will clarify that after the Ombudsman reports possible 
misconduct discovered during an investigation, the 
investigation may continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m confident that these amendments will ensure 
consistency respecting provisions governing officers of the 
Legislative Assembly, will also clarify that the Children’s 



April 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 849 

Advocate acts independently from the Ombudsman, and also 
update and clarify other provisions respecting these officers of 
the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing let me thank, on behalf of everyone, the 
Ombudsman and the Children’s Advocate for the work they do. 
I’m pleased to move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise today on this Bill to debate and provide some comment 
on the changes to the Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate 
Act. 
 
It’s very interesting that this piece of legislation is coming 
forward just after the Child Advocate has presented a report 
dealing with the many inadequacies in the Social Services 
department; in fact is a scathing report, as reported by the 
media, of Social Services. 
 
So it’s interesting that the government at this time would be 
bringing in amendments to that Act which allows the 
government to set salaries by order in council. At the present 
time that is not the case. The salary is set independently of this 
Assembly. It’s set in accordance with the salaries outlined for 
Provincial Court judges. Now that is to be changed under this 
particular Act, this particular amendment, so that the salary is 
set by the Board of Internal Economy on which sits four 
government members and two members of the opposition. 
 
You have to wonder why that was necessary to take place at 
this particular point in time, and why if that was the proper 
manner in which the salaries were to be set, that wasn’t done in 
the initial legislation. I guess it’s really important to question 
the minister as to why the initial legislation set out the salary 
levels to be tied to the Provincial Court judges, which is 
independent of this Assembly. And why then is there a need to 
have that changed today? 
 
So it really makes a person wonder why these changes are 
necessary? Is there some other things that are happening that 
need to be debated in this House dealing with this particular 
officer of this legislature, that the government is for some 
reason bringing this piece of legislation forward? 
 
I find it very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the government — 
when the Child Advocate was being reappointed — didn’t want 
to follow the process that was set out in The Ombudsman and 
Children’s Advocate Act and now they’re bringing in 
legislation to change that Act. When we wished to have the 
process followed, they voted against doing so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now they’re also changing the Act to allow the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council — which is the Premier and the cabinet — 
to be able to remove the Child Advocate for various reasons. 
They can suspend her or remove her from office for matters of 
incompetence. Who judges whether the Ombudsman or the 
Child Advocate, in this particular case, is incompetent? Is it the 
Assembly? Is it Lieutenant Governor in Council, the Premier 
and cabinet? Who makes that determination? 
 
When a report comes down that is scathing of the government, 
does that mean the officer of this Assembly is carrying out her 

duties, his duties in the proper manner with the proper 
competence, or does the Premier and cabinet judge it to be 
otherwise? I think we are walking on very dangerous ground 
here, Mr. Speaker, with these particular amendments, especially 
when this piece of legislation would also allow the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council, the Premier and cabinet, to direct the 
Ombudsman and Child Advocate as to what areas they are to 
prepare reports on. 
 
I think those offices need to be independent, and be able to 
make investigations and report on whatever issues they feel are 
important and need to be investigated. There should be no limits 
on it. 
 
(1115) 
 
And I’m hoping that when the minister has the chance to stand 
up and explain this Bill in a proper manner, rather than just a 
few seconds, that in Committee of the Whole, he will be able to 
explain exactly what their intentions are. Will they be 
presenting references to the Child Advocate and the 
Ombudsman such that they overload the minister’s office so 
that they can’t perform other duties that the Child Advocate 
may be interested in investigating. 
 
I think these are all very, very serious matters, Mr. Speaker, that 
need to be seriously considered before this particular piece of 
legislation moves forward. 
 
There are a number of third parties that are interested in this 
particular piece of legislation and how it’s going to affect the 
workings of those offices and how it’s going to affect in 
particular the children of this province. 
 
We have seen that the government is failing drastically in 
protecting the children of this province. Three thousand 
children, Mr. Speaker, are in the foster care program and we are 
having as much as a 70 per cent failure to comply with the rules 
that the Social Services department has in place themselves. 
 
So clearly there is a problem within the government, and we 
need to be assured, Mr. Speaker, that this piece of legislation is 
simply not an attempt to sweep all of that under the rug. 
Therefore, I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 15 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 15 — The 
Department of Justice Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s come to my 
attention that this Bill by the . . . from the . . . through the 
Department of Justice that has been brought to us by the minister 



850 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2000 

is apparently mostly of a housekeeping nature. But as I went 
through the amendments, Mr. Speaker, I have some concerns 
about their ability to do housekeeping, and what it is they’re 
actually trying to sweep under the table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things we like to do in government is 
being able to protect those people who work on our behalf. And 
certainly the courtworkers of this province, who provide a valued 
service to us, have the opportunity to feel as though that we trust 
them, that they have the ability to work on our behalf in a positive 
manner, so that they feel as though that whatever they do will not 
be taken and held against them at any given time in the future. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the courtworkers in question in this case 
certainly have a great deal to do with the Aboriginal community. 
And one of the things that is always of great concern to us is that 
those members of the Aboriginal community who have come up 
against the law in some cases have the opportunity — those 
members of the Aboriginal community — to be able to access 
quality and safe processes so that they understand the English 
common law system. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, it’s very confusing at times, and it is 
particularly of great concern to us that those members of our 
society have the opportunity to be able to sit down with a great 
deal of sense of confidence and surety, so that when they 
receive advice on what’s going . . . what’s happening here in the 
legal system, what does it mean to them, that the person that 
they are talking to has the confidence of the government and 
has the confidence of the legal system and certainly the 
confidence of the justice of the . . . the Department of Justice. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that concerns me about this 
Bill is less of what it does for the people that are being held up 
with court action, as those people that are providing the legal 
advice. 
 
Now it is certainly true that we need to trust those people who 
are employed by the government and provide them with a 
degree of surety that what they are doing is providing the 
service that is required and necessary. But, Mr. Speaker, what 
this Bill also talks about is some exemptions. And I have a great 
deal of concern with employees of the state being exempted 
from incompetence. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s not to say that these people who rise 
every day and do their utmost to provide quality advice to those 
people who are up against our justice system and who need that 
quality of advice to ensure that their needs are being looked 
after in the courts, Mr. Speaker, but I think it’s also important to 
understand that when it comes to degrees of incompetence in 
our system, Mr. Speaker, that there are no exemptions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in many cases in our society, whether it’s in 
education or health, when mistakes are made due to 
incompetence, that those people that those mistakes are enacted 
against have a degree of assurance, Mr. Speaker, that they are 
able to protect themselves from the system. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, do we see that in this Bill? Well we’re a 
little bit unsure about that. Because what it appears to be in this 
Bill, Mr. Speaker, is that there’s an exemption here for those 
courtworkers who may have been able to pass on advice 

through improper channels or improper methods, and certainly 
advice that has very little relevance to the cases that may be 
heard before the court, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it was with some reluctance that I can look at a Bill like this, 
Mr. Speaker, that talks about exempting courtworkers from the 
ability of those people that they represent in all good faith and 
in due course from offering extremely poor advice in many 
cases or advice that is simply not relevant to the case. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think this is something we’re going to 
have to look at a little further in this Bill before we can move on 
with it to ensure that those people that are being looked after by 
the courtworkers in this province feel fully confident that their 
representatives are being held to the highest standard. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, also too, I have some concerns with the 
degree of confidentiality between the courtworkers and their 
client. Now, Mr. Speaker, we certainly have to understand that 
in the legal system there has to be a large degree of 
confidentiality between, between the workers, whether it’s the 
lawyers themselves or the courtworkers and their clients. That 
goes without saying. But, Mr. Speaker, I have some concern in 
this Bill whether that addresses that issue or whether there is 
again an exemption in many cases here. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is always possible for someone inside the 
system — inside the legal system or inside the justice system — 
to access information that has not been provided to them on a 
confidential basis by their clients. Then . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. 
Speaker, that the courtworkers or . . . are exempted then from 
legal proceedings that would put them in opposition to the 
justice system and their ability to try to proceed with court 
action against an individual who has been alleged to have 
broken the laws of our country. So I have a great degree of 
difficulty with that, Mr. Speaker, and I hope that in the next 
several weeks we have the opportunity to be able to debate this 
issue and certainly receive some clear understanding from the 
Minister of Justice regarding this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a bit of an anomaly that we’re finding in 
this Bill that we’re simply not getting a good enough 
clarification of and, Mr. Speaker, that has to do with age limits 
here. Now it seems as though that in this Bill we’re going to 
provide the services of courtworkers for those people who have 
been charged under . . . in adult court for those who have been 
charged, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we are wondering why those people in the Aboriginal 
community who are adults have to wait to be charged before 
they are provided with legal services, and whereas if they are a 
youth under the young offenders’ Act being investigated, Mr. 
Speaker . . . and I use the word investigated because what this 
Act does, it clearly illustrates that if you are a young offender 
all you really have to do is be alleged to be a participator in a 
crime and you’re provided with a courtworker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a great deal of trouble on this side 
of the House — and I do personally — with inconsistencies in 
the Act which require differentiations between different 
segments of our society. Does that mean to say that those 
people from Aboriginal ancestry who are over 18 are far more 
knowledgeable of the justice system than those that are under 



April 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 851 

the age of 18. 
 
Actually, when we think about it, Mr. Speaker, we’re actually 
only talking about a very fine line here. Someone who’s 18 is 
qualified to understand the justice system and someone who is 
17 is unqualified to understand the justice system, so therefore 
they are able to attain legal services and courtworker assistance 
immediately upon the allegations of a crime. 
 
Whereas, if they have the unfortunate opportunity to make the 
mistake and it’s being allegated against them after they . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you hon. member. Then once 
we move to the age of 18, all of a sudden they’re far more 
knowledgeable of the justice system, so therefore what we can 
do then is exempt them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, all of a sudden these people are kind of left 
out on their own not understanding all the ramifications of 
what’s going . . . happening here with them; where in many 
cases, Mr. Speaker, these people are no more knowledgeable of 
the justice system when they’re 18 as when they’re 17. But 
apparently, Mr. Speaker, the justice system in this province 
believes quite highly that they do. And I think that’s very 
unfortunate. 
 
Now I think in this Act we need to take a look at some time in 
the future as to the creating some parity here. Certainly in our 
northern communities, those people up there have less 
opportunities to grab a full understanding of our justice system, 
Mr. Speaker. And maybe we need to step back here a minute 
and try to help them, everyone understand the ramifications of 
this type of a clause. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think at this time this clause needs to 
re-examined again. We are certainly going to give the Minister 
of Justice ample opportunity to explain to us why he’s brought 
these clauses out in the manner that he has. 
 
But I think it’s also important here to remind ourselves what is 
the importance. What is it we’re trying to accomplish? Are we 
trying to accomplish protection of those people who have a 
great deal of trouble understanding our legal system? Or are we 
trying to protect those people who are there to help those people 
who are having trouble understanding our legal system, who 
through some misfortune of their own have run up against the 
law? 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, what’s important here is that we try to 
look after those who are having a great deal of trouble in our 
legal system, and rather than protect those who are providing 
the legal services, we need to spend a little more time protecting 
those people who do not understand the legal system. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that we adjourn the 
debate on this Bill. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 16 — The 
Justice Statutes (Consumer Protection) Amendment Act, 

2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate having a few minutes to speak upon this Bill. 
 
I believe that the Bill clarifies the legal framework for the long 
established practice whereby the registrar of the consumer 
protection branch under each of the amended Bills may arrange 
for the distribution of proceeds of a bond to a claimant. This is 
actually a good thing in it, Mr. Speaker, I believe as it will 
assure that consumers under these Acts are able to receive 
intended protection from the bonds without undertaking full 
court proceedings. 
 
Subsequently, the following Acts must also be amended in 
order for these provisions to come into effect in The Motor 
Dealers Act, Direct Sellers Act, Collection Agents Act, Sale of 
Training Courses Act, and credit reporting Act. 
 
These changes will set out that the registrar may direct any 
money recovered under a forfeited bond or realized for the sale 
of collateral security may be paid to such persons deemed by 
the registrar to be entitled to these monies. 
 
And I also appreciate the part, Mr. Speaker, that there’s also an 
appeal process put in place for the protection of the peoples 
involved. 
 
Also these amendments appear to be a very positive step that is 
dealing with a very complex area of the law where the average 
consumer may not be completely aware of his rights, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It is absolutely crucial that consumers are protected from such 
things as fraud, and in too many cases we have seen things like 
this happening. In many cases I believe, Mr. Speaker, quite 
often the victim seems to have less rights than the person 
committing the crime or committing the fraud the way our 
justice system is set up at the present time. 
 
Having said these things, Mr. Speaker, I think we still have a 
number of members of the public that we would like to check 
with and get their opinion on this Bill, so at this time I would 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1130) 

Bill No. 6 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 6 — The 
Mentally Disordered Persons Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Act to Amend 
the Mentally Disordered Persons Act is an interesting one, and I 
think it’s an important one. There is a statement that I think is 
fairly important — that it says a society is often judged by how 
we deal with those people that are not as privileged as maybe 
some of the rest of us are. And I think when we deal with an 
Act like this that sort of thing comes into play in a very definite 
sort of a way. 



852 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2000 

It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, when I mentioned that opening 
statement, I have to recall that a number of years ago I visited a 
country in Western Europe . . . Eastern Europe, pardon me. And 
after having spent about three weeks there, the person that I was 
with asked a question if I had seen anything unusual. And I 
said, well, you know, aside from the scenery and the buildings 
and the architecture and all those sorts of things, nothing 
particularly unusual. 
 
Then he said, well, you’ve probably noticed that you haven’t 
seen any people with disabilities or mental disorders or any of 
that sorts of things out on the street — they were all out of 
sight. And I recalled, after that question was asked, that I hadn’t 
seen one of those. And when you stop to think of that, it was 
little frightening that something had happened to all those 
people — they’d all been tucked away, they’d all been hidden 
someplace. 
 
What is probably worthwhile noting, it was sort of a strongly 
socialist country that that happened in. And I think that 
indicates something very much about the whole socialist view 
on these sorts of things. 
 
We look at this particular Act, Mr. Speaker, and we have to ask 
some very important questions. I think if we look at our 
experience over the past, there was a time that whenever you 
had mentally disordered persons around they were just put away 
someplace and put out of sight, even in our province of 
Saskatchewan. However, I think there have been people that 
have led the whole fight, led the whole movement to give some 
respect, responsibility, and dignity, Mr. Speaker, to people who 
are mentally disordered. 
 
And I think of my particular constituency, and I’m very proud 
of some of the groups that have led that. I think back in the ‘40s 
when one of the . . . what used to be called the experimental 
stations came up for sale, a group of people in the area decided 
to purchase that and create a good home that will have much 
more of a home aspect to it than an institutional aspect to it. 
And that still exists in my community. It’s known as the 
Mennonite youth farm. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s had an excellent 
reputation across this province. It has set the standard in many 
cases for people taking care of those who are less fortunate. 
 
And I think it would probably be a good time to recognize the 
individual that had the foresight, had the vision, and had the 
concern, a gentleman who’s no longer with us, by the name of 
Henry Friesen, who basically had that vision, who said we need 
to take care of these people in a way that we hadn’t taken care 
of them in this particular province. 
 
Since that time and in more recent years, other communities in 
my constituency have sort of taken up the torch in that area and 
provided many facilities that would meet some of those needs. 
The Menno Home situation at Waldheim is another excellent 
example of the care and the consideration that’s given. 
 
And I believe that essentially most of the communities 
throughout my constituency have that sort of vision. From time 
to time, they’ve been able to access some government funding 
and that’s appreciated where that’s happened. But the vision has 
essentially come from the people within those communities. 
 

As we look at this particular Act, Mr. Speaker, I think we must 
at all times recognize and respect the rights of the individual. 
And I think that’s one of the concerns that I have when I look at 
Bill. No. 6. 
 
The concerns that come out of that is if someone’s declared 
competent — either by a psychiatrist or judge — you would 
think that was then final and that was the end of it. But 
according to this particular Bill, that’s not the end of it. Those 
kinds of decisions and concerns could be ongoing without any 
length of time, without any limit of time that’s out there. 
 
And when we start to think about what that could lead to, Mr. 
Speaker — you have the people in our society who need the 
most support, the most help, and the least harassment — this 
particular Bill may allow for exactly the opposite. And I think 
we have to take some very careful . . . a very careful look at that 
to make sure that we keep the protection out there for the 
individuals that we want to protect. 
 
With this proposed legislation, that particular decision that 
should be made either by a psychiatrist or a judge, can now be 
appealed to the Court of Queen’s Bench either by a psychiatrist, 
a family member, or another individual who may be involved. 
And that’s a pretty loose and open possibility there, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that’s where the scary parts of this 
particular Bill come to the front. It seems that almost anyone 
can appeal that particular decision. 
 
There are people, Mr. Speaker, who fit into this particular 
category that have substantial financial assets. I know in my 
constituency, and I’m sure the other members of the House are 
in the same situation, where people in the past have willed to 
some of their family members some land, some property, some 
finances, to make sure that they would always be well taken 
care of. And I think we respect and we honour those kinds of 
concerns for family members. 
 
However, once that’s taken care of, then what happens with all 
those kinds of assets? How well are they taken care of? Who 
has access to them? And all of those questions come into play. 
 
Now according to the direction of this particular Bill, it says a 
psychiatrist, a family member, or another individual who may 
be involved — and as I said, that’s a very vague thing — can 
then go ahead and have this person reassessed time and time 
and time again. That ends up being a particular harassment 
situation. 
 
Now the question may be asked, why would anyone wish to do 
that? Okay. Very simple. There are always people in our 
society, unfortunately, who are prepared to prey on other 
individuals. And if someone can be assessed as this particular 
Bill indicates, other individuals may then decide they have 
some access to that particular . . . to those finances or to that 
property. And I think that’s where the concern lies in this 
particular Bill. 
 
When that appeal is made, Mr. Speaker, both a medical and a 
psychiatric exam, or both, can be ordered. Now I would 
imagine at first blush we would say, well there’s no problem 
with that particularly. And maybe if it only happened one time, 
that might be okay. 



April 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 853 

But it does not deal with the real concern. What is not in this 
particular Bill — Bill No. 6 — is a statement about how 
decently we deal with the persons in this situation, how much 
respect we give to them. And I think that, Mr. Speaker, deserves 
a very close analysis. 
 
Now interestingly enough, the individual then must submit to 
those exams as ordered. Well I would imagine if somebody has 
that first request that’s made, we would probably say, well 
that’s fair enough; that’s fine. But these things can be reapplied 
for. The exams can just keep on going. There doesn’t seem to 
be any limit according to Bill No. 6 to the number of exams that 
take place. This can happen again and again. 
 
It also seems that the individual in question does not really have 
a choice in the matter. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s also a 
concern. I think they should have some access, some 
opportunity to go ahead and voice their own concerns. And as I 
mentioned right at the very start, a society is always judged by 
how it treats those who are most . . . have the most misfortune 
in their lives. And I think we need to look at that. 
 
The question is: are their rights recognized? Are their rights 
being respected? And so, Mr. Speaker, as we look at Bill No. 6, 
there are many questions and concerns that we have. And we 
will want to make sure that all the people that are involved, that 
should be involved, the legal society, families that maybe 
involved, all are represented in this. 
 
And to that extent and to looking forward to the research that 
needs to take place, I would now like to adjourn debate on this 
Bill No. 6. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Boyd that Bill No. 7 — The Student 
Assistance and Student Aid Fund Amendment Act, 1999 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 7, An Act to 
amend The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund. Most of 
the amendments in the Bill are pretty standard, mostly 
housekeeping in nature. But since the budget this government 
has claimed that they want to renew their commitment to 
post-secondary education. Unfortunately what we have recently 
seen with the cancellation of programs is just the contrary. 
 
One of the biggest obstacles, Mr. Speaker, that students face 
upon graduating from grade 12 is whether or not they want to 
further their education, and one of the biggest barriers is how 
are they going to finance it. Now it’s interesting in today’s 
world we talk about graduating . . . what we’re going to do after 
our youth graduate from grade 12. 
 
It wasn’t long ago that many of our parents and relatives only 
looked at going to school till grade 8, 9, or even 10 was a 
luxury. Now we’re talking about grade 12 and beyond. And in 
this age of global economy and high technology, computers and 
Internet, it’s a virtual necessity that our students and our youth 
get more than a grade 12 and go on to post-secondary 

education. So it’s very important that we assist our students in 
this area. 
 
As we have seen through further scrutiny of this budget, this 
government has actually cancelled the program that many 
students relied on for summer employment to help pay for their 
education. And it’s interesting that the government talks about 
renewing their commitment to post-secondary education while 
cancelling a very important program for our youth. 
 
But I would like to talk about this government’s promise during 
the election campaign to pay for first-year students’ tuition. 
What happened to that promise? Or was that just more political 
rhetoric? Is that just another broken promise from this budget? 
 
Mr. Speaker, upon graduation from their chosen fields of study, 
students incur exorbitant debt loads from loans they have 
received over the course of study. But the NDP did not really do 
anything to acknowledge this except for a measly tax credit, 
which in actuality does not amount to anything, since they also 
repealed the interest-free status on student loans. 
 
Now just like the budget the government brought down, one 
hand they lower taxes and the other hand, they raise taxes. They 
put money in people’s pockets with one hand and take the 
money out of the other pocket with the other hand. And they’ve 
done the same thing with the education of our youth. They 
promise a tax rebate with one hand, and the other hand they 
take it away by eliminating the interest-free status. 
 
In the minister’s speech regarding this Bill, he spoke about 
improving financial accessibility to funding for students. But 
with the cancellation of the programs, it appears that they are 
hindering the process more than facilitating it. 
 
Another concern is what sort of job opportunities will there be 
for graduating students to stay in Saskatchewan when they 
finish school and have to pay back thousands of dollars in 
student loans. More of our best and brightest will be leaving 
Saskatchewan for Alberta, with the recent announcement of the 
Canadian Bible College leaving Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it ironic when the members opposite claim 
that they are not willing to mortgage their children’s future, 
when it is them who have managed to take away scholarship 
money from students when they receive funding from the 
Canadian millennium scholarship fund. And again, this is 
something the government has that really deceived our youth. 
They learned of this millennium scholarship fund; they went out 
and applied for it. But in the end they did not receive any 
benefit from it. The government took their scholarship. 
 
It is very difficult to comprehend how this government can go 
on and on about investing in the future when they are doing 
everything possible to stifle students’ productivity. 
 
(1145) 
 
As Saskatchewan is dealing with a brain drain, this government 
has done little or nothing to address this very serious problem. 
Students have left our province in droves and all we are left 
with is reading about the successes elsewhere. It is just typical 
of the NDP to talk about their commitment to students in the 



854 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2000 

future in our province, when in actuality they have done more 
to hold back our youth. 
 
Recent example is of the cancellation of the student program 
employment as I mentioned earlier. Many students rely on this 
program to assist in paying for their education and pay down 
some of their student loan debt. The private businesses that the 
member opposite brings into the debate also count on this 
program as a means to hire local students and give them some 
real-world experience. 
 
And it’s very important that students not only get the financial 
rewards of working in summer programs, summer jobs, so they 
don’t have to incur too many loans and debt and have a decent 
standard of living while they are going to university. But it also 
gives the student much needed experience working on jobs 
whether it’s in their field that they are studying in or not; just 
the experience of working and doing a good job . . . but it also 
helps the employers of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the summertime many employers, farmers, and non-farmers, 
need students and rely on their labours. And unfortunately this 
program has cut into that. But also the students have had to 
worry about the cancellation of the interest-free portion of the 
student loan repayment program. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this plan has put added pressure onto our 
students; and upon graduating from the university or trade 
schools, they now have to start paying interest immediately. 
And this puts a great amount of pressure on these students to 
have a well-paying job lined up right after graduation. 
 
And naturally, as in many cases we have seen, these students 
look where the best opportunity for jobs are and unfortunately it 
is elsewhere. It’s not in Saskatchewan. And because of the 
added pressure of needing employment immediately, they go 
where the best opportunities are and that’s usually, 
unfortunately, Alberta or elsewhere. 
 
One thing the government has to look at and not only help 
student employment but just employment for students after they 
graduate from their university or trade school, is developing 
opportunities in Saskatchewan. 
 
And again and again we’ve heard that especially in rural 
Saskatchewan, the infrastructure is falling apart. When a 
business is looking to invest, build a factory, put up a business, 
they look at a community and they have to look at some very 
important aspects. First, infrastructure such as roads and 
highways — will they be able to get their products in and out 
and their raw materials in and out of the community? 
 
Of course they look at the education system. Is it an adequate 
education system for their employees’ children and their own 
children? The health care in the community — is it adequate 
health care? And of course taxation. Taxation is a big problem 
when setting up a business when you’re competing with other 
jurisdictions, not only local taxes but also the provincial tax 
which is involved. 
 
Now there is no doubt that the members opposite will talk about 
the fact it was them that offered free tuition to first-year 
students. And they will talk about the fact they have gave 

graduating students a $353 tax credit. But it does not amount to 
anything if they don’t stay in Saskatchewan and take advantage 
of this. So this is another program that will likely not be taken 
up because the students will have to leave the province to get a 
job and they will not be eligible for the tax break. 
 
But it’s not only the post-secondary students that have been hurt 
by this government. K to 12 education has been grossly 
underfunded by this government to the tune of $380 million. 
And again it goes back to what the taxpayer can pay at the local 
level. And again we have seen a lack of attention in the budget. 
And I attended many, many tax revolt meetings, and people 
said before the budget that they can not stand any more taxes. 
 
And we have to look at K to 12 education. We talk about 
post-secondary education. We need our youth to be properly 
educated in the earlier grades so they can go on and take their 
courses and classes and have the skills to learn in the university 
classes. And we have to look at many things in the K to 12 
system. We must keep our students in school to begin with so 
they graduate from grade 12. And we need . . . and 
unfortunately a lot of it has to do with funding. 
 
And I would just like to read a bit from the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association news release. And just in 
summary, what Mr. Shaddock says: 
 

If we are not careful, our education system is going to 
crumble, and therefore so will the future of our province. If 
we shortchange our children now, we shortchange 
ourselves in the future. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Leave to bring Easter greetings. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Easter Greetings 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
thought we were going to be doing these greetings during 
members’ statements and I was going to be asking leave at that 
point for 20 minutes in that I don’t often get a chance to preach 
any more, and I thought this might be a good chance for me. 
But I’ve trimmed it a little bit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, spring is the time of new life and new beginnings. 
The season of Lent is a time of contemplation, preparation, and 
commitment, a season which culminates in joyous reaffirmation 
of life and love. The promise of eternal love is at the very heart 
of the Easter celebration. 
 
Today is Holy Thursday and it marks the final weekend of the 
Easter season. Even though the legislature is not generally a 
forum for discussing religious issues, the significance of Easter 
has influence beyond any specific creed. 



April 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 855 

For many, Easter is a time of greatest hope. It is a time when we 
celebrate love beyond measure, the triumph of life over death, 
of good over evil. It is a time when we take a break in our 
temporal activities, time to catch our breath, time to visit with 
our families, time to prepare ourselves to return to our duties 
with renewed energy, renewed vigour, and renewed hope. For 
all who observe this holiday and for those who just get a longer 
weekend, we hope that it’s a time of renewal. 
 
I pray that God will continue to bless and guide all of us 
through this Easter weekend and through the days and years 
ahead. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — To ask leave to give a Easter greeting. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Easter season is 
a time for renewal, a time in which to renew our Christian 
beliefs in the passion and death of our Saviour. It is through his 
death that we may receive our salvation. 
 
The Easter season is a sign of new life and new beginning. With 
this in mind, let us all renew our pledge to work towards a more 
just society, a society where all mankind can stand side by each 
as all work towards God’s kingdom. 
 
A blessed Easter season to all and may we find the peace of 
Christ in our hearts. It also gives me a great deal of pleasure, 
Mr. Speaker, to join with our Jewish friends and neighbours in 
wishing everyone a joyous Passover celebration. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you, hon. members. I too, if I may, 
I’ve been asked on behalf of the hon. member for Canora-Pelly, 
asked to convey some wishes on his behalf. And I trust you 
would allow me leave to do so. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Greetings from the Member for Canora-Pelly 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member from Canora-Pelly would 
like to extend greetings and a Happy Easter to all. He is now 
out of the hospital, with good reports from his doctors. He 
wants to express his sincere thanks for the telephone calls, for 
the visits, the cards, the wishes that he’s received from MLAs, 
caucus staff, and employees of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
He will be returning home to Invermay for a recovery period, 
and looks forward to his return to this House as soon as 
possible. And he wishes everyone Godspeed and God bless. 
 
And I know that if the member was here he would acknowledge 
the Ukrainian community. I can’t quite keep up to that level of 
communication as the hon. member from Canora-Pelly so I 
won’t endeavour that. 
 

But I too would like to extend to each and every member, to 
you and your families, to enjoy the spirit of this special time of 
year in whichever way you may choose to celebrate, to enjoy 
with your families, your friends, your loved ones. And I do look 
forward to seeing you back again next week. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — As I say, I look forward to seeing you all 
when we reconvene at 1:30 p.m. Wednesday next. Happy 
Easter! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:56 a.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


