





























































Hansard: June 27, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2227 
 June 27, 2000 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 86  The Wood River Constituency By-election Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move first reading of Bill No. 86, The Wood River 
Constituency By-election Act. I suppose in brackets we could 
put the Yogi Bill, but we won’t today. But, I so move. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 86  The Wood River Constituency By-election Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly I move that the Bill now be read a second time; 
again, the Bill called Bill No. 86, The Wood River Constituency 
By-election Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 86  The Wood River Constituency By-election Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. Joining us tonight is Darcy McGovern with 
legislative services in Sask Justice. 
 
Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 86 — The Wood River Constituency By-election Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — By leave, I move this Bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 7:08 p.m. His Honour the Administrator entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 65 - The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 47 - The Power Corporation Superannuation 

Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 19 - The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 

Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 20 - The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 74 - The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment 

Act, 2000 
Bill No. 75 - The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment 

Act, 2000 (No. 2)/Loi n° 2 de 2000 modifiant la 
Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 
alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

Bill No. 70 - The Education (Elimination of Business Tax) 
Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 modifiant la 
Loi sur l’éducation (élimination de la taxe 
professionnelle) 

Bill No. 14 - The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment 
Act, 2000 

Bill No. 22 - The Local Improvements Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 23 - The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 

2000 
Bill No. 6 - The Mentally Disordered Persons Amendment 

Act, 2000 
Bill No. 16 - The Justice Statutes (Consumer Protection) 

Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 31 - The Police Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 34 - The Saskatchewan Evidence Amendment Act, 

2000 
Bill No. 79 - The Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts Act, 2000 
Bill No. 61 - The Engineering and Geoscience Professions 

Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 49 - The Highways and Transportation Amendment 

Act, 2000 
Bill No. 1 - The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 

2000 
Bill No. 2 - The Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 24 - The Department of Agriculture Amendment Act, 

2000 
Bill No. 42 - The Cattle Marketing Deductions Amendment 

Act, 2000 
Bill No. 25 - The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 52 - The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 

modifiant la Loi sur la faune 
Bill No. 53 - The Wildlife Act Consequential Amendment Act, 

2000 
Bill No. 5 - The Parks Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 60 - The Forest Resources Management Amendment 

Act, 2000 
Bill No. 82 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 81 - The Income Tax Act, 2000 
Bill No. 83 - The Income Tax Consequential Amendment Act, 

2000 
Bill No. 84 - The Education and Health Tax Amendment Act, 

2000 
Bill No. 85 - The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Act 
Bill No. 50 - The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 

2000 modifiant la Loi d’interprétation de 1995 
Bill No. 51 - The Interpretation Act Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 63 - The Legal Aid Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 80 - The Court of Appeal Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 sur la 

Cour d’appel 
Bill No. 86 - The Wood River Constituency By-election Act 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 



2228 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 7:13 p.m. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to ask for 
leave of the Assembly to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your 
gallery is one of my favourite cousins, my first cousin. His 
name is Rod Belanger. He’s in the city here taking some 
training. He’s also a customs officer being stationed in 
Saskatoon. 
 
And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, he’s also wearing a TSN 
(The Sports Network) jacket, a jacket given to him by a great 
athlete, with him being one of the greatest non-athletes in the 
history of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome my 
cousin here to the Assembly this evening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1915) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Land Titles Act, 2000 
 

Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’m just going to invite the minister to 
introduce his officials formally. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d ask the 
Assembly to welcome the following officials: Ron Hewitt, on 
my right, who is a Q.C. (Queen’s Counsel), who is the 
executive vice-president of Saskatchewan Land Information 
Corporation and has been involved in this project for a very 
long time. Behind him is Mary Ellen Wellsch, who is project 
manager in the program, policy, and law department of the 
Saskatchewan Land Information Corporation. Behind me is 
Darcy McGovern from legislative services, who has been here 
before. 
 
And if I may, Mr. Speaker, just to recognize that Carl Shiels is 
also here, the executive director of the Saskatchewan Land 
Surveyors’ Association, in the gallery. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees and 
Minister, and welcome to your officials here this evening. A few 
short, quick questions all in one to start it off perhaps, Minister. 
Could you just relate when the computerization project for the 
LAND (Land Titles automated network development project) 
project, if you will, began; its original budget and what it is 
currently budgeted to cost the taxpayers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, in response to the 
member’s question, the project began in 1996. At that time it was 

called the Land Titles automated network development project, 
and that was estimated to cost $20 million, Mr. Speaker. And that 
was, as the member will know, essentially the simple automation 
of the Land Titles system. 
 
The budget to date is $49.9 million. And the member will know 
that there’s been a significant expansion of this project since 1996. 
And I’ll just relate to him, for him and for the House, the 
expansions of that original project which accounts for the increase 
in budget. 
 
In addition to the LAND project was the integration of the land 
titles system with the Geographic Information System — GIS. 
That was developed by Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. And that included the integration of all survey 
functions and a conversion of maps. That was one big part of the 
project, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The development, secondly, the development of an e-commerce 
and imaging system. Thirdly, the employee and organization 
preparation for the transition from the paper-based system to an 
electronic system. The purchase of a building to house documents 
and staff who will be converting the documents into electronic 
form, and additional monies as a result of increased information 
technology costs in our market. So a significantly greater project 
— significantly greater project — than was the case in 1996. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Which of those elements that you’ve just highlighted were not 
originally contemplated? All of them that you just listed were 
not originally contemplated by the project would be the first 
question. And second question is, you . . . you mentioned a 
building, a purchase of a building. And how much, how much is 
the building going to cost and was there not throughout 
government, SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) space somewhere else, somewhere in the city of 
Regina or else wherever it needed to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In answer to the first question, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, all of the things I mentioned are additional to the 
original project so the original project was envisaged as just 
being a simple automation of the land titles system and has 
since been expanded into a major electronic commerce, 
electronic government, and even, really, relationships between 
individuals too. So a large electronic government electronic 
commerce system. 
 
The purpose behind providing resources for buying a building is 
it can be capitalized and it makes much more sense for SLISCO 
(Saskatchewan Land Information Services Corporation) to buy 
a building rather than to rent one. There is nothing available 
from SPMC. It’s a fairly major project in terms of size, both in 
terms of the imagering aspect which requires special technology 
and so on. And also for warehousing possibilities later down the 
line. But the money is for . . . for $5 million to set aside to 
purchase a building. Whether we need that or not is another 
matter. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. Minister. 
You can imagine how . . . notwithstanding some of the things 
that you’ve highlighted that were over and above what was 
originally planned for the project, you can imagine some of the 
questions that people will have given the fact the original 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2229 

budget was $20 million, and we’re now basically at $50 
million. Thirty million dollars certainly is not insignificant, and 
as it relates the original cost of the project it’s . . . perhaps that 
understates it somewhat. 
 
And so I think that you’ve mentioned in the course of media 
interviews that there may be also some chance for revenue 
generation as a result of this project. Could you please highlight 
what those opportunities are and what progress the department 
has made to date to market this project around the world or 
across the country? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, first let me just 
reiterate. The member’s quite right that a significant increase in 
budget brought about by a significant increase in capacity and 
scope raises some issues, and I hope we can allay those today. 
But first of all, the member will know that an improved service 
and significantly better turnaround on Land Title services will 
flow from this project as it’s carried out throughout the 
province. So we’ll have very quick response to people’s needs 
which is certainly an important aspect. 
 
With the integration of GIS, there will be a seamless system for 
mapping the province that integrates these two previously 
unrelated or separate systems, and the value to business and real 
estate developers and mineral exploration firms and so on will 
be quite significant. And their support has been important in the 
development of this project. And similarly taxpayers will also 
get the development of an e-commerce and imaging system 
which should also constitute significant advantages to them. 
 
And the system which we’re developing to aid in the integration 
of land titles and GIS will have significant numbers of 
applications that will mean improvements in other government 
departments and services. And it can be sold to other 
jurisdictions, other provinces, and other countries, and to 
private industry. All of which will constitute a direct benefit to 
the people of the province. 
 
So the member should know that other government departments 
and the other operations of government will benefit from this 
service, and they have all shown interest. Other provinces have 
shown interest in this project also, because this project is 
significantly more advanced than would be the case in any other 
province. 
 
Other countries, in particular developing countries, have shown 
an interest. All of . . . well, significant numbers of the large 
computer and consulting companies have an interest in 
participating in this process, as have other components of the 
private sector. 
 
The member asks what have we done so far to move into these 
opportunities, and, as he will know, the corporation was 
established on January 1 and to date significant discussions with 
potential partners have taken place. And, as he will know, we 
have great hopes for this corporation. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I guess, 
when do you anticipate the . . . when do you anticipate to roll 
the project out, for it to be fully operational? And, well we’ll 
get into the whole question of Crown Corporation versus some 
other mode of delivery, but maybe you could start with that. 

When do we expect to have it roll out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Deputy Chair. I take it the 
member from Swift Current is particularly interested in the roll 
out of LAND Project, Land Titles Offices. Would that be right? 
 
And the project schedule is as follows. The first office to be 
brought on line will be Moose Jaw in May of 2001, May 7; 
Humboldt, June 18, 2001; Regina, July 9; Battleford, November 
19; Prince Albert, January 7; Saskatoon, March 25; Yorkton, 
June 10; and — this is really no reflection on the member — 
Swift Current, July 8. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, what 
do the other provinces do in terms of . . . Most of the other 
provinces I understand have a computerized LAND system in 
place. Obviously if they’ve done it earlier, it may not be as 
current as ours will be, we hope. But the question would be, 
what sorts of models do other provinces use? 
 
Do some other provinces have . . . have some of the provinces 
contracted out this kind of a service? And did your department 
at least explore other alternatives rather than setting up yet 
another Crown corporation in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, in response to the 
member’s question, the other provinces have a computerized 
land titles system. We actually will be last in implementing that. 
The member’s quite right that with the fast advance of 
technology the most recent technology is not only the most 
expensive but the most effective. 
 
So we have benefits flowing from that which of course with the 
advance of technology presents other challenges. There were 
significant consultations with other provinces about their 
process. And those consultations and those recommendations 
were given serious consideration when this project, our project, 
was in its planning stage and its implementation stage. And 
those recommendations are embodied — from other provinces 
— are embodied in the corporation which we are discussing 
today. And in addition to that, the extra components in this 
project are of significant interest to other provinces as well. So 
they recommended, the other provinces recommended that we 
follow this approach significantly. 
 
And they also . . . there was significant consensus on the need 
to ensure that this corporation would be a Crown corporation. 
And the rationale behind that primarily is that it is important 
that Land Titles be a public program. It’s always been the case 
that the province has stood behind Land Titles in the province, 
and it’s important that that security be available to citizens of 
the province from now into the future. 
 
The creation of a Crown corporation however enables that 
security, that protection to the public, to be part of the 
corporation while also providing a corporate structure that can 
take advantage of commercial possibilities as they become 
available through the development of this technology. And the 
creation of a Crown corporation to manage and deliver the 
project establishes a new business enterprise that will have a 
mandate to pursue strategic alliances, both with public and 



2230 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

private sector. That will offer a wider range of products and 
services on top of the land information system and will enable 
us to market those products and services both inside the 
province and outside province. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. What 
have you contemplated in terms of the structure of the 
corporation? For example, what will be its capacity to borrow 
money and carry debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The Crown corporation, as the member 
will know, was established by an order in council. That 
corporation answers to CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) and its borrowing limits and powers are set 
down in the order in council. I don’t have that number with me 
right now but I can get it. We can probably get it for you 
quickly, can we? Or tomorrow . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just tomorrow, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — We can get it for you tomorrow if 
that’s okay. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Minister and Mr. Deputy Chair. How 
many employees are currently involved and working in the 
areas that are going to be contemplated by the new LAND 
project and what will be their status after rollout in all these 
different locations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I think the member 
is referring to the Land Titles staff, and if he is, there are about 
220 employees working on the paper-based Land Titles system 
at the present time. Plainly, moving to a computer-based system 
will reduce the needs in terms of numbers. We would anticipate 
about 80 employees being needed to operate the computer 
based system. And we’ve essentially known that since about 
1997. And that information is being shared openly with the 
union affected. 
 
There’s been significant discussion about employee assistance 
for those who will no longer be required for the new system, 
lots of consultation with the union in question, and lots of work 
to ensure that the employees, present employees, will have 
other opportunities. Indeed, one of the six principles of the 
LAND project is a commitment to employees, and I’m sure the 
member can understand that. Without committed employees in 
a very complex, fast moving area of this sort, the corporation 
would be certainly in a less advantageous position than would 
previously be the case. 
 
So really there’s about 126 positions which will no longer be 
required. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Have these employees guaranteed work elsewhere 
in the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I can say to the member that while no 
one is being guaranteed positions, there are already many 
transfers which have taken place, in particular to the 
Department of Justice. The matter is discussed extensively and 
openly with SGEU (Saskatchewan Government and General 
Employees’ Union). And every effort is being made to ensure 
that those employees will be taken care of. The employees 

themselves know this and are participating in the discussions 
which will seek other alternatives for them. 
 
Mr. Wall: — One of the elements of the LAND Project that I 
think everyone would agree with, and myself as an economic 
developer in a previous life, understood the impatience that 
entrepreneurs had and business people had with how the paper 
system works. The turnaround drove people crazy, and of 
course by and large small business people and entrepreneurs are 
impatient, and that would compound the situation. So 
everyone’s looking forward to some, you know, improvements 
in terms of efficacy with this system. 
 
And I would ask that question, I guess, if you could give us a 
for-instance on a, you know, a . . . I’ll give you some 
parameters, I guess. I got one acre commercial transaction for a 
commercial project. What kind of turnaround would we be 
looking at after the system in place versus what’s there now? 
And also is there any fee increases contemplated as a result of 
the new system that will have to be borne by people utilizing 
the new LAND system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, in response to the 
member’s question, for the last six months, Land Titles have 
been keeping to their target of a turnaround time of about seven 
days. That’s been consistent over the last few months. 
 
Once the system is implemented, it is anticipated that the 
turnaround time would be between 24 hours and 48 hours, and 
once the on-line registration is in place . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Almost. Once the on-line registration is in 
place, then the registration will be instantaneous. 
 
Now the member said, would there be any fee increases? Well 
there haven’t been fee increases, as he will know, since 1990. 
So there will be fee increases, but there will also be significant 
differences in services — on-line searches, for example, 
merging with GIS, a whole bunch of extra opportunities for 
people which will reduce the fee increases. And in addition to 
that, significant, significant commercial opportunities for 
SLISCO which will ensure that fee increases can be kept as low 
as possible. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Just one final question, I guess, as you head into 
the . . . as you get into the final stages of the project. And it’s 
similar to a discussion we had on another Bill as it relates to the 
security of the system. 
 
And I wonder if you could confirm for the members of the 
committee what measures the department has taken, what the 
department has done to ensure that this system is absolutely and 
totally secure. Because of course we’re dealing with very 
sensitive information and we all know that we live in a world 
where these systems can be easily compromised. So what 
measures has the department taken to ensure that won’t happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, in response to the 
member’s question, we discussed this as he says recently with 
another Bill, the electronic commerce Bill, and the issue of 
security is a critically important one to all of us. 
 
And the member can be assured, and indeed so can the residents 
of Saskatchewan, that the most comprehensive, sophisticated 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2231 

technology is in place here to ensure both the accuracy and the 
security of the system. And it is always a possibility that certain 
people could gain access to any computer data base, and they’re 
reported from time to time in the newspapers. 
 
So every reasonable effort has been taken to ensure that access 
to the LAND data base is not possible. That means fire walls 
and other security devices such as virus detection and so on will 
be employed to protect the data. As well the system will know 
of and report any unauthorized access by anyone or by any 
computer. 
 
And the member should be aware, and I think this is important 
with regards to most of these kinds of computerized systems, 
the security will be much better in this system than is the case 
today in our paper-based . . . in our paper-based system in 
which actually somebody could break into an office at night — 
maybe we shouldn’t be talking about this — and change the 
title without the knowledge of anyone. 
 
(1945) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 566 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 56 – The Land Titles Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 apportant des modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Land Titles Act, 2000 
 
Clauses 1 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, by leave, to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. With us tonight is a very special group of young 
people, in particular, who are with us from the constituency of 
Athabasca. They are here to lobby and work with government 
members and a number of staff people, talking about the South 
Bay annual youth conference. And they’re seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. 
 
And if they would stand as I introduce them. In the group is 
adult Allard Merasty, youth Brennan Merasty, Shane Laliberte, 
Tyrone Ratte, Ryan Ratte, and Dan Lee Mispounds. And they 
are here, and this is a very special day because they are 
spending two days in Regina, lobbying and working with us. 
And I wish you the very, very best in your endeavours and look 
forward to meeting with you later. 
 
I hope all members will join with me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Land Surveys Act, 2000 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees. Mr. 
Minister, just a few questions on this Bill. It is part of the 
LAND project as well. 
 
Some specific questions as it relates to surveying, because we 
have had some concerns on the part of surveyors who’ve 
contacted us, and whom we’ve contacted to discuss the Act. 
 
It appears that procedures for conducting surveys have not been 
described in the Act. And it appears that the Act empowers the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council or the cabinet to prescribe 
procedures in the legislation. And is this true, and if so, why 
was that course taken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the member asks 
why significant portions of this process would be left to 
regulations — well, the original Land Surveys Act also would 
have had significant aspects of the process left to regulation. 
 
Times change, and these are detailed provisions which are best 
addressed by regulation rather than in legislation which, if 
required to be changed, would have to be done through the 
procedures in this House rather than the quicker and simpler 
process of changing regulations. And that argument prevails 
today, Mr. Deputy Chair, that these are provisions which are 
better left for regulation rather than in the statute itself. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, one 
question where we’ve also heard and I’d like to ask to the 
minister, and it is a detailed question in respect of sections 31 
and 34 — talks about the establishment of a controller of 
surveys. What happens if this controller does not approve the 
surveyor’s restoration or re-establishment survey? Is the survey 
invalid or non-binding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, in response to the 
member’s question, I should first introduce to my far right, Ed 
Desnoyers, who is the controller of surveys. 
 
The member asks, I think, what would happen if the surveyor’s 
survey was not recognized by the controller of surveys. And the 
surveyor’s work, of course, is his or her professional 
responsibility. And in the event that the controller of surveys 
did not accept the surveyor’s report, then the surveyor would 
have to go and make the matter right. The controller of surveys 
is, after all, rather like the Master of Land Titles who makes the 
final decision as to the efficacy of the documents before him or 
her. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees. We’re also getting some questions about section 
48, the boundary confirmation, and I think a lot of people would 
have to deal with this issue from time to time. That deals in 
general with boundary monuments that are placed in error, and 
the occupation and developments on the land based on those 



2232 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

monuments. While there’s a need for mitigation in such 
circumstances, I think there must also be an absolute assurance 
that the landowners of the properties involved are an integral 
part of the process. What assurance can you give them that they 
will indeed be a part of the process of determining the correct 
boundary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Chair. We can make 
the commitment that . . . I can make the commitment that 
landowners will indeed be involved and will have the 
opportunity should they be of the view that a monument is 
wrongly placed to pursue appropriate remedies for that error to 
be corrected . . . I mean through such processes as mediation 
but finally on application to the registrar, and the registrar could 
also take measures to ensure that an improperly placed 
boundary was correct. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that 
assurance but I think you’d agree that nowhere in the Act . . . 
the Act itself doesn’t provide that assurance. In fact, and please 
correct me if I’m wrong, but it strikes me that there’s a 
possibility that the process could go ahead totally within the 
confines of government without land owners being aware of 
this, the fact that the boundaries have changed and the fact that 
they may have needed to be able to provide some input to the 
proper authorities to make their case. Is that true? Can you give 
assurances that this legislation does indeed assure that people 
will have some input into this under these kinds of decisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the concern the 
member raises is dealt with in section 45 to 50 and 51 to 56 of the 
Bill which is titled an “Application for Boundary Confirmation.” 
So in the event, Mr. Deputy Chair, that there is some problem, 
section 46 provides for the registrar of titles on his own initiative 
to initiate an application to confirm the location of a boundary. 
And section 47 also then would permit either or both of the 
following to done: an investigation to be conducted and a survey 
to be conducted and a report prepared appropriately. 
 
So in the event that there is some question, then the registrar can 
pursue this matter, and section 51, Mr. Deputy Chair, provides that 
anyone who wishes to object to the location of a boundary shall 
register that objection with the registrar of titles. So there is in the 
Bill itself ample provision for addressing any concerns about 
inappropriately placed boundary monuments. And lastly, if any 
person is unhappy with the result, they can always appeal through 
the normal process to courts, and that’s provided for in section 58. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 96 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Condominium Property 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, and 
Mr. Minister. What assurances can you give that — to 
developers specifically who now have to submit their plans 
through this plan processing before they receive approval — 

can you give them some assurance in terms of how timely the 
process is going to be that it won’t unduly cause a delay in the 
approval process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the . . . there’s no 
expectation that this will take any longer than presently is the 
case. Indeed we would anticipate time savings once the whole 
process is in place. 
 
So I don’t think that anyone . . . any corporation thinking of 
establishing a condominium should expect any delay at all, 
other than what takes place now. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. Will 
there be any other costs either to government or developers as a 
result of the process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question, 
Mr. Deputy Chair, there won’t be a significant change in fees. 
The process for reassessing fees in the land titles system as a 
whole we’ve discussed briefly, but this process should be, as I 
say, no more time-consuming than is presently the case, and no 
more expensive. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, that 
concludes the questions that we have for that Bill. And let me 
thank you, Minister, and through you to your officials, thank 
them for their help this evening. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 59 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the hon. Minister of 
Justice to report the Bill without amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Let’s 
then before I do that thank the officials for being here this 
evening and indeed thank all those involved in the development 
of this project and indeed the expanded project into SLISCO. 
This indeed is an exciting project for the province, one which 
holds great opportunities for us, and one which has required a 
great deal work and effort on behalf of the officials. 
 
And I note that the member from Swift Current appreciates that 
too and mentioned that at the beginning of the session. And I 
want to thank the member for his questions. This is a complex 
set of statutes covering complex issues, and he raised some 
useful points, and we will respond to the question that we were 
unable to respond to, tomorrow. 
 
And I would extend to the member once again an invitation to 
be briefed on this project with any of his colleagues. It is — I 
think he will agree once he’s had that briefing — a project 
which holds great hope for the province and indeed for 
employment in the province in particular in these high-quality, 
high-skilled jobs, and we look forward to great opportunities. 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I move that the committee report 
Bill 58 without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2233 

Bill No. 64 — The Fiscal Stabilization Fund Act 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the Minister of Finance 
to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I have with 
me, to my left, Dr. Paul Boothe, who’s the deputy minister of 
Finance. And behind Dr. Boothe is Mr. Terry Paton, who is the 
Provincial Comptroller. And behind me is Ms. Joanne 
Brockman, who’s the executive director of the economic and 
fiscal policy branch of the Department of Finance. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
And welcome, Mr. Minister. I know we pulled you off some 
very important duties and I want to welcome your officials as 
well this evening. 
 
Mr. Minister, in clause no. 4 and clause no. 7, those clauses 
refer specifically to the objectives of the fund and the reasons 
for the creation of the fund. And they also talk about a balance 
in the fund, the fact that as minister you must lay out a 
four-year fiscal plan. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we see a percentage of 5 per cent, that 
doesn’t mean a whole lot to individuals. Could you give us an 
example of what you feel would be the revenue that you would 
be looking at as a result of a 5 per cent figure? And, Mr. 
Minister, a further question to that is, when you look at the 
General Revenue Fund, will you be using the entire number that 
is in the General Revenue Fund that would include transfers, for 
instance, from the federal government? Will you be looking at 
that as a full percentage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer to the question, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, is yes. We would be looking at all revenue to the 
province of Saskatchewan whether from taxation we impose 
ourselves, transfers from the federal government, miscellaneous 
fees, licenses and so on. And that would be approximately — 
let us say for purposes of debate — $5.6 billion. Five per cent 
of that would be roughly $270 million. We would have a target 
of, in effect, setting aside $270 million each year to meet any 
unforeseen expenses or anything that may happen as a result of 
volatility of commodity prices, farm prices, oil and so on. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister and Mr. Deputy 
Chair. You refer to the fact that there should be a balance in the 
fund at the end of the fourth fiscal year, Mr. Minister. Are you 
suggesting then that the balance at the end of the fourth fiscal 
year would be $250 million or that you would increase that each 
and every year by $250 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the answer is we mean 
the balance would be 5 per cent so that we would aim to have 5 
per cent of the annual revenue kept in a savings account. 
 
But let us say that at the beginning of the first year we said that 
we were setting $270 million aside but that we didn’t have any 
problems throughout that whole year, so we didn’t draw it 
down. Then the next year, we would not be taking any money 

out. We would just leave the money we had put in. We 
wouldn’t need to transfer any money in because we would have 
set aside the money. 
 
So in other words, it’s not cumulative. We won’t set aside a 
billion dollars over four years. We’ll set aside the $270 million 
in year one, and if we don’t use it, it will stay there, and we 
won’t put anything else in it the second year because it’s 
already there in which case I would think that that would mean 
that you would use the revenue you have available to you either 
for program expenditures . . . you might spend the money, 
improve the highways, health care, whatever, or you might cut 
taxes. Or you might pay off debt, something like that. But the 
answer is you just put the money in on a one-time basis. If you 
spend it, you put more in; if you don't spend it, you leave it as it 
is. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in 
clause no. 4 it indicates that the purpose of the fund is to help in 
the stabilization of the fiscal position of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. And you’ve just indicated that 5 per cent works 
out to about 250 to 270 million. Do you think that that is 
sufficient amount in a fund to stabilize the fiscal position of the 
Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Based upon the level of historical 
fluctuation in revenues that we have had in terms of the swings 
that we may have, yes. That amount of money gives us 
sufficient insurance that we would be able to in effect pay our 
bills with that much money. And we’ve looked at, with the 
officials from the Department of Finance, historically what may 
happen to us. And if we save 5 per cent, that will protect the 
taxpayers from sudden tax increases or program cuts which may 
arise if suddenly we are short of revenue. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, in clause no. 6 it indicates that 
interest or earnings on investment must not remain within that 
fund. And it says very specifically, “must not be credited.” Is 
there a legal obligation why that interest monies do not stay in 
the fund and in fact have to be transferred back to the General 
Revenue Fund? Could you explain the reasons for that clause? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. The purpose of the fund is for fiscal 
stabilization. And it’s set at a certain amount. It’s not designed 
to invest or to earn a lot of interest. It’s simply designed to 
provide a stabilization reserve. 
 
So our thinking was that it wasn’t necessary to put the interest 
in because basically our target is 5 per cent and that’s a 
statutory target set by the legislature. And anything else should 
be paid into the General Revenue Fund which I think is 
consistent with the principles annunciated by the Gass 
Commission in the early ’90s which said that any revenues you 
have, generally speaking, should be paid into the General 
Revenue Fund and available for either program expenditures, 
tax reductions or debt paydown. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in 
section 9, in the two clauses there, you referred to both the 
money going from the General Revenue Fund to the so-called 
stabilization fund as an expense and then in clause (b) I think 
it’s . . . The clause refers to the amount that would be 
transferred from the stabilization fund back to the General 



2234 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

Revenue Fund. It says that that is deemed to be revenue of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 
Could you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. If the monies that are in effect in a 
savings account are used by the government, then they should 
be accounted for as if they are used by the government, which 
would be the case. 
 
In other words, that section simply means that if we take that 
money out of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, we have to report 
that to the legislature as if we had received that money as tax 
money, and it has to be fully accountable in the Public 
Accounts. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, instead of referring to that as 
revenue to the General Revenue Fund, wouldn’t that be . . . 
wouldn’t it be much more efficient and probably, through 
accounting principles, wouldn’t it be just an inter-fund transfer? 
Wouldn’t that be a more logical step to take, rather than calling 
it revenue a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, it wouldn’t be really recording it for 
a second time. To maintain accountability, we believe that 
deposits to the Fiscal Stabilization Fund will be recorded as an 
expense to the General Revenue Fund, so that you have an 
expense item. And it’s logical that if you withdraw from the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund you will then record that as revenue to 
the General Revenue Fund. 
 
In fact, I don’t think there is a better way to do it. I think you 
expense it when you pay it out; you must treat it as revenue 
when you bring it in. 
 
And bear in mind that under some circumstances you may be 
paying it out as an expense in year one, let us say, and if we do 
well, we may not be drawing that fund down for five years. So 
suddenly money comes out of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund into 
the General Revenue Fund. We have to treat that as revenue and 
fully disclose that to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. While I agree that 
there should be accountability and full transparency, I think the 
suggestion here is, of course, that when we look at this year’s 
budget, you have revenue that you have indicated as the source 
as being the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, net 
earnings. Or whether they’re the net income or whether they’re 
the retained earnings — all of these funds have been declared as 
revenue already in this fiscal year. 
 
You are going to make a transfer, and there’s going to be 405, if 
my numbers are correct, 405 million in the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. Now suppose next year you needed to transfer some 
money back from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. You would 
now, by your answer, you’re going to again call that revenue to 
the General Revenue Fund. So I see that as two indications that 
that has become revenue twice, this year and again whenever 
you transfer it back. Is that not accurate? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well that is accurate, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

It’s true that it would be recorded as revenue twice, but you 
must remember that you’re dealing with two separate fiscal 
years. In the first year the member referred to, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, that is money being paid from the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority fund to the General Revenue Fund. 
That’s recorded as revenue. 
 
But the second recording as revenue occurs in a subsequent 
fiscal year in the question that the member posed. So the only 
proper way to do that is to have two recordings of revenue 
because you’re dealing with two separate fiscal years. So there 
is no other way to record the revenue other than reporting it in 
each year so that the matter can be fully and properly disclosed 
to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy 
Chair. To the Minister, I’m looking at a document that was 
released by the Manitoba government, and I’m sure your staff 
have had the opportunity to look at this. This is a summary of 
the changes proposed by the Finance minister of the province of 
Manitoba, Mr. Greg Selinger. 
 
And Manitoba, as I understand, has had a Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund for a number of years, and there have been a lot of 
concerns raised by the Provincial Auditor of Manitoba about the 
fund. And I’d just like to read a couple of quick paragraphs to 
you, Mr. Minister, and see what your response would be. It says 
this: 
 

For many years, it was the government’s practice to double 
count funds in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund as revenue. 
First they were counted in the year they were placed in the 
fund; then they were counted a second time when 
withdrawn from the fund to balance an operating account 
shortfall. This practice was out of step with generally 
accepted accounting principles. 
 

Further paragraph says: 
 

To address the problem, the proposed legislation would 
end the practice of classifying transfers from the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund as revenues. This change is in keeping 
with recommendations made by the Provincial Auditor 
over many years. 
 

And his final comment is that from . . . this is a direct quote 
from Mr. Selinger, the minister, he says: 
 

Counting FSF (in other words the fiscal stabilization fund) 
withdrawals as inter-fund transfers is an important step for 
financial accountability and transparency. 

 
So the reason for the questions that I’m leading to, Mr. 
Minister, over the last few minutes, has been that the Provincial 
Auditor of Manitoba recognized this double-recording as 
revenue of funds. And what he suggested, I think, over the last 
number of years to the governments of Manitoba and to the 
Finance minister, is that there shouldn’t . . . this shouldn’t be, 
we should not be following this type of practice in Manitoba. 
 
And as I see your Bill, and I see the set-up that the Minister of 
Finance in Manitoba has reacted to, it’s exactly the same thing. 
And I’m wondering if we’re not going to have, a year or two or 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2235 

three down the road, the Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan 
saying the exact same things about the fund that you are 
creating, and then we’ll have to make the changes. If that is 
accurate wouldn’t it be more appropriate to make those changes 
now by way of an amendment to ensure that we’re not calling it 
revenue twice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — There is a difference between Manitoba 
and Saskatchewan in this respect, I think, and that is that 
Manitoba is moving toward having not just their General 
Revenue Fund statement but also a summary financial 
statement. And Saskatchewan has had a summary financial 
statement since the early 1990’s. 
 
And the difference is that I think the member, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, is correct with respect to the observations that the 
Provincial Auditor might make in Saskatchewan consistent with 
what has been said by the Provincial Auditor in Manitoba. But 
that criticism by the Provincial Auditor would not apply with 
respect to disclosure in the summary financial statement. And 
so the officials advised me that, because we have the summary 
financial statement that we have, that the matter would be fully 
disclosed in answer to the criticism of the Provincial Auditor in 
the summary financial statement which may not be true in the 
province of Manitoba. 
 
That doesn’t mean to say that the Provincial Auditor would not 
have the same criticism with respect to the treatment of the 
matter in the General Revenue Fund statement, but the 
Provincial Auditor in Saskatchewan would be able to give a 
clean bill of health to the summary financial statement 
notwithstanding that kind of objection. 
 
And I would add this, that I believe that the — I don’t want to 
speak for the Provincial Auditor although I did have a 
discussion with the Acting Provincial Auditor with respect to 
this Bill — and I don’t believe that this Bill would necessarily 
answer every criticism that the Provincial Auditor or his 
officers might want to levy with respect to fiscal stabilization. 
 
But I think that the Provincial Auditor’s office would probably 
view it as a step in the right direction. And they probably would 
have criticism or suggestions in the future for how to improve 
fiscal stabilization. 
 
But it doesn’t take away from the point that I think they would 
regard this as improvement over what we have now. And I 
think that’s the important point. 
 
Could it be improved upon in the future? Perhaps. And we need 
to look at that. Is it an improvement over what we have now? I 
think definitely it is. And I think from my conversations with 
the Provincial Auditor they would see it as an improvement. 
 
But in specific answer to the question, the difference between 
Manitoba and Saskatchewan is that our summary financial 
statements fully disclose all of the revenues and expenditures 
are not qualified by the Provincial Auditor. And the same would 
apply with respect to treatment of this matter. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, my final question is connected 
to the paragraph that I read to you, 
 

Mr. Minister, where I still have difficulty understanding the 
suggestion for Manitoba that using or calling the transfer from 
the stabilization fund to the revenue fund as a revenue is not 
within . . . it says here, that it is not . . . it is out of step with 
generally accepted accounting principles. Okay, it’s not the 
auditor raising a concern. 
 
And I’m wondering if that is indeed true. If the suggestion by 
accountants in all situations, whether they’re Saskatchewan or 
Manitoba or wherever, if the accountants are suggesting that 
this is out of step — that you would call it revenue twice — if 
that’s true, then will we be forced to make some changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised, Mr. Deputy Chair, by the 
officials that the problem the member refers to, raised by the 
Provincial Auditor in Manitoba, would be corrected in the 
summary of financial statements that we have in Saskatchewan; 
that that objection would not apply to the summary of financial 
statement that we have in Saskatchewan and that the Provincial 
Auditor would find the treatment acceptable notwithstanding 
the criticism with respect to the General Revenue Fund 
statement. 
 
And I won’t repeat my previous answer, but I’m advised that 
what corrects it in Saskatchewan is the summary financial 
statement. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy 
Chair. To the minister, I guess we’ll look forward to the first 
opportunity that the auditor has to analyze the fund and to see 
how it’s been set up and whether it works within those 
principles. And I want to thank you and your officials for the 
answers this evening. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like to 
thank the members of the official opposition for their 
co-operation with respect to the Bill and their questions. And 
I’d also like to thank the officials from the Department of 
Finance for their assistance not only throughout the year but 
also today and this evening with respect to this Bill. And with 
that I’d like to move that we report this Bill without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. And with that I would move the committee rise and 
report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Land Titles Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
55 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 



2236 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

Bill No. 56 — The Land Titles Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 apportant des modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Land Titles Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
56 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Land Surveys Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
57 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Condominium Property 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
58 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 64 — The Fiscal Stabilization Fund Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(2045) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Fiscal Stabilization Transfer 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
Vote 71 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the Minister of Finance 
to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. They are the 
same officials I had with me earlier. Dr. Paul Boothe, the 
deputy minister of Finance; Mr. Terry Paton, who is the 
Provincial Comptroller; and, Ms. Joanne Brockman, who is the 
director of the economic and fiscal policy branch of the 
Department of Finance. 
 
Subvote (FS01) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, 
Mr. Minister, and good evening to your officials. Once again I’m 
looking forward to clarifying some of these points. I didn’t ask any 
of these in an earlier committee because I think they can be 
handled here just as well. 
 
Just for clarification, Mr. Minister, when we’re talking about the 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund, we’re setting up a new fund here, you’re 
transferring money into this fund. And in fact from our earlier 
conversation there isn’t going to be an actual fund set aside. I think 
the fund is in name only and it becomes then a budgetary or an 
accounting item. Can you clarify that again for me please, for the 
record? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Chair, what the member 
says is exactly correct. When we have excess funds available in 
the Government of Saskatchewan we do not keep them separate. 
We actually use them and we create in effect an account payable 
of the General Revenue Fund if it draws on the fund and an 
account receivable of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Which in 
effect is the same as if I deposit my money in the bank, the bank 
doesn’t necessarily have the money sitting there for me but I have 
an account receivable from the bank, they owe me the money. 
And the bank has an account payable, they owe me the money. 
 
One might wonder well why don’t we just keep the money 
separate. The reason is that if we keep the money separate we 
would then have to go out and borrow money and pay interest in 
order to run the government. What we do instead is use the money 
that we have, void the payment of interest and that way we save 
the taxpayers of the province some interest payments. So it works 
out to the benefit of the taxpayers. And I hope I’ve explained that 
adequately for the member. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you. That 
explanation is very similar, of course, to the one that we talked 
about earlier. 
 
The question I would have then and I’m really going back to the 
Bill that we had just passed and for clarification. But it talks about 
establishing this fund and amounts can be transferred in. 
Transferred means it’s put in there in a budgetary or an accounting 
manner I assume. But when we get down further into the Bill 
where it talked about assets of the fund may be invested. Here 
we’re talking about finite amounts of money because we’re 
talking about investments. 
 
And I’d like to get a clarification as to what is meant then by 
investing funds that are only there in a budgetary sense and the 
earnings on these investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The investment of the fund would be an 
investment in the General Revenue Fund. The intent of the 
legislation is to say that it would be invested in the General 
Revenue Fund. In other words, it would be made available for use 
by government to meet the day-to-day operations of government. 
 
And I might say that this is considered by all large organizations, 
whether our government or any other large organization, to be 
proper cash management. That if you have a cash fund, that that 
cash will be used as opposed to just sitting there, and you will 
try to minimize your interest charges. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The word 
“invested” maybe causes a bit of a problem there, but in the 
next part of that, 6(2), “any interest or other earnings” — and 
I’m not sure what is meant by other earnings on these 
investments. In other words, we’re talking about a specific 
amount of money again that goes into the general revenue. Well 
if you put the money into . . . or use it in the General Revenue 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2237 

Fund, and apparently it must earn an interest; otherwise it 
wouldn’t be talking about depositing this interest or other 
earnings in General Revenue Fund. That’s the part that’s 
confusing for me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised by the officials of the 
Department of Finance that the lawyers in the Department of 
Justice have advised that the section should be worded this way 
to clarify that if there is any interest or earnings of the fund that 
those would have to be paid into the General Revenue Fund. 
 
But I’m also advised, Mr. Deputy Chair, that the expectation is 
that there won’t be any interest or earnings of the fund because 
those funds will be made available to the General Revenue 
Fund. However, the lawyers for . . . so that there’s no 
misunderstanding by anybody, the lawyers have advised that 
the section should be drafted this way to specify that really the 
only money that this fund will have is money that will be paid 
from the General Revenue Fund into the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. And the intent of the section is to say that’s the only 
money that fund is entitled to. If there’s any interest, if they 
tried to earn any interest — which they shouldn’t be doing — or 
if they had any earnings, that has to be credited to the General 
Revenue Fund. And that’s the intent of the section, that it just 
won’t become an issue. 
 
And I’m advised that when I ask, well, we’re not anticipating 
any interest or earnings, so why are we worrying about it, that 
the lawyers, being lawyers, say, well just to ensure that it 
doesn’t have any money other than the money that’s 
appropriated by the General Revenue Fund and budgeted for 
and announced in the budget. Anything they have has to be 
returned to the General Revenue Fund. That’s the intent of that 
section. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair, in all 
deference to lawyers, it’s certainly baffling to somebody like 
myself that hasn’t had that kind of experience. Again, going 
back to my colleague’s earlier comment, a transfer from one 
fund to another would in my view have been much more simple 
to understand, maybe to execute as well. 
 
Let me proceed from there, Mr. Minister, just to try to establish 
or clarify some of the things about this particular fund. I noticed 
in this year we're talking about the establishment of $405 
million in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. And I noticed from the 
general statement of revenue in the budget, and I’m looking at 
page 12, that transfers from these Crown equities . . . There’s 
two items — transfers from the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority, net income; Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority, retained earnings. One is 310 million and 
the other one is 695 million. Is it my understanding, then, that 
the transfers from those two entries, Liquor and Gaming 
Authority, about $1 million, part of it is going to be going into 
the General Revenue Fund per se and 405 million is going to be 
assigned — is that the right word? — assigned to the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, all of the money in the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority fund will be paid into the General Revenue 
Fund, and $405 million will be paid into the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. And in the future, all monies received by the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority will be paid into the General Revenue Fund, 

which will be an improvement in accountability in the sense 
that the money simply goes now from liquor and gaming into 
the General Revenue Fund. Then the amount of money you set 
aside for Fiscal Stabilization will be as approved by the 
Legislative Assembly in accordance with the plan that will be 
set out in the budget. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, just for clarification you said 
all the money from the Liquor and Gaming Authority would go 
into the General Revenue Fund. Are we talking about the net 
amount of money or all the money as you have indicated . . . 
just the profits from the liquor and gaming? When you referred 
to all the money, it’s a bit confusing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — On an annual basis it would be just the 
profits from liquor and gaming that would be paid into the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, can you tell 
me why, when we were earlier on in our session we were 
looking for money that we may be able to suggest go to help 
farmers or whatever the case, there was an indication that there 
was not that kind of money available. And yet at this budget we 
see there’s a retained earnings of $695 million. That seems to 
be money that was in that fund but not identified. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Chair. The answer is with 
respect to the $310 million, the current year revenue. You have 
to bear in mind, Mr. Deputy Chair, the member has to bear in 
mind that we’ve always taken that into revenue on an annual 
basis, so that’s nothing unusual or new. The question has been: 
with respect to the retained earnings, how much do you draw 
down? 
 
So you’re really only talking about the retained earnings, which 
are the $695 million, I think it was, and that’s a lot of money for 
sure. But I would refer the member to page 50 of the budget 
address book and answer it simply this way, that the revenue for 
this year is $6.4 billion basically. The expenditure will be $5.3 
billion. And that leaves an operating surplus of approximately 
$1.09 billion. So there is a surplus there. But of that, we have to 
service the public debt, that is, paying interest on the public 
debt which this year will be $677 million. 
 
So you look at your revenue, 6.4 billion, your expenditure, 5.3 
billion. You have a surplus of 1.1 billion, but you’re paying 
$700 million servicing the debt. And that leaves you with about 
$414 million. That’s all we have left after we pay the 
government expenditures and servicing the debt. We’ve set 
$405 million aside. It leaves us with a surplus of $9 million. 
 
So my answer is the current year revenue into the liquor and 
gaming fund, that’s already accounted for each and every year. 
There’s nothing new about that. 
 
(2100) 
 
The surpluses . . . or the retained earnings, I should say, is being 
drawn in as part of the revenue. It results in an operating 
surplus. But once you pay the interest on the debt and pay for 
the expenditures that are included in the budget which have to 
be approved by the legislature, then all you have left is the 



2238 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

amount we’re putting into the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
There’s no money that’s gone missing or available for 
expenditure. It’s all completely accounted for, down to the last 
dollar. And everything, all the money we have, is described in 
the budget, in the Estimates. It’s all going somewhere, subject 
to approval by the Legislative Assembly. There’s no slush fund. 
There’s no money available, other than we believe we should 
set $405 million aside as a stabilization fund so that the people 
of the province have something in the bank, in effect. We think 
that something should be left in the bank. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I noticed on page 
12, going back to the general statement of revenue, that there 
was going to be an estimated transfer in 1999-2000 of 295 
million and more. But then the forecast was for no transfers 
until we get to the estimated 2000-2001 of the 310 that we’re 
talking about. 
 
It would seem to me that the 310 has come from somewhere 
that I’m having difficulty putting my finger on. Could you just 
clarify that again please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer is that we, Mr. Deputy Chair, 
we got higher than anticipated revenues last year largely 
because of the higher than expected oil prices. That was one 
factor. Also higher than expected tax payments from the federal 
government with respect to income taxes. And higher than 
expected federal transfers. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. 
Minister. Just a couple more questions if I could then and 
mainly again for clarification. 
 
This particular fund has been set aside for fiscal stabilization. I 
think you said 5 per cent would be on an ongoing basis — about 
250, $270 million. After this budget there’ll be 405, so I’m 
anticipating that we won’t have to see an addition to this fund in 
the coming years if it’s not drawn down. Have I got that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well that’s exactly right, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I should note that in the budget document, page 51, we 
note that the Centenary Capital Fund, or the Centenary Fund as 
it’s now called, will be drawn down $30 million a year in each 
of the three years subsequent to this fiscal year. So that’s $90 
million. And then next year, $25 million will be used to pay for 
the second year of property tax relief for farmers. 
 
But beyond that, that will leave us with approximately 5 per 
cent of estimated revenue and the money will be there. That 
money’s there if we need to draw it down because of an 
unanticipated event. Then we’ll have to replenish the fund. If 
we don’t need to, then that money will simply be there: next 
year we won’t have to add to the fund. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, we have this fund that this is 
there. I guess you’d call it protected money in that fund. It’s a 
budgetary item that’s out there. The money however is being 
utilized, as you explained earlier, for day-to-day operations that 
are costing us interest on an ongoing basis. 
 
My question I guess is, why was there . . . why 400 million set 

aside even though the money is still being used? You’ve 
actually protected that budgetary item against other items that 
could have used a larger budget, I’m sure. And I’m thinking 
particularly of highways. I’m thinking particularly of health 
care, maybe even education. Those budgetary items could’ve 
gone there. Even if you had protected 250 million, there’s still 
that $150 million that could’ve been allocated to a budget in 
another area. 
 
At the same time, local health boards are running deficits, as 
you know, and municipal governments are struggling to keep 
their equipment and their expenses in line. That’s a bit of a 
problem for me when I see that amount of money budgeted and 
set aside when it maybe could’ve been utilized for things that 
are so desperately needed right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the answer to the 
question is that our feeling was that we had more revenue last 
year than we had anticipated, but we could not guarantee to the 
people of the province that we would have that level of revenue 
each and every year thereafter. So some of it we considered to 
be one-time money that we would have this year, but not 
necessarily next year. 
 
Therefore given the fact that the revenues of Saskatchewan are 
fairly volatile because we’re dependent in part on oil and in part 
a large part on farm products, we felt it was best to not assume 
that we would have that money each and every year when the 
advice we have from our officials is that we won’t have it. And 
so we thought it would be better to put that into expenses that 
were not of an ongoing nature, and so we created the Centenary 
Fund and the two-year program for property tax relief for 
farmers. And that’s the reason that we didn’t feel that we’d have 
that level of revenue each and every year. 
 
And we’re trying to really protect the taxpayers from a situation 
where we might go into deficit or debt or have to increase taxes; 
therefore we thought we should save some of that money in the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund as I’ve described. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
I’m going to, if I could, I’m going to defer to my colleague 
from Canora-Pelly. But I would like to thank, before I do, I’d 
like to thank you, Mr. Minister, and your officials for helping us 
here. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I’d like you to clarify a couple of things, and I’m 
referring to page number 12 of your budgetary statement when 
you talk about the transfers from Crown entities. And you’ve 
indicated that your officials have told you that next year there 
will not be the sources of revenue that you described — and 
rightfully so because, as you’ve indicated, you are transferring 
the entire retained earnings of the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority, you’re transferring all of that out of the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority into the General Revenue Fund. And we see 
a figure of 695 million. 
 
You also have indicated that the net income for this year of 310 
million . . . And I think that sort of contradicts what you said at 
the very beginning, Mr. Minister, when you said that each and 
every year we transfer the income from the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority, when in fact last year, for the fiscal year ’99-2000, 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2239 

none of the net income of the Liquor and Gaming Authority 
was transferred. Is that accurate, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s true, Mr. Deputy Chair, that we did 
not transfer the income last year. But it is the officials’ opinion 
that that income will have to be transferred this year and every 
year hereafter. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy 
Chair. We see as indicated there by those two numbers, that’s a 
billion dollars worth of revenue that the General Revenue Fund 
has acquired from the Liquor and Gaming Authority. And I 
guess what we need to look at, if we’re going to look at future 
years when you talk about whether or not the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund will require any further monies, I look back 
at last year’s and I see that there’s a dividend transfer of 125 
million and that there were other enterprises and other funds of 
28 million. So we saw $153 million worth of revenue for last 
year. This year, we see $1.2 billion. 
 
And of course that revenue is not going to be the same but if we 
look at the dividend fund that you’re using this year, the 
dividend transfer that you’re using of 150 million, and 
projected, I understand, for next year . . . I’m sure you’re 
projecting at least 300 million of revenue from the net income 
of the Liquor and Gaming Authority each and every year. So 
will not this fund, no matter what happens, if you just keep the 
transfer from CIC, the dividend transfer of 150 million, will you 
not see at least a half a billion dollars in this revenue source 
each and every year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I think it’s fair to say, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, that yes, we have seen approximately $300 million a year 
from Liquor and Gaming to the General Revenue Fund and I 
think that will continue. And we see a dividend of about $150 
million from the Crown Investments Corporation. So that’s a 
total of about $450 million. 
 
That is revenue that comes to the General Revenue Fund. It’s 
reported in the documents. That’s why the member knows 
about it. It’s there; it’s transparent. That money comes into the 
budget. 
 
I think the question the member is asking is, well therefore isn’t 
there a whole bunch of money that we could use to spend on 
things that presumably we’re not spending on it now. And I 
would say to the member, well there’s not just $450 million or 
half a billion dollars of income coming into the province of 
Saskatchewan. There’s in fact $5.6 billion a year. And where’s 
it going? 
 
Well it’s going to the things that are disclosed in the budget 
which we all know about. If the question is, is there a whole 
bunch of money sitting out there unaccounted for that we can 
do other things with? I’m very sorry to report to the member 
that no there isn’t because nobody would be happier than me if 
there were hundreds of millions of dollars available to do other 
things because believe me, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d like to have 
some extra money. 
 
But unfortunately the money is accounted for. The money is 
disclosed in the summary of financial statements which are 
audited by the Provincial Auditor. There isn’t hundreds of 

millions of dollars out there unaccounted for that we can do 
other things with. I wish it were so, but unfortunately in the real 
world it is not so. 
 
Yes, there’s revenue coming into the province of Saskatchewan. 
There are things that we do with that revenue — 2 billion for 
health care, 250 million for highways, so on and so on. It’s all 
accounted for. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I was not suggesting that it was not accounted for. Mr. 
Minister, my questions were around you clarifying, and I think 
you did very well in clarifying, the fact that in the Crown 
entities transfers each and every year we will probably see at 
least a half a billion dollars. And I think you left the impression 
with the people of Saskatchewan and with the official 
opposition that indeed there wouldn’t be any additional monies 
coming into this fund because everything had been transferred 
out. 
 
And I think you’ve clarified that we’ll be seeing at least a half a 
billion dollars if the Liquor and Gaming Authority continues to 
produce the revenue that it does and $150 million as a dividend 
from CIC and the other fund I’m assuming that it will range 
around $38 million. 
 
So we do see a half a billion dollars that will be there and 
you’re indicating that, of course, that’s revenue that you’re 
going to be held accountable for and it will be used to fund all 
of the expenses that you have. And I thank you for that 
response. 
 
Subvote (FS01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 71 agreed to. 
 
(2115) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
And with me tonight for the estimates are my officials from 
Agriculture and Food. Seated here with me, Ernie Spencer, 
acting deputy minister of Ag and Food; Susie Miller, assistant 
deputy minister; Stan Benjamin, executive director, planning 
and development; Hal Cushon, director of policy program 
development; Jack Zepp, director of administrative services 
branch; and Ross Johnson, manager of operational services. 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I have a 
couple of questions concerning production of organic milk in 
the province. 
 
I have forwarded to you a couple of written questions and they 
were answered that your department had looked into the 
production of organic milk and they were interested . . . or they 
had looked into the program that was offered in BC (British 
Columbia). And is that a possibility in our province? 
 



2240 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, there is potential for organic 
milk my officials tell me. It would have to come under the Milk 
Control Board though, the same as any other milk production so 
you’d have to have quota. But certainly if there is a demand for 
organic milk production, if you have producers who are 
interested, they should contact us and we would help them 
through the hoops as how to go about the process. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, yes I’m aware that they have to have access to quota 
and apparently there is no quota available right now in the 
province. 
 
The BC Agriculture department told me they accessed a special 
quota pool from the federal government for specialty products 
and so that they accessed this pool — they have that in BC — 
and organic producers then purchase the milk from that pool. 
And it’s done differently, it’s marketed a little bit differently. 
 
So yes, I have a number of organic producers and an organic 
processor who is interested in this and they would be more than 
happy to meet with your department. 
 
The one other question that I have in the organic line, because 
it’s definitely an upcoming market, it’s a growing market. There 
has been articles and different literature circulating that the 
Canadian Wheat Board would like to take control of the organic 
market of grains and herbs and spices. 
 
Does your government condone this or would they be in favour 
of the Wheat Board having control of the organic market? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Just on the issue of organic grains, 
first of all the Wheat Board would have no jurisdiction or 
authorization over herbs and spices of any kind, including 
organic. And it’s my understanding they don’t have an interest 
in being involved in that area. 
 
In fact as it would relate to organic grains under their 
jurisdiction they are very interested in working with producers 
and being flexible in terms of their production as well. 
 
But the member’s absolutely right, organic consumption in the 
United States is growing somewhere between 15 and 30 per 
cent a year. So there is a huge demand and I think quite a huge 
opportunity for producers to look at that area. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, and Mr. 
Minister, basically I would like to know though what your 
government stand is in . . . are you in favour of the Wheat 
Board having control over that? Or do you feel it should be 
marketed through some other method through the farmers or 
through organic boards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Any changes to the Wheat Board 
that would extend the grains under the jurisdiction of the Wheat 
Board would have to be at the producers’ request. So in my 
opinion obviously is clear that I support the jurisdiction of the 
Canadian Wheat Board as it now exists, but any expansion 
potential of the Wheat Board certainly would have to come at 
the request of the producers of that commodity. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Minister, is there any funding, grants, or 

assistance to aid farmers who wish to farm organically? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, we don’t have grants as such 
but the extension services in agriculture certainly is there to 
help producers, and also I guess as with other producers who 
were involved with research and development and trade policy. 
So we do those three categories but not direct grants for any 
organic production. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. For this 
fiscal year do you have any . . . set aside any funding for 
organic research? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well there’s two areas that we’re 
looking at this year. One is through the ADF (Agriculture 
Development Fund) program, some research money for organic. 
I think over this year and next, probably in the area of 
$100,000. It’s not a lot of money but it’s something. 
 
And we’re also looking at crop insurance being able to 
differentiate organic versus non-organic as it would apply to 
grains and oil seeds under the crop insurance program. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, do you have . . . Is there any money in, I think it’s 
called Cangro Processors Ltd. from the Saskatchewan 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Not through our department. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I have one 
question from my constituent. He wants to know: does the 
government provide education to warn farmers and workers of 
the dangers of pesticide spraying? He wants to know if there’s 
any money set aside this year or do you have any programs like 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, within the Department of 
Agriculture there are training programs for pesticide 
applicators. That would be for commercial applicators but any 
individual farmer could come to those sessions as well. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ve had some calls 
from my office too, people interested in user fees. Could you 
supply me a list of all the user fees related to Agriculture 
through your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — We can supply it again but there 
was a written question earlier that asked — I think it was a 
written question — where we gave all of the increases and those 
that stayed the same. But I can provide that for you because I 
think I’ve got it in my office in my file. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Minister, just one more question. The province 
had appointed a special advisor in Agriculture. Is that through 
your department? Is he funded through yours? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, the individual is on staff but 
it’s through the Department of Finance, not through 
Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Minister, I believe that’s all the questions I 
have for now. 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2241 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and 
welcome to your officials. We have seen in the last few years, a 
number of years, an escalation in the number of . . . a 
substantial expansion in the hog numbers in this province. And 
we are asking on behalf of some folks that have questions in 
this area about the expansion of the hog industry as to what 
kinds of checks and balances are in place to ensure that runoff 
and air quality and manure applications and all of those types of 
things are handled in a proper fashion. So on behalf of those 
folks, I would want to ask you some questions about that, Mr. 
Minister. Primarily it’s in the Good Spirit Lake Provincial Park 
area that people are concerned, the upper Assiniboine River 
basin. 
 
I understand that Big Sky Farms has received approval to build 
three very large hog barns in the Rama area, in the RM of 
Invermay. This is located in the upper Assiniboine River basin. 
The water from the site areas drains into the Good Spirit Lake 
Provincial Park. The people of the area are requesting that an 
environmental impact study be done before the project 
commences. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that what the plans are or could you ensure or 
give the people of that area some degree of comfort in knowing 
that any proposed facilities in that area will be handled in a 
proper environmental fashion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think that’s a very, very important 
question and we have had a number of individuals who have 
expressed interest, and in some cases concern, about the 
proposal that has been developed for that particular intensive 
livestock facility being built in that area. But what I can say is 
that in the province of Saskatchewan, as you would be aware 
because you’ve been very much involved in the debate around 
this, that we have extensive approval process, as strict or more 
strict I would argue than anywhere else in the world as it would 
relate to hog production. 
 
We also have one of the lowest levels of hog production per 
acre of land than anywhere else in Canada or for that matter in 
North America. So we do not have the problems that might 
exist in countries like Denmark or the Netherlands where in a 
very, very small confined area they have many millions of hog 
production. We have, I think, 44 per cent of Canada’s cultivated 
land and only about 1.2 million hogs at the present time. 
 
And so when you consider the availability we have for injection 
. . . and much of the liquid hog manure is now injected into the 
soil so the washing or runoff problem that might have existed at 
one time simply isn’t there any more. So we very, very 
carefully monitor the watersheds and encourage the farmers to 
be very careful in how they spread, and we monitor how that 
takes place. 
 
So we are very, very comfortable that the laws we have in place 
will protect the watersheds and individual farmers and some of 
our very priceless recreation areas. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Some of these 
questions are of a fairly specific nature, and for that reason I 
would understand if you weren’t able to answer them. But I 

would ask that you and your department commit to being able 
to provide written answers to the questions, with regard to these 
very specific types of questions. I’ll send them across after 
we’ve concluded here this evening. 
 
But in most prairie ecosystems, phosphorus is considered the 
key factor in the growth of algae, including the toxic blue-green 
algae which could potentially affect Good Spirit Lake. If there 
were any kinds of adverse effects in the area or with respect to 
local farm water supply situations for personal or for farm use, 
who is responsible for any kind of damages or compensation in 
that respect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Maybe what I would suggest to the 
member opposite, that if he would just read all of the questions 
and then I would make a commitment to get the answers and 
get back to him. As he says, some of the issues are technical. I 
can get briefed here by my officials, but it would certainly save 
a fair bit of time of the committee if he would read the 
questions into the record, and then I would make a commitment 
within the next — let’s say — 48 hours, to get the response 
back to you. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Fine, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
 
What proactive measures to prevent a Walkerton-type disaster 
in this province are taking place with respect to the 
contamination of well water, dugouts, and/or lakes and river 
systems? 
 
Is the rate of manure application being adapted for our growing 
season? 
 
Who will be liable for compensation of private land and any 
damage to the water supply? 
 
Those are the questions that people had in this area. 
 
We also have had some questions coming in with respect to the 
production of eggs and chickens and broilers in the province. 
And I would . . . they’re quite detailed and lengthy, Mr. 
Minister, so rather than read through them to you and to the 
Assembly, I would ask that you and your department look these 
over and provide detail with respect to those as well. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, the other questions we had were 
surrounding air quality. Is your department, when it comes to 
confinement of livestock operations, looking at any kind of new 
technology in terms of the waste air coming from those 
facilities? That seems to be an area of concern that people have 
when it comes to intensive livestock operations in the relatively 
. . . in areas where people may be living close by. I certainly am 
aware that there are regulations in terms of distance and those 
kinds of things. 
 
But what work is going on with respect to air quality problems 
that people are experiencing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — There is two jurisdictions that are 
involved here. If it’s outside of the barns, air quality that may 
be emitted from the barns or from animal waste in an area 
would be monitored and the responsibility of SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management). 



2242 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

Inside the barns though, where workers are involved or the 
actual operator of the barn, the Department of Agriculture is 
now starting to do some experimenting and testing and making 
sure that we know the air quality within the barns. 
 
Although, this is a fairly new project, but we are ahead of other 
jurisdictions in Canada or at least on the cutting edge of that 
research to make sure that we have an understanding of — 
unlike when the old barns were there it meant maybe an hour or 
two a day in a barn — now we have people spending eight 
hours a day or a shift in a barn. It’s very important to know 
about the air quality within the facility. So we are doing some 
experimenting and testing of that and that is the responsibility 
of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think every one I’m 
sure province-wide is of the view that we want to see, at least 
we are on this side anyway, in favour of development and 
expanding our economy in Saskatchewan. However we have 
concerns and I think they are valid concerns that folks raise in 
this area of air quality, waste water problems, manure 
applications, all of those kinds of types of concerns that come 
forward with respect to any increase in livestock numbers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And in order to ensure that they are being handled properly, air 
quality issues and all of those types of concerns, we want to 
ensure and we want your commitment from your department 
that these concerns that people have will be dealt with in a very 
forthright manner to ensure people all over the province that 
this is being handled in a proper fashion. 
 
The concerns that people have are, I think, real in many ways. 
They have certain concerns about air quality that are real. They 
have concerns about runoff that are very real. No one wants to 
see the kinds of problems that they’re having in other 
jurisdictions right now. And to ensure that that doesn’t happen, 
I think we all have a responsibility to . . . and your department 
obviously has a responsibility to play a role in that. So we want 
to ensure that that’s handled properly, Mr. Minister. 
 
The last area of questions that we have for this evening are in 
the area of the AIDA (Agriculture Income Disaster Assistance) 
program, Mr. Minister. We have had all kinds of contact with 
farmers from across the province with respect to the program. 
Where it is going, what kind of changes are being made, what is 
happening with respect to the negative margins situation, what 
is happening in terms of the program right now, whether or not 
farmers are receiving a ’99 AIDA benefits — we’ve heard all 
kinds of rumours whether your department is actually signed on 
for ’99 or not and whether cheques are being cut or that sort of 
thing. 
 
When producers phone into the program, they’re getting very 
conflicting information. On one hand, we are being told that the 
process is taking place as it should. On the other hand, farmers 
when they phone in to see about the progress of their 
application are being told that Saskatchewan’s dragging its feet 
in this area. So perhaps you can help us with this, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Just going back to the issue that you 
raised about the air quality in hog barns, I just wanted to 
mention too that the prairie swine centre, which is a very 

excellent barn and facility which does research in hog 
production, intensive hog production near Saskatoon, is doing 
some very excellent research on air quality in hog barns. And it 
might be worth your while if you’re in that area sometime to 
just go and have a look because there’s a lot of good work being 
done. 
 
In the area of AIDA, it’s fair to say that the program, as it 
related to the 1998 program which was money then paid out in 
1999, there were huge and difficult problems. And in that year I 
think about $147 million were paid out to Saskatchewan 
farmers. Our anticipation is for 1999 program, which is now 
being applied for and paid out. 
 
The application form, as I understand, although I haven’t had a 
personal chance to look at it, but is simplified in many ways. 
The federal minister who administers this program — I believe 
out of Winnipeg — is guaranteeing or insisting that the 
turnaround time will be much quicker than last year. And the 
amount being paid up has gone up from 147 million to 
Saskatchewan to 300 million. So my anticipation is that it will 
be a better program in 1999 or that money that’s being paid out 
this year than it was last year. 
 
But we are not very satisfied with the way the program has been 
administered in the past. It’s taken too long. There have been 
too many mistakes made. And you will know as well as I that 
people waited up to five months to be told that they weren’t 
eligible for the program. And this only adds to the sentiment 
that many farmers have of incompetence within the program. 
When you say, well why didn’t you look at it one day and see 
that we weren’t eligible and call us back and tell us within a 
week that we weren’t eligible? What were your people doing in 
the federal administration looking at these forms for five 
months before they made up their minds that we weren’t 
eligible? So there were some serious, serious programs. 
 
I know that I just signed off a lot of letters to my staff in Crop 
Insurance thanking them for their program, the CSAP 
(Canada-Saskatchewan Adjustment Program) which they were 
responsible for which saw the turnaround time from the time an 
application came in until the cheques were in the mail of four or 
five days. 
 
And I have sent a letter off to Mr. Vanclief challenging him to 
look at the way our program was administered here and asking 
him to apply some of the technologies that we use in Crop 
Insurance of getting the forms processed in AIDA. 
 
Now I don’t know whether they will take us up on that or not 
but I think it’s totally unacceptable that we have $300 million in 
an account to be paid out this year through AIDA and farmers 
are having to wait three or four months for the turnaround time. 
 
So we’re trying to do what we can, although, as you know, this 
program is administered by the federal government. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:42 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


