





























































Hansard: April 03, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 421 
 April 3, 2000 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Cline, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 
Romanow that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, I just rise to say thank you for 
the indulgence of the colleagues opposite and the colleagues 
around me for the small history lesson I may have given earlier 
when I was speaking. But anyway I think I have concluded 
most of my remarks on this. 
 
Suffice to say that I think it’s evident by now that my residents 
and constituents of Regina Sherwood strongly support this 
budget and I, on their behalf, will be voting in favour on their 
behalf. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to give my response to last Wednesday’s budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everywhere I went this past weekend, I heard the 
same thing — they did it again; they promised a tax cut, then 
hosed us. Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Coronation 
Park, when talking about the tax cuts, criticizes the members on 
this side, saying we should salute the tax cuts when they come. 
Does he realize that the reason we haven’t saluted them is 
because we haven’t seen any yet, and maybe won’t? 
 
This same member says, paying bills is a struggle and an 
ongoing struggle. Gee, Mr. Speaker, I wonder why. But instead 
of doing something positive to help the people out, what do 
they do? They expand taxes. 
 
Oh they brag over there about this historical budget, the tax cuts 
that are supposed to come if we give them time. But in the 
meantime they hit the citizens of this province with a 
consumption tax — things that the people of this province have 
to buy, the necessities of life. That makes this a pretty hard pill 
to swallow, Mr. Speaker, and even that pill is taxable now. Mr. 
Speaker, this is not very encouraging for labourers and the wage 
earners of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP (New Democratic Party) government 
talks about optimism. Now isn’t that ironic, or even somewhat 
of an oxymoron, a socialist talking about optimism. Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Regina Dewdney says things like 
reality is reality and people come together to overcome 
obstacles. Mr. Speaker, the people did come together last 
September 16 to overcome an obstacle, the NDP majority. Sixty 
per cent of the people of Saskatchewan voted against this 
administration, but they can’t accept reality so they had this 

shotgun wedding to gain majority status. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the leader of the so-called Liberal Party cannot get 
off scot-free here either. With a stroke of the pen he got himself 
a cabinet position in this administration, at the same time 
betraying every person who supported him and his party during 
the last election. Now he goes along with the manipulation. 
This Minister of Education states that if school divisions can’t 
meet their budgets, they can raise the school mill rates. He says 
they’ve done it in the past and he sees it as a safety valve. This 
is on the heels of RMs (rural municipalities) all over the 
province holding tax revolt meetings because the ratepayers 
cannot stand any more taxes. Mr. Minister, aren’t you listening? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has essentially frozen the health 
care budget. We have the longest waiting lists and we certainly 
aren’t seeing much in the way of solving this problem and 
others. And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m talking about health care I 
would like my colleague, the member from Canora-Pelly, to 
know that he is in our daily thoughts and prayers. We miss him 
and we hope he’ll be back real soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, this budget made no allowance for 
the additional police officers in this province. During the 
election the members opposite promised 200 additional police 
officers. Zap — that’s gone along with three court houses 
located in Weyburn, Humboldt, and Assiniboia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was somewhat encouraged to see the cap 
removed on the farm fuel rebate program. Unfortunately it does 
not have the impact that a reduction in the fuel tax would have. 
The property tax rebate was also encouraging although that 
feeling was short-lived. Downloading because of the education 
budget will make ratepayers no better off. And yes, Mr. 
Speaker, this time the Minister of Education can take the credit 
for that and my Liberal opponent’s plum appointment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite boast of a thriving economy 
in the oil industry and et cetera. Mr. Speaker, the people of this 
province remember the NDP government of the 1970s under the 
leadership of Allan Blakeney that confiscated potash mines, 
shut down the oil industry, and started buying up farmland at 
inflated prices. Mr. Speaker, thank goodness they were thrown 
out before that got out of hand. But they never learned, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re at it again. But people don’t forget. They 
recognize this government’s arrogance and dictatorship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like now to mention the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund or the pick and choose fund or the fancy 
slush fund; you can call it what you want, but it’s all the same 
thing. 
 
In this former liquor and gaming fund, we learn that there’s 
$695 million sitting there. Mr. Speaker, last December the 
members on this side of the House asked that $300 million of 
that fund, which we believed to be $350 million at that time, be 
given to the farmers of this province. Mr. Speaker, in the last 
vote of the old millennium, every member of the Liberal/NDP 
coalition government voted against supporting the farmers of 
this province. 



422 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

This is nothing short of a slap in the face to every farmer in this 
province and everyone who depends on the agriculture industry 
to make a living, to be turned down, leading them to believe 
that they would be draining the rainy-day kitty, all the while 
knowing that they had over twice the amount of money 
requested just sitting there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess it’s no wonder that the members opposite 
don’t have the courage to venture out in the rural areas to attend 
any meetings regarding tax revolts. Goodness knows, there’s 
been plenty of them. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s also been 
meetings regarding the forced amalgamation of municipalities 
that they haven’t attended. But I guess I’d be a little nervous, 
too. But Mr. Garcea is bearing the brunt and kind of earning his 
$750,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one more thing I just can’t understand is why this 
government won’t relieve some of the hardship every person in 
this province is facing regarding fuel prices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal Minister of Finance has laid out a plan 
in which the federal government will match any provincial 
government 100 per cent if they reduce fuel tax. Mr. Speaker, 
for every dollar spent, it would only cost the provincial 
government 50 cents. We are asking for a 10 cent a litre 
reduction, 5 per cent being provincial responsibility. What a 
deal. 
 
But what does this social government say? Mr. Speaker, they 
say that they wouldn’t be able to continue with road repairs if 
they cut this tax. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a hot tip for this government of 
potholes. Go out into the rural area, travel some of the 
highways. The roads are a disgrace. So here you are, Mr. 
Speaker, paying 15 cents per litre fuel tax and driving on goat 
paths. This is a disgrace and so is this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this smoke-and-mirrors budget leaves the average 
taxpayer no further off. The NDP have stated that anyone who 
can’t run this province on $4.5 billion a year doesn’t deserve to 
be government. Mr. Speaker, the projected revenue of this 
budget is $6.4 billion. So what does that tell us . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, the member over there sits 
chirping in his seat. If he’d just listen for a minute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Coronation Park also 
mentioned Regis Philbin and his show, Who Wants to Be a 
Millionaire, in his speech. Well, although the Finance minister 
looked like he might have borrowed a tie from Regis when he 
delivered the budget — and it was a nice tie — I would like to 
think that he is the host of another show, called The Shell 
Game, because that’s what this budget is, nothing more, nothing 
less than taking money out of one area and putting it into 
another. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Finance wants to play Who 
Wants to Be a Millionaire, he has one lifeline left, and that is to 
make a phone call: call the federal Minister of Finance and take 
part in this fuel tax reduction that would benefit every citizen of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask the Minister of Finance, what is 

your final answer? And with that, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support 
the budget, but I do support the amendment put forth by the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be here, 
supporting the government motion and in direct opposition to 
the Saskatchewan Party amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new budget on the year 2000 is indeed not 
only a good budget, not only a historic budget, but indeed it’s 
good for all the people in the province — from north to the 
south. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, on my commentary, I want 
to deal with a general aspect of the budget, the aspect as it 
relates to the North. And, Mr. Speaker, I will deal with the 
budget as it relates to taxation on First Nations people. 
 
On the most general comments at the beginning, I would say 
this, Mr. Speaker, as I look at the history of Saskatchewan and I 
read the history of the 1930s, in regards to this province, and I 
knew that there was about 30,000 KKK (Ku Klux Klan) 
members in this province. I knew that there was racism in this 
province, but also know that there’s been improvements, 
particularly in the last half century. 
 
People who fought for this country like my uncle used to say, I 
was proud to be a Canadian because for the first time during the 
war I could walk side by side with my fellow Canadians, and 
that he would be looked upon as acceptable. Before that he said, 
I could not walk into a restaurant with a non-Aboriginal person. 
And for me he said — and he died this year — he said that it 
was important that we had made progress from fighting side by 
side with others because when they fought for this country they 
didn’t say, did you pay tax or not. They didn’t say were you 
Metis or were you Indian. They fought for this country together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — So when I took the notion, the theme, I 
would say that we’re trying to move in this new century to a 
greater politics of inclusion for all people in this province. 
Whether we look at the North or the rural or the urban centre, 
we have to look at the politics of inclusion. 
 
As I listened to one of my members today he was using the 
Polish language and also the French language. And I’ve heard 
some Ukrainian spoken in this House, and I was very pleased 
with that because it is a respect of all peoples in this province. 
And it’s a respect of the different languages that exist in this 
world. And I think that in that sense it made me feel good to 
hear that in this legislature. So it’s this idea on respect for all 
cultures and for all peoples that is the essence of my 
commentary. 
 
In regards to the general side of the budget, I would say this: I 
looked at the capital and infrastructure needs in this province 
which was a strong topic. I am pleased to say that at the general 
level our highways budget of $250 million is the highest it’s 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 423 

ever been in the history of this province. I looked at the capital, 
the centenary capital fund of $120 million — $30 million for 
each of the next four years — to be an important aspect of this 
development and this province. It showed that — in effect that 
when we look at the bonus, as opposed to tax, debt, and 
programming — that we have listened. Some people will say 
we did not go far enough and others will say other things, but 
the fact is that we had the highest, the biggest budget there was 
in highways in this provincial history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — The other thing that is always on the 
news — and we see it from the different provinces, we see the 
problem internationally — is the issue of health. And when we 
are looking at the balanced approach again I was looking at the 
budget, and this year the budget expenditures will be $113 
million more. Again when I looked at the past, about three years 
ago it was about 95 million; there was about 200 million. By the 
time we looked at this year’s budget, it’s an important trend that 
we had set with the coalition government as we set in $113 
million — 1.97 billion for health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — When we look at the issue in relation to 
fairness, I was also very pleased with the budget because it’s 
important to look at fairness not only for all peoples but for the 
people in the greatest need, the lower-income people. I was 
pleased that the budget looked at that factor and that with the 
sales tax rebate there’ll be 285,000 people impacted. I was also 
pleased that 55,000 would be taken out of the tax rolls, another 
important first in the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — So as I looked at the politics of it . . . I 
always, when I was in the legislature, used to listen, when I was 
in opposition, the politics that divided rural and the politics of 
exclusion. And when I saw the development between . . . the 
division between the rural and the urban, I knew that you had to 
have an inclusive policy throughout. Because I looked at the 
Devine government, I knew that they completely neglected the 
North, many aspects of the rural areas, pinpointed some of the 
areas where they put in some money, but in many cases were 
very, very divisive in a lot of their political rhetoric during that 
time. 
 
(1915) 
 
And when I looked at the overall story, as I listened to the Sask 
Party members, I always used to have a tough time in regards to 
the idea of truth in the House, in the legislature when I heard 
some of the commentary. Because, you know when I listed to 
the Devine government, they would say never will we have a 
gas tax in this province. Then later on they would put in a gas 
tax because they had spent some money all over the place. But 
that type of an idea was . . . there was a lot of cynicism that was 
developed in the House. 
 
And I must say this in regards to our tax cut. Overall when you 
take the increase in the sales . . . the PST (provincial sales tax), 
and when you look at the income tax, when you listen to the 

Sask Party people from across, it looks like in fact that there 
was an increase in the taxes in this province. Completely false. 
When you subtract the amount from the tax, in regards to 
income tax which is over 400 million, on the tax in regards to 
the sales tax, the overall benefit is 260 million in the people’s 
pockets in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — So when you look at the truth, Mr. 
Speaker, that is what I’m talking about that you got to present 
the facts as a whole as you’re taking that into consideration, not 
take one tiny aspect of it and try to make that as the basis of the 
whole truth, what is only one section of it. 
 
In regards to the North I would say this: the North again, of all 
the budgets that I have seen historically, we’ve been 
progressively looking at improvements on the budget in the 
North over the years. But I must say that for the North this year 
we got the largest increase since our government took over. The 
increase in regards to the northern budget in actual dollar terms 
will be that we have moved from $242 million of expenditures 
last year to $267 million worth of expenditures. That’s a $25 
million increase to northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — So when you look at it, some Northerners 
will be asking me where are those expenditures? And I will be 
looking at that. They will now know that on the highways 
budget we will be getting a $5 million increase, from 31 million 
to $36 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — In regards to the forestry program which 
benefits all the people of the province from Prince Albert over 
to other areas in Meadow Lake as well as Hudson Bay, that 
indeed there will be an improvement as well on the SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) 
budget in regards to northern Saskatchewan on forestry to make 
sure that the roads were built and therefore development as well 
as access to the community to the tune of $5.9 million. 
 
I looked at the budget in regards to capital . . . as it relates to 
health spending, and this year it’ll be over $10 million for both 
health and education. And we will be making sure that the 
hospital, the health centre in La Loche goes up, as well as the 
one in Stony Rapids. And indeed that is very important for the 
people of northern Saskatchewan where we have hospitals 
approximately every 300 miles. And I think that is very 
important to consider. And the other thing is that when we’re 
looking at the budget on that 10 million, it will also help pay for 
the school in Pinehouse for 1.3 million out of that 10 million. 
 
So when you look at the aspect of development for the North 
and for the province, it’s been very positive. I looked at the . . . 
I mentioned the forestry side of the 5.9 million but I think that a 
lot of people will be very happy that . . . When we had the 
major fires in 1995 we had spent over $95 million. I read in our 
budget . . . and operated between 26 to 28 million. And this year 
we’re adding on a reserve fund for $50 million. And I think that 
will be very, very good in regards to northern Saskatchewan so 



424 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

that the funding is above-board and it is looked at upon in 
regards to what happens in regards to the North. Because as I 
read the predictions we maybe have — and I hope it doesn’t — 
that it may be another tough fire season. I certainly hope not but 
I think we’re protected for that anyway. 
 
As I looked at the overall aspect of development in the North, 
as I compare the health side, probably one of the strongest 
things for health is sewer and water. Many of our communities 
in the South already have sewer and water but some of the 
communities in the North still don’t have sewer and water. And 
when you look at the health costs, etc., that arise, that’s one of 
the contributors in regards to the health costs. 
 
This year we will be putting in $3 million on capital in regards 
to sewer and water in northern Saskatchewan. We will also be 
making sure that our federal partners do a cost sharing with us. 
We’re hoping that over a five-year period we can get $25 
million worth of sewer and water projects in northern 
Saskatchewan and that is a fact that we’re listening to people in 
the North because last year when the study said we needed 
about that amount of money. So I think in that sense we have 
listened not only to the people of the province but also to people 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Now for my commentary in regards to the 
First Nations and the PST. I must say that from a government 
viewpoint it was one of the more — on a personal level — it 
was one of the more difficult decisions that we had to make in 
regards to this budget. And it was basically because our 
government over the long, long term has shown great sensitivity 
in regards to developing partnerships with First Nations people 
and Metis people, etc. And that when we looked at the report, 
you know, that came down — the Vicq report which 
recommended the taxation of First Nations people in regards to 
the PST — we had a look at that and we debated the pros and 
cons and basically the ideas that come from it were such that we 
had to make sure that there was protection on the low-income 
side. 
 
I knew one thing when I listened to Sask Party members, you 
know talking about the facts about the tax. Not once in my 
political experience since I’ve been around — same with the 
Tories that were around before. I never saw one thing in their 
platform or anything in their literature or anything on Indians, 
except this: lower the tax for everybody, and tax the Indians. 
That was basically the line of the Saskatchewan Party. And I 
knew that the Saskatchewan Party would never say anything 
about doing anything for Aboriginal people in regards to 
economic development. Nothing. 
 
And I knew that they would do absolutely nothing in regards to 
education. As a matter of fact, a lot of their people would be 
doing that. There’s a big difference between our policy and 
your policy. Your policy was very simple: cut. And that’s what 
you would do. You would never do anything on the low-income 
side. You would never do anything on the rebate, and I will be 
explaining those points. 
 
I know that another bigwig chattering from across over there 
because I hit a nerve. I know that I hit a nerve because they 

know it is true. They know it is true that they will not deal with 
the economic issues and education and health and other issues. 
All they will do, when they talk about Aboriginals, is play the 
hot-button politics. Yes, you got to tax, and that’s all I heard 
from them, absolutely nothing else. 
 
When we, on our platform, deal with Aboriginal people, we 
deal with the issue on partnerships. We’ve seen the forestry 
strategy. We’ve seen that on the forestry strategy for the first 
time. We will see Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation be part of the 
forest management agreement and their partner Lac la Ronge 
Indian Band, along with Zelinsky Brothers, will partner up in 
that area of FMA (forestry management agreement). 
 
And when he looked at it, the member chirps from his seat 
when he was a Conservative from before and now he’s a Sask 
Party member. Now I’ll tell you something. In the North, when 
your government was around with the Devine government, they 
slashed the North. And they cut the spending in the North while 
they increased spending in their own areas. 
 
But I would say that, as I look at the different types of 
strategies, I would look upon the fact that we’ve been looking at 
different areas of development. We’ve seen the partnerships in 
regards to education. We’ve been able to look at the 
partnerships established over the years on education. When I 
went to university, there was only a handful of us going to 
university and there was three treaty Indians that I knew taking 
a course at the university in 1965. Now that there’s about 2,000 
that’s out there, approximately over 100 . . . 1,000 Metis, and 
also in regards to the fact that in northern Saskatchewan we 
now have over 2,000 people taking post-secondary. 
 
So I think it’s very important . . . the member, the former Tory, 
chirps from his seat and I know he’s getting a little bit worried 
that the truth is finally hitting and taking and hurting home. But 
I think that in many cases, I thought that the strategy . . . 
(inaudible interruption) . . . Well you give me a reminder. I’ll 
give you another example therefore of what the Devine 
government did. 
 
When that member from Moosomin was around with the 
Conservatives, a lot of the people at rural and urban areas got 
$300 million worth of money in regards to getting natural gas to 
their homes, and it was a big program. When I looked at that 
program when we came into office, a lot of the First Nations 
people came to see us. They said, $300 million that was spent, 
they said, do you know how many of our reserves are 
connected? They’re selling to reserves in Saskatchewan. There 
was a total of six . . . six reserves had been hooked up. 
 
I’m pleased to report at this time, Mr. Speaker, that indeed 
we’re looking at approximately 50 First Nations people that are 
connected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — The other thing is that they never did very 
much in regards to the Crowns other than try to privatize them. 
And when we looked at SaskTel in regards to the North, we put 
in improvements to make digital service available in the North 
to the tune of 29 million in our first term. Over our last term, we 
had put in 25 million to improve access to the reserves. 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 425 

And I knew that a lot of those lines didn’t have enough lines for 
the number of houses and people who wanted phones on the 
reserves, so they were unable to access the telephone service to 
deal not only with economic . . . the economic basis of the 
reserves but also to deal with the issues of culture, whether 
you’re going to the powwow or whether for the kids being at 
school. 
 
So indeed now I can say that with the access that we put in — 
there was about 35 per cent of First Nations people who had ties 
to the telephone system — I’m pleased to report now that there 
is over 60 per cent. And that has been a big improvement over 
the past few years. 
 
On the education side, as I mentioned before, this year’s budget 
is about a 4 per cent increase, is about $6.5 million now for 
SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated College), GDI (Gabriel 
Dumont Institute), SUNTEP (Saskatchewan urban native 
teacher education program), as well as NORTEP (northern 
teacher education program) in northern Saskatchewan. So 
overall I see an improvement in relationships with First Nations 
people. 
 
And I’ve received some comments in regards to the tax and I 
wanted to send this message out that in regards to all the issues 
that I have raised whether it’s in education or whether it’s in 
economic development and the ideas of partnerships — we are 
still going to continue to do that. We will still be following that 
type of action, and that indeed, you know, has been the basis of 
our policy so far, and that’s what will continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — I know that the Sask Party didn’t put any 
of that stuff on their platform. But I was dealing with an issue a 
little while ago that smacked about the same thing and that was 
with the MP Pankiw because Pankiw reflected some of the 
things that I hear from the Sask Party. Not all of them because 
you can’t stereotype all the Sask Party people because there’s a 
couple members over there that I was very pleased with in the 
past while. You know the member from Carrot River and the 
other member just north of P.A. (Prince Albert), they dealt with 
the issue of racism in this House. And they put the idea out 
there that racism is not good for the people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — And I must say that one of the things that 
I’ve learned on stereotyping is you cannot stereotype everybody 
in all the parties. That indeed that’s what I wanted to say out 
here. 
 
But I know that there are some people around, and I know that 
when I talk about Pankiw, you know, he referred to the 
employment equity system as a basis of the KKK. But I know 
historically in the United States and Canada that the KKK just 
hates affirmative action, employment equity, or anything like 
that. They’re the strongest fighters against that. 
 
So when Pankiw is making a comment and saying that 
employment equity was a form of the KKK he was dead wrong 

on that. He wasn’t following history. As a matter of fact it was 
Pankiw who mirrored the position of the KKK, and that was 
indeed the historical truth to it. 
 
So when I look at those types of debates . . . You know that’s 
the type of debate that I’m talking about when I’m talking about 
the politics of inclusion and the politics of respect that indeed 
when people bring these up, I hope that those members in the 
Saskatchewan Party who are dealing with racism go through 
their party network and making sure that those types of things 
do not grow. That as we approach the new century that those 
types of things are lessened, you know, more and more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — When I looked at the issue, therefore, of 
First Nations and taxation, it was a very, very emotional issue 
for myself personally and a very sensitive one. And I knew that 
of all the good things that we had done, sometimes those would 
be forgotten, you know, as we dealt with a tough issue. And that 
as we dealt with it, I wanted to make sure that we were dealing 
with it in the fairest possible way that there could be. 
 
I knew that the Saskatchewan Party would never give a rebate. I 
knew that the Saskatchewan Party would never have a sales tax 
credit. So I think that when I look at the rebate, I would like to 
hear their member talking — now they’re chirping from their 
seats again — but when their member, their leader, comes in the 
House and says, yes, I support the rebate, then I might believe 
them. But that will not happen; I know it will not happen. If in 
the House, any one of them vote for the sales tax credit, then I 
might believe them. But all of them will vote against it because 
that’s what will happen. 
 
So when I look at the path that, in regards to the First Nations 
people, it was, therefore, a difficult one as I said, but we 
followed a certain principle that was already established. And 
we looked at the idea of the GST (goods and services tax), and 
we looked at the aspect of the tax that way. We knew that on 
the GST, the tax was paid off-reserve, and there was protection 
and exemption on-reserve. So the principle of taxation 
off-reserve was there with the federal law and the federal policy 
on the GST. 
 
And the other thing, too, that when I looked at the policy on 
income tax, income tax was protected on the reserve but it was 
paid off the reserve. One of the biggest myths in history, 
because the PST was not paid, was that a lot of people said, 
well Indians don’t pay tax. And that was completely not true. 
All the people that I knew, of the First Nations people, pay not 
only income tax, their businesses pay a lot of corporate tax. And 
that indeed when you look at the history, you know, there was a 
big myth perpetuated by certain politicians that indeed when 
you dealt with this issue that Indians didn’t pay. That was 
completely false. 
 
Indians, First Nations people, pay tax like everybody else in 
regards to the income tax. In that income tax it includes both the 
federal income tax and the provincial income tax. And that 
indeed when you look at that principle, that indeed there is 
protection on-reserve and not in regards to off-reserve. That is 
the principle that is being followed. 
 



426 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

The other thing is that in regards to the municipalities, you will 
hear some of the people from the Saskatchewan Party say, well 
those Indians they don’t pay anything relating and they don’t 
contribute to education. Again, false. Wrong. When you look at 
the municipal tax . . . when you look at the municipal tax, when 
treaty Indians pay municipal tax — some of those members 
don’t know that Indians pay municipal tax — when they pay 
municipal tax, part of that money goes to libraries and part of 
that money goes to schools in the cities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — But when you hear the Saskatchewan 
Party, they will sound as if well Indians don’t pay tax — 
completely false. That’s the type of politics that I meant on the 
politics of exclusion, the politics of disrespect that the 
Saskatchewan Party plays. 
 
When I looked at the overall impact, I would like to do a 
summary because this is a summary in regards to the benefits. 
On the benefits side, the rebate in regards to the First Nations as 
a whole on the tobacco and also the fuel tax, the total amount of 
money that the First Nations will receive if they apply 
according to the principles of what has transpired already with 
Muskoday who was one of the first of the eight First Nations 
who took us to court, that indeed what happened is that they 
will do the rebate. 
 
Muskoday . . . the member from Moosomin, not Moosomin . . . 
The member from Cannington chirps from his seat again. He 
does not know the history of course so I will tell him. He 
doesn’t know the history of First Nations people, of native 
people, so I will tell him. 
 
So the tax . . . The whole history was that we would do a lot of 
negotiations with First Nations people, but like anybody else 
they are free to go and follow what they wish to do, and take us 
to court if they want to. So they took us to court in regard to the 
taxation of the fuel and tobacco tax, and that was six years ago. 
And . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . that was six years ago. 
 
Now there were seven First Nations bands since that time that 
wanted to take us to court. So that indeed when you look at it, 
that the whole shift had taken away from negotiations to the 
court cases, so when you’re looking at that we moved from 
negotiations to that of the court cases. But the principle of 
federal policy and federal law at the present time is such that 
there is production in regards to income tax on-reserve, but not 
off-reserve. The GST is paid not on-reserve but off-reserve, and 
it’s the same type of principle, we’re making the laws consistent 
now from the federal to the provincial level. 
 
An Hon. Member: — But you were supportive of charging this 
provincial tax on-reserve, previously. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — The member’s all mixed up. He said I 
supported the tax on the reserve previously, completely wrong 
and false, I never did . . . As usual you should be following a bit 
of the history, you know in this province, and you’ve been 
wrong in many issues. Now if I heard chirping from your seat I 
would pay due respects and he said, geez, the member from 
Cumberland, are you going to be supporting economic 
development and partnerships with First Nations? I’d probably 

have my eyes wide open and say yes, member from 
Cannington; but that’s not what you’re talking about. All you’re 
talking about is the negative stuff against First Nations people 
and Metis people, and that’s all I hear from you on, and that is 
the reason why I’m saying what I’m saying. 
 
So when I look at the overall rebate, therefore, there’ll be $12 
million going to First Nations. The interim, the PST, they will 
pay, in regards to the 8 million. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You pay the PST? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — The member, the leader actually asked 
me, do I pay the PST? Of course I’ve been paying the PST all 
my life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — And of course now they’re clapping. Now 
the leader who played the politics of division for the 
Saskatchewan Party when he was a member of parliament with 
the Reform Party, one of the reasons why Reform Party 
changed its name from a lot of, what do they call them, 
Conservative Reform Alliance Party? And many of the . . . why 
the Reform Party went down the drain was the politics of 
division. They played too much politics of hot division, against 
immigration, against the French issue, against Aboriginal 
people, etc. You should know well about that. And as you come 
into the South, that’s exactly what you display again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — So when I look at the fact, I wanted to 
reiterate the point. I’m not trying to stereotype all the 
Saskatchewan Party. I’ve heard some members from there that I 
have a lot of respect for and I’ve heard them talk against racism 
and I appreciate that fact. But when I see it and when I sense it 
out, I will be able to respond immediately and in the way that I 
should. 
 
On the aspect of a rebate there: for 12 million we’re going to 
rebate to the fuel and tobacco side, treaty Indians now will pay 
$8 million on the PST. So there’ll be a $4 million and a half 
million dollar plus on that side . . . I mean a $4 million plus on 
that side. 
 
On the sales tax rebate — sales tax credit is a popular term — 
the total amount in there for First Nations is estimated to be 
about four and a half million. Out of the 32 million, it’ll be 
about four and a half million to First Nations people. In other 
words, there will be about sixteen and a half million dollars 
through this flip we’re talking about, but also in dealing with 
the sales tax credit for First Nations people. Well of course they 
will have to pay the 8 million. 
 
So there’s going to be an eight and a half million dollar plus in 
regards to the overall agreement, completely different from 
what the Saskatchewan Party would ever do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — I think that in regards to the fact . . . I 
mean the member, again the leader, always chirps from his seat 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

in his message to Perry Bellegarde and I think that he must be 
. . . I don’t know whether or not he’s meeting with Perry 
Bellegarde but my understanding is that in regards to the court 
case, there is a court case that is taking place, as any citizens 
have, you know, the right of law. And I think that in regards to 
that fact, they will be taking us to court and with due respect to 
the legal process, so that we do not prejudice the case, I will 
definitely not make any comments in that regard except to 
know that it is the right of any citizen to be able to deal with it 
in a court case. 
 
Now, when you look at it, the member over there of course will 
not support . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the leader asked me, 
do I support the budget? Yes, I support the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — But I know one thing. You as the leader 
will not support the $25 million increase that the North will get 
because you don’t care about the North. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — You don’t care about the North. When 
one of your people ran against me last election, they didn’t even 
have one little line in regards to northern Saskatchewan. That’s 
the type of leadership that you do have. You are really going to 
have to improve on that when the next person runs . . . a 
Saskatchewan Party candidate runs in Cumberland constituency 
because a lot of people were very disappointed that you flew in 
a candidate and he didn’t even know anything about northern 
Saskatchewan and did not say nothing about it. 
 
And I knew therefore you would be voting against the $25 
million increase that we will do in regards to northern roads, in 
regards to health and education, in regards to . . . in regards to 
the capital expenditures on health and so on. So that’s the 
comment that I would make in regards to the overall budget. 
 
On the low-income side, we still don’t tax the food. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — It’s a major expenditure for a lot of 
people on a daily basis, but when you looked at whether poor 
people or rich people, we still don’t tax food. Or restaurant or 
the shelter or the heating or the lights. So that when you look at 
that, it is a very important aspect. And the other thing is that a 
lot of the people, when they look at their children and when 
they buy children’s clothing, that will also be exempt; there’ll 
be no tax on children’s clothing. 
 
So when we look at our policy, of course it’s going to be very 
different from the Saskatchewan Party. I know that they were 
very, very worried about some of my comments but I know that 
my comments run true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I will make a summary, in 
regards to the comments that I made, in Cree. With due respect 
to all the languages of the House and with due respect to all the 
cultures of this province, I will say my commentary so that 

when I listen to . . . the people come talk to me, a lot of the 
elders who are in the hospitals, some of them seen their last 
days in this province. They feel very proud when they have 
somebody speak to them directly so they understand very 
directly what happens in this House. 
 
Very often they come to me, they said, we were happy when 
you were speaking, in English I sort of understood, but when 
you said something in Cree you said it and I understood it. And 
it is in that context that I always do an explanation in regards to 
Cree. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would call you Otuyumiw in Cree, Mr. Speaker. In 
closing comments, I would say this. My hope for the future in 
true spirit as I talk with other Sask Party members who have 
dealt with the issue of racism, that I was very happy when they 
spoke in the House on trying to deal with this issue. It felt good 
for me because I know that I cannot stereotype all of the 
members in the same light. 
 
And I knew that as I faced the future in the new century, that 
my hope and desires that we go to the politics of inclusion — 
the inclusion of all peoples whether they speak in the Polish 
language in the House or the French or the Ukrainian language, 
all the languages from Asia, anywhere all over the world — the 
ideal for us has to be the politics of inclusion. Not only in 
regards to training but also in regards to jobs. Not only in 
regards to jobs but in regards to business ownership, in regards 
to being part of FMAs because in the long run, when we share 
the resources of this great country and this great province with 
all peoples, then the politics of inclusion becomes real. It 
becomes possible, and it becomes tried out by governments and 
by everybody in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — So with that, Mr. Speaker, I support the 
government motion and, of course, oppose the amendment by 
the Sask Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
constituency of Thunder Creek is a rural constituency 
concerned with all of the issues that interest any other 
constituency in this province but with a special interest in 
agriculture because Thunder Creek is pretty well agriculture. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the member on her feet? 
 
An Hon. Member: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Please state your point of order. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have just heard a 
very fiery and impassioned speech from the member for 
Cumberland, and I think that all members of this House would 
like to join with me in acknowledging both his speech and the 
fact that he has sacrificed his 54th birthday dinner to come to 
this House to give this speech. And with a bit of coaching from 
the member from Athabasca, I would like to wish him happy 



428 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

birthday in his language. I would like to say to him — and I 
would hope that all members would join with me in saying — 
“Mew Tip Ska Min”. Happy birthday, Keith! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would just remind the House that a 
member’s birthday is not a matter of a point of order. But I join 
in on those wishes. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I wish the member 
from Cumberland a very happy birthday. 
 
As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, Thunder Creek to me is agriculture. 
But we’re also even more than that. We have a state-of-the-art 
potash mine and a huge fertilizer plant at Belle Plaine. We have a 
sodium sulphate plant at Chaplin. We are also fortunate to have 
many entrepreneurial small business people, including some light 
manufacturing. Oil and gas activity has advanced ever so slowly to 
the west border of our constituency and is also closing in on the 
east side, but ever so slowly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the progressive, forward thinking people 
of Thunder Creek would like to see a budget that would encourage 
the rapid expansion of oil and gas and mining industries, as well as 
the manufacturing and processing of agricultural produce. We 
view removal of the cap on the farm fuel rebate as a positive thing. 
It must be realized that this only applies to gasoline used in 
farming, and most farmers don’t use a lot of gasoline in their 
operations these days as a vast majority of equipment is diesel 
powered and has been for many years. So it won’t have a large 
impact on a farmer’s bottom line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance announced a property tax 
rebate that will amount to a rebate of property taxes on the average 
farm of about $440 a year, and that’s over two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education is not adequately provided for in this 
budget, particularly in rural school divisions with static or 
declining enrolment, and it is clear to everyone involved that mill 
rate increases for education will be necessary in order to cover 
operating costs if programs are to be maintained. This is a case, 
Mr. Speaker, where government gives with one hand and forces 
the school board to take all of the benefits back just in order to 
maintain teachers and programs. 
 
This is not only downloading, Mr. Speaker; it’s backdoor 
downloading. It’s sneaky and underhanded and the people of 
Saskatchewan will see it for what it is. Mr. Speaker, this budget 
does not increase the provincial government share of the cost of 
education and people will see that as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance makes much of the 
so-called historic tax cuts in this budget. Let’s review that. If 
you add up all the tax cuts in this budget for the year, it comes 
to about $43 million. And SaskTel and SaskEnergy rate 
increases already approved by this government will put over 
$41 million right back into government coffers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you do the subtraction, that’s a whopping $2 
million tax cut to the people of Saskatchewan. That’s a tax cut 
this year of $2 per person. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, if I was to 
be so presumptuous as to give the people of this province 

advice, I’d say try not to spend it all in one place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance tries to make these 
laughable tax cuts more palatable to the public by selling them 
with a lot of smoke and mirrors about more substantial tax cuts 
down the road — tax cuts, Mr. Speaker, that will have to be 
dealt with in future budgets before they become anything more 
substantial than pie in the sky dreaming or wild conjecture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, families and businesses in this province pay 
higher income tax, higher corporate tax, higher property taxes 
than our main competitor, Alberta, and a 6 per cent sales tax 
that Alberta families and businesses don’t pay at all. Taxes are 
killing investment in this province, Mr. Speaker, and this 
Liberal-NDP coalition government’s response is to broaden the 
base of the PST. 
 
The oil and gas industry comes to mind because we compete so 
directly with the tax regime in Alberta. Mr. Speaker, the 
following is a list of some of the more common items, and 
mostly high-ticket items, that the industry pays 6 per cent PST 
on in this province but of course are not taxable just across the 
border in Alberta. There are new items on the list but many of 
them have been PST taxable before expansion. I think this list is 
telling as to why our oil and gas service industry can’t grow and 
why oil companies would really rather invest elsewhere. 
 
(2000) 
 
The list is broken down into 10 categories, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
withering list but members on both sides of this Assembly need 
to hear the list, Mr. Speaker, to get perspective on the kind of 
damage this tax inflects on an industry like oil and gas. 
 
Under the first heading, Mr. Speaker, drilling costs. Some of the 
things there included are anchors, cementing materials, collars, 
communication equipment, conductor casing, directional tools, 
down-hole motors, down-hole tools, drill-bit rentals, drill bits, 
drill collars, drill pipe, drilling mud and chemical, equipment 
losses, equipment rentals, equipment repairs, fishing tools, 
freight, instrumentation, intermediate casing and accessories, 
lubricants, nitrogen, packers, portable fences, power tongs, 
reamers, safety equipment, safety supplies, stabilizers, surface 
casing and accessories, testing equipment, tool rentals, trucking 
and freight, well-control equipment, well-site trailer rentals, 
whip stocks. 
 
Under the heading of completion costs, Mr. Speaker: acidizing 
material, bridge plugs, casing, casing accessories, cementing 
materials, collars, completion fluids, directional tools, 
down-hole tools, drill-bit rentals, drill bits, equipment losses, 
equipment rentals, equipment repairs, fishing tools, fracturing 
materials, lubricants, mud materials, nitrogen, packers, 
production casing, production liner, production tubing, 
retainers, safety equipment, safety supplies, testing equipment, 
tool rentals, trucking and freight, well-stimulation materials. 
 
Under the heading of well equipment, Mr. Speaker: 
beam-pumping equipment, bottom-hole pump, buildings, 
engines and motors, equipment and repair parts, fencing 
materials, flow line, flow tank, lease tank, line heater, meters 
and metering equipment, production tanks, pump-jack units, 
sucker rod, tank rentals, Texas gauge, tubing accessories, 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

tubing, wells and fittings, well head equipment. 
 
Under facilities: absorbers, boilers, buildings, cathodic 
protection, chemicals, coating and insulation, communications 
equipment, compressors, compressor fuel, computer equipment, 
computer software, dehydrators, dew-point control equipment, 
electrical equipment, equipment rentals, fencing materials, fire 
heaters and boilers, flare stack, flow lines, fuel gauges, heater, 
injection equipment, instrument controls and meters, instrument 
and automation line heater, line pipe, lubricants, manifolds. 
That’s half the list, Mr. Speaker. That’s half the list. And there’s 
a similar list for the mining industry, the pipeline industry, and 
every other industry in this province that I can think of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the PST is killing our oil and gas service industry 
and slowing the development of our very substantial oil and gas 
reserves. Mr. Speaker, there is the matter of the liquor and 
gaming fund — or LGF, which the government also used to call 
a rainy day fund or RDF. Well, Mr. Speaker, it appears this 
fund has doubled in size to $7 million since January when this 
Liberal-NDP coalition government said they couldn’t afford to 
put $300 million on the table to trigger more federal help for the 
ag crisis. And the fund is projected to grow by another $350 
million in this year. Now apparently $290 million has been used 
to balance this budget and $405 million has been put into a new 
fund called the fiscal stabilization fund, or FSF. This fund has 
also been called the fancy slush fund, FSF. A better name might 
be the money hidden from suffering farmers fund, or MHFSFF. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Since there’s no indication as to what this 
money may be used for, Mr. Speaker, I think an even more 
appropriate name might be the save our sorry NDP backsides in 
the next election slush fund. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Or the SOSNDPBSITNESF, the shortened 
form of which would be the NDPBS fund. This government 
makes excuses . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I just . . . hon. members, please. I just 
ask that you choose your words judiciously in your debates. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’ll keep that in mind. 
 
Now this government makes excuses for not being competitive 
with Alberta, Mr. Speaker, because they say Alberta is just too 
rich, or they have just too much oil revenue. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
oil and gas and mining can be great engines of our economy as 
we have as much oil in the ground as Alberta. And we have 
more potash than anywhere else in the world. And we have by 
far the richest uranium deposits in the world and we have gold 
and coal and diamonds and sodium sulphate. And we have 
nearly half of the farmland in this country. And we can’t 
compete with Alberta? If we can’t, Mr. Speaker, it’s not that we 
don’t have the best province in the country because we do. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, if we can’t compete it’s because of high taxes, 
taxes like the PST that this government not only refuses to 
reduce but insists on expanding. And regulations and red tape 
imposed upon companies that have invested here in oil and gas 

and mining and processing which in effect make them tax 
collectors from themselves, that keep investment in Alberta and 
keep opportunities there for our young people as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Friday a member from that side of the House 
suggested that we shouldn’t tell our children about 
opportunities that exist in other parts of the world that at this 
time are not available to them here. Well, Mr. Speaker, I put a 
high priority on seeing that my children receive all of the 
information available that may help them towards a brighter 
future in an increasingly competitive world. I will be telling my 
children about these places, and so will every decent parent in 
this province — even, Mr. Speaker, if it does tend to thwart the 
NDP plan for a backward little socialist utopia here amidst the 
sea of opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — In the next election, all of us who care about 
our children will put an end to the NDP’s socialist master plan 
once and for all, Mr. Speaker, and the next government of this 
province will make us competitive with our neighbours and 
opportunities will be created for our children. Then, Mr. 
Speaker, we won’t have to tell them about brighter prospects 
and better opportunities elsewhere. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, expansion of the PST on repair 
services, computer services, and professional fees will hurt oil 
and gas and mining and agriculture, and every other industry in 
the province. Smoke and mirrors in place of immediate 
substantial tax relief and continued underfunding of health and 
education while setting up a $405 million slush fund will make 
this budget a hard pill to swallow for the people of this 
province. They won’t support it, Mr. Speaker, and neither will I. 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, it is with pride that I rise to 
support what I consider to be a watershed budget. But before I 
begin, may I first of all say that I have a certain amount of 
reluctance following that eloquent address from my 
Neechiwagun from Cumberland. And I also want to say before I 
commence that on behalf of myself and all my colleagues, we 
wish the hon. member from Canora-Pelly a speedy recovery 
and an early return to this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, when the Liberals were 
elected to government in Canada and the NDP in 
Saskatchewan, they both succeeded Tory governments which 
had run up huge deficits. Tough decisions had to be made and 
Canadians were required to pay a price to get our fiscal house in 
order. But we knew it had to be done. We knew that to continue 
to run up debt was to mortgage the future of our children and of 
our country. 
 
However, I want to congratulate the taxpayers of Canada and 
Saskatchewan for the sacrifices they made in order to eliminate 
the deficit. But fortunately now is the time when Canadians can 
look forward to a dividend for having eliminated that deficit. I 
have spoken before in this House about the need to lower our 



430 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

taxes and especially our income tax. This year the federal 
government, under the leadership of Finance Minister Paul 
Martin, did just that, and last week the same thing happened in 
Saskatchewan with the introduction of this budget — the largest 
tax cut in Saskatchewan history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — The reform to our income tax system 
means that 55,000 low-income residents are to be removed 
from the tax rolls; 70 per cent of all Saskatchewan residents . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Addley: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While the member from Cumberland was speaking, I thought I 
heard the member from Saltcoats say something that I thought 
was inappropriate. I wasn’t sure that that’s what he could 
possibly have said, so I checked with some other members and 
they agreed that that’s what they heard as well. And the quote is 
something like this: “Come down to my riding, we’ll show you 
how Custer felt.” 
 
I don’t think that this legislature should have language like that. 
I don’t think that this is a place for that kind of dialogue. I’m 
sure, knowing and working with that member, that he doesn’t 
mean to say that and I would like to think that he wouldn’t think 
that that’s appropriate language. I would ask that the member 
retract and apologize for that statement, as the member from 
Saltcoats. 
 
The Speaker: — On the point of order the hon. member has 
raised, it would not be a matter of record nor was it heard by the 
Chair. However, if in fact such a statement was made, I would 
afford the hon. member the opportunity to withdraw those 
remarks. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if in 
any which way I was thought of as showing disrespect for that 
member or First Nations people or anyone else, I certainly did 
not mean that and if taken that way, I sincerely apologize to that 
member and for that matter, to every member on that side of the 
House. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Will the hon. member withdraw those 
remarks? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, yes. And I meant 
to add that, that I certainly would withdraw those remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — I want to thank all hon. members. This is a 
very venerable institution and I appreciate the recognition 
afforded by members that we must be cautious on the language 
that we use in this institution. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
reform to our tax system means that 55,000 low-income 
residents will be off the tax rolls. Seventy per cent of 
Saskatchewan residents will pay no more income tax than if 

they lived in oil-rich Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — The debt reduction surcharge will be 
gone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — The high income surtax will be gone. 
The Saskatchewan flat tax will be gone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Overall, Saskatchewan taxpayers can 
look forward to a 30 to 40 per cent reduction in income tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — We all know our farm population has 
been under considerable pressure due to the catastrophic drop in 
grain prices. This budget provides some needed relief: a 25 per 
cent reduction in property taxes over two years worth $50 
million; the complete elimination of fuel tax on farm fuels. 
 
This budget is about tax fairness and it is also about tax 
competitiveness. It is also about being responsible. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is establishing a reserve 
fund, called the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. This fund will 
ultimately have in it approximately $290 million, or 5 per cent 
of the provincial budget. This is our guarantee that if revenues 
go down or there are unforeseen expenditures, we will be able 
to maintain the level of government services without cutbacks 
and without increasing taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, this is sound fiscal 
management. 
 
We all know that most municipalities in fact have far larger 
reserves. In the case of my own home town, North Battleford, 
the city reserves are equal to one year’s budget. Unfortunately, 
the provincial reserves will be only equal to 5 per cent of the 
budget. 
 
And yet the opposition says it’s wrong for us to have any 
reserves. They say we should simply spend everything. We 
know that if we did that, then the first time this province had a 
forest fire in the North or did something to assist our farmers, 
we would tip into deficit. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this budget increases education spending by 
5.4 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — The Saskatchewan Party says that isn’t 
nearly enough. It should have gone up far more. 
 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

Health spending has gone up 11.1 per cent. The Saskatchewan 
Party says that isn’t nearly enough. It should have gone up far 
more. 
 
Highways spending is being increased by 6.6 per cent. The 
Saskatchewan Party says that isn’t nearly enough. It should 
have gone up far more. 
 
Finally the Saskatchewan Party looks at the tax cut package — 
the largest, single, tax cut in Saskatchewan history — and they 
say the tax cuts weren’t nearly enough. Taxes should have been 
slashed far more. Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s face it. You can’t 
make a Tory happy with a budget unless it’s written in red ink. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it has to be admitted 
that some of this income tax reduction has been accomplished 
by the broadening of the provincial sales tax, and of course we 
had that very enlightening talk a few minutes ago by my friend 
from Thunder Creek who told us about the dog food and the 
drill bits and the drill bits and the dog food and the dog food 
and the drill bits and the dog food and the drill bits . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I was going to leave that one out. 
 
Anyway it has to be admitted though there is a grain of truth 
there. The sales tax was broadened. Admittedly it wasn’t 
broadened nearly as much as Grant Devine and the hon. 
member from Kindersley demanded it be broadened. They 
wanted to broaden far more . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and 
Moosomin. And so the Tories wanted to broaden far more. Now 
we didn’t broaden the sales tax as much as the Tories say we 
should have, but it was broadened. We didn’t broaden the sales 
tax perhaps as much as the Leader of the Opposition would 
have preferred, but we did broaden it. 
 
Well I have to admit that my constituency, being on the western 
part of the province, we’re sensitive to the sales tax issue. But 
for those unhappy with the broadening of the sales tax, it is 
important to remember that low income residents of this 
province will now qualify for the first time for a sales tax credit 
similar to the GST rebate. Low income residents of this 
province will now receive $77 for an individual per year or 
$264 for a family. 
 
I think that’s a very positive step that we have taken into 
account the effect of the sales tax on low-income residents. 
 
Well I want to speak for a few minutes on how this budget 
particularly affects that most wonderful part of our province 
known as the Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while enjoying the benefits of the massive sales 
tax cut and income tax residents of the Battlefords will now 
notice a number of substantial programs. Some of the 
province-wide initiatives I’ve already discussed will have a 
huge impact on the people in and around the Battlefords. 
 
The removal of the farm fuel tax and the $50 million property 
tax rebate on farmland is important to the farming constituency 
of my area. Also, Mr. Speaker, work will be getting underway 
shortly for the new Drumming Hill open custody facility which 
will be built on the grounds of Saskatchewan Hospital. 

I am certain that anyone who has driven through the Battlefords 
will recognize the commitment the province is making to the 
downtown core in North Battleford. And I think that I’m 
confident that there will be a number of good news 
announcements for the Battlefords in the near future including 
the Department of Education reaffirming its commitment to the 
joint-use facility of the North Battleford Comprehensive and the 
Northwest Regional College. 
 
But the most important aspect of the budget for the Battlefords 
comes from the Department of Highways and Transportation. 
The total highways budget spent on the Battlefords last year 
was under $100,000. Well, Mr. Speaker, this year it will be 
$700,000. In the next few years Highways plans to spend nearly 
$20 million in our area. The coalition government recognizes 
something I’ve been saying for a long time — the Battlefords is 
a great place to locate and invest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — A while ago some people were actually 
suggesting that the Yellowhead Highway bypass the 
Battlefords. That’s what a number of prominent Saskatchewan 
Party supporters were saying including the member for 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood. Such a move would have turned our 
community into a ghost town. Luckily those misguided Tory 
thoughts are old news. 
 
This government will not squeeze the lifeblood out of the 
economy of the Battlefords. Instead the Liberal-NDP 
commitment to this area is shown by the fact that the North 
Saskatchewan bridge project will commence this year. Work on 
grading ramps and abutments for the second North 
Saskatchewan River crossing will commence very shortly. And 
after the abutments have settled, Highways will continue its 
work over the next couple of years to complete the bridge and 
the twinning project. 
 
The coalition was able to cut taxes and increase spending for 
the people of the Battlefords without putting this province into 
red. It’s no wonder the Saskatchewan Party has few complaints. 
In fact, I’m pleased to note that my colleague, the member for 
Battleford-Cut Knife, said it best in our newspaper, the North 
Battleford News-Optimist, published only yesterday, when he 
said about the budget, “It’s not bad; it’s certainly a move in the 
right direction.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, what a fine example of 
co-operation that it’s not just the two parties over here could 
work together. Even the Saskatchewan Party recognizes that 
this budget is good for Saskatchewan in general and the 
Battlefords in particular. And I congratulate the hon. member 
from Battleford-Cut Knife for having the integrity and the 
insight to recognize that fact . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Yes, no wonder the Leader of the Opposition has given his 
commitment that he wouldn’t change this budget. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this budget represents the very nature of the 
coalition government. It’s a compromise. It’s a positive balance 
between the need to fund necessary services, to provide tax 



432 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

relief, and to be fair to low-income residents. We understand, 
unlike some members opposite, that to balance the budget and 
give the people of Saskatchewan a future, there has to be 
something more than merely tax cuts. A government must show 
vision. This budget shows that partnership between the two 
coalition parties, working together, and doing the job we were 
elected to do — making good policies that benefit the people of 
this province. 
 
We recognize that within the political process there is room for 
honest compromise. No one party has the monopoly on good 
policy. And it also shows that we, as a coalition, listen. 
 
During the past election the Liberals promised university 
students a tuition credit. The New Democrats offered new 
students free first year tuition. Both of these options are not 
found in the budget, and I’ll tell you why not. We consulted 
with the people. They had a better idea. The people told us, and 
particularly the students told us, that the best way to help 
post-secondary students was by giving a tax credit for 
graduating students who choose to remain in this province. This 
tax credit, which can be used over a four-year period, allows the 
leaders of tomorrow the chance and opportunity to establish 
themselves, to get their feet firmly underneath them, and to get 
a running start at their careers in Saskatchewan. 
 
For the Liberals, it has given us the opportunity to have our 
voice heard, to have direct input into the workings of 
government, to apply our strengths, and to make a difference in 
the lives of the people of Saskatchewan — a goal all parties 
share. 
 
The coalition is the start of a new approach to politics in this 
province — a new way of doing business. It allows the 
opportunity for policy to be discussed, debated, and decided 
from alternate points of view, taking the best suggestions from 
both partners and presenting a policy that is stronger because of 
the process. It gives us the ability, in short, Mr. Speaker, to 
think outside the box. 
 
For my part, there are times when I think it might be easier to 
sit on the sidelines in opposition complaining about all the 
problems and talking about how easy the solutions would be if 
we were only government. It would be easier, but unproductive. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, people are starting to notice this coalition 
and the work it is doing. Well, Mr. Dick DeRyk, in Yorkton . . . 
in The Yorkton Review, Dick DeRyk writes: 
 

Quite frankly, I don’t hear the voters of Saskatchewan, the 
people of this province who made their decision on 
Election Day, complaining a whole lot. At least not those 
who are concerned more with good government than with 
politics. And there is a huge difference between the two. 

 
Other provinces are watching us as well. And they are pleased 
with what they see. The Edmonton Journal, in a recent editorial 
said, and I quote: 
 

The coalition may ultimately help restore some of the 
influence individual MLAs and MPs have come to lack 
and to dampen the tribal allegiances parties have expected 
from voters and candidates alike in recent elections. That 

can only be good for democracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what it’s all about: doing things that are 
good for democracy, for individuals, for different groups, for 
everyone. 
 
Well an example too of how the coalition has allowed us to be 
more flexible in our thinking is the review of The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act, the PIPP (personal injury protection 
plan) review. Now I know there’s been some confusion 
surrounding the PIPP Review Committee’s mandate. However, 
anyone who wanted to know how broad that committee’s 
mandate is needs only to read the legislation. 
 
The legislation says that the review committee is to and I quote: 
“Review and report to the Lieutenant Governor all matters 
concerning the personal injury protection plan.” That sounds 
like a pretty broad mandate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To emphasis that point, Donna Larsen, the Vice-Chair of the 
committee has reaffirmed just how broad the mandate is in a 
letter to the editor in which she said the committee would, and I 
quote: 
 

Look at the Personal Injury Protection Plan and see how it 
is working. The committee will look at the personal injury 
benefits, including the rights individuals have to take 
actions through the courts. And will look at how the 
rehabilitation part of this program works. 

 
She said that the committee will work to understand the impact 
PIPP is having and, in order to do this, it will need to look at 
comparisons with alternative systems, including the previous 
tort system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the review committee got off to a rocky 
start, it is my hope that residents of the province, especially 
those who have been injured in vehicle accidents, and the Law 
Society of Saskatchewan will now participate fully in this 
review. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Aboriginal Affairs minister I want to discuss 
some of the pressing issues in Saskatchewan today. I have 
repeatedly said that it is vital to the future of our province that 
we end the marginalization of Aboriginal people and that they 
be allowed to fully participate in the economy and in the 
workforce. Projections are that 35 per cent of our population 
will be Aboriginal by the middle of this century. We simply 
cannot afford to have such a large percentage of the population 
not working, not actively engaged in the economy, and not 
paying taxes. 
 
Last week, I was at the Yorkton Friendship Centre. Chief Tony 
Cote at that time commented that if First Nations people are to 
be taxpayers, they have an absolute right to a full and fair share 
of all the benefits and programs operated by the province of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I totally agree. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard some people 
suggest that removing the PST exemption off-reserve will 
stimulate economic growth on treaty land. Doug Cuthand, in an 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 433 

editorial today in The Leader-Post, says that: 
 

The real exciting part is “what does this mean for First 
Nations business?” Now that the provincial government 
has occupied the field for off-reserve taxation, it leaves 
First Nations governments with free rein to develop their 
own tax policy and foster the development of tax-exempt 
retain outlets (on reserves). 

 
I agree with Mr. Cuthand that this is what may happen. The 
removal of the PST exemption may well result in significant 
economic development on First Nations land. I have been asked 
if this is a problem for me. My answer is, absolutely not. If this 
stimulates business on Saskatchewan reserves, I say great. Of 
course, on-reserve exemption from taxation applies to First 
Nations people and only First Nations customers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have said before and will say again that this 
government is committed to including Aboriginal people in the 
future of this province. It is dedicated to finding solutions that 
allow Aboriginal people full participation. In this regard, I want 
to discuss the Aboriginal employment development plan. I am 
proud of the work which has been done by my department. 
 
Earlier this year, I received a letter from Dr. Jim Pankiw, 
Member of Parliament for Saskatoon-Humboldt. He wrote 
concerning the Aboriginal employment development agreement 
with the University of Saskatchewan. Let me put this matter in 
context, Mr. Speaker. At present only about 1 per cent of the 
support staff at the University of Saskatchewan is Aboriginal. 
The university doesn’t think that’s good enough. They want to 
encourage the training of Aboriginal young people so that 
qualified applicants will be able to compete for jobs on their 
own merit. The university wants a workforce which more 
accurately reflects the demographics of this province. Well Dr. 
Pankiw was furious, and I want to read into the record some of 
his comments in his letter. I quote directly from Dr. Pankiw’s 
letter. 
 

Clearly there are many Canadians, myself among them, 
who will never understand such hate and malice towards 
the fundamental principles of equality and fairness. 
 

He went on to write: 
 

I am unsure as to what impaired logic is being employed to 
justify this blatant act of discrimination, but I doubt very 
few people outside the tyrants of political correctness, will 
support it. Proponents of this initiative could have been 
portrayed as modern day Klansmen, though preferring to 
hide between the subterfuge of politically correct rhetoric 
and doublespeak instead of a white sheet. Nonetheless the 
hiring policy being proposed and the inevitable 
consequences bear a resemblance to the former 
segregationist policies of the southern United States. 

 
In closing, he writes: 
 

Let me suggest that it is misdirected bigots espousing 
race-based hiring standards who sow the seeds of hate and 
foment inequality among Canadians. 
 

Well after this letter, Mr. Speaker, Dr. Pankiw and I had a 

debate on the university campus. What struck me was not his 
opposition to what he termed race-based hiring. In my view, it 
is appropriate for the political system to question how we can 
best accomplish a level playing field in the workforce and how 
we can be fair to a particular target group as well as to the larger 
society. 
 
No, what struck me was Dr. Pankiw’s continual use of the terms 
“us” and “them” when referring to non-Aboriginal and 
Aboriginal citizens. He at no time said anything which 
indicated that he understood that we are one small province and 
that we are in this thing together. The essential point was not 
acknowledged nor I think recognized, that despite our external 
differences we are one society and one people. 
 
On the contrary, he several times made the point that any 
attempt to help one group was by definition to work against all 
others. He insisted that a program to help women was a slap in 
the face against all men, and he insisted that a program whose 
target group is Aboriginal people is a take-away from all 
non-Aboriginals. 
 
Nor could he be enticed into considering how we as 
non-Aboriginal people might be impacted by the prospect of 
having 35 per cent of our population unemployed or 
underemployed and largely outside the economy. That 
apparently was a problem for Aboriginals. Again no recognition 
that it is a problem for us all. But, Mr. Speaker, it is a serious 
problem for all of us and it is a problem which inevitably will 
get worse unless we are prepared to join hands and take action. 
 
Currently about 12 per cent of our population is Aboriginal. In 
1992 when the Aboriginal employment development program 
was introduced, only 3 per cent of the public sector labour force 
was Aboriginal. Aboriginal unemployment in Saskatchewan 
was running at 30 per cent compared now to only 4 per cent in 
the non-Aboriginal community. 
 
Well we also are told by the statisticians that by only 2012, a 
little more than 10 years from now, 46,000 Aboriginal young 
people will enter the provincial workforce age. Well we will be 
seeing many baby boomers leave the workforce and we will in 
fact be facing work shortage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unless we get serious at training and education 
and opening up our workforce, this province will be facing the 
tragic, and I would suggest bizarre, situation of having high 
unemployment and work shortage at one and the same time. 
 
We have a problem but we also have an opportunity. We can 
act now for the good of Saskatchewan. In order for 
Saskatchewan to reach its full economic potential we must 
include Aboriginal people in the workforce. But we do not have 
to be discouraged. We are achieving results. Mr. Speaker, in the 
health sector alone, well over 700 skilled Aboriginal workers 
have been added to the workforce. They have been awarded 
their jobs based on merit because of the Aboriginal employment 
development program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I have spoken to some of 
these young people. They are proud of the fact that they have 



434 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

competed for these jobs and been awarded them on merit. They 
are proud of the fact that they are now full participants in the 
labour force. They are not asking for special consideration, Mr. 
Speaker. They only want the same chances as my children and 
yours. 
 
I want to publicly thank the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce, the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and the 
many business people who have contacted me to get more 
information on the program. They know that the future of their 
businesses and of this program depends on our success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to publicly thank the hon. member 
from Humboldt in this House. The hon. member from 
Humboldt and I were on a radio talk show recently, and she 
publicly endorsed the Aboriginal employment development 
program of my department, and she publicly stated, on behalf of 
the Saskatchewan Party, her opposition to the wild rhetoric and 
ridiculous posturing of Dr. Pankiw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I am pleased that our attempts to bring 
Aboriginal people into full participation in the economy has 
all-party support in this House . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, it also makes me think that my time spent as desk mate for 
the hon. member from Humboldt was not entirely wasted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve enjoyed this opportunity to participate in the 
debate. I wish, in conclusion, to make some closing remarks 
concerning one aspect of my department, namely the 
anniversary secretariat. 
 
As you know, the world crossed a landmark just three months 
ago when we entered the new millennium. I want to thank 
members of my department who organized Saskatchewan’s 
participation in this world-wide celebration. I also want to thank 
all hon. members on both sides of the House who participated 
in special events to honour those citizens of our province who 
had lived in the 19th, 20th, and now the 21st centuries. The 
three-century club, as we call it, has 176 members in 
Saskatchewan. And it was very appropriate that we began this 
century by honouring those senior citizens of our province with 
special receptions. 
 
In the case of the Battlefords, we had a very pleasant afternoon 
to honour our seven members of the three-century club. 
Approximately 150 people attended a tea at the Chapel Gallery. 
It was an honour for me to make the presentations. When I 
presented Helen Reynaud, age 100, with her certificate, I shook 
her hand; she turned to her nephew and said, “Should I kiss 
him?” To which her nephew replied, “No, he’s a Liberal.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — As well as honouring the eldest citizens 
of our province, we were also pleased to specially recognize the 
31 new citizens who were born January 1, 2000. Mr. Speaker, I 
thank all members for co-operating so fully with the millennium 
celebration. I trust they will be just as enthusiastic to work with 
my department as we plan the celebrations of the province’s 
centennial in 2005. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the budget presented this week is an important and 
integral part in our celebration of the new millennium because 
this budget is our guarantee that our province will face the new 
century with a strong and vibrant economy, a competitive tax 
rate, and a reinvigorated commitment to those basic social 
programs which have built and sustained this province. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to be able to give 
my opinion of what I think of this give-and-take budget that we 
are talking about tonight, Mr. Speaker. And this government 
has become famous for giving a little back to the taxpayer and 
then turning around and taking a whole lot more back in. 
 
We see this in the income tax cuts that this government made, 
they say massive cuts. I think about $41 million, Mr. Speaker, 
this year. If you offset that with the increases in the 
SaskEnergy, SaskTel rates that have gone up this year, I think 
that adds up to approximately $40 million. So in one fell sweep 
we see our tax break come and our tax break go. But then, Mr. 
Speaker, that doesn’t even come near to cover the expansion of 
the PST, which is what, approximately 160, $170 million a 
year. 
 
So who’s the big winner here? The taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
or the NDP-Liberal coalition government? You can answer that 
as easy as I can. The big winner is the government members on 
that side, not the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, if we go back before the last 
election and look at what the Liberal Party at that time — and 
I’m sure you know what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker — what the 
Liberal Party was promoting at that time and what the NDP 
government was promoting. 
 
And let’s look at what the Liberals were asking for with 
agriculture. They said we’ve got to help farmers. They said it 
quietly, but they said it. But on the NDP side, what did they 
say? Continually, Mr. Upshall, the Premier, and every member 
over there said no, oh, no, we can’t help the farmers. 
Continuously kept saying that. 
 
(2045) 
 
The Liberals at that time said we should do more to help with 
the education tax on property. They said it very quietly, but they 
said it. What did we hear from these NDP members at that 
time? Oh, no, we can’t help. Remember, this is before the last 
election. We can’t help the taxpayers out there. 
 
Health care is another example, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
Liberals were saying, especially the doctor was saying, oh, 
we’ve got to do more in health care. I’ve got all these ideas. We 
need more money. We need all these things. And the NDP were 
saying no, once again, we can’t help. No, God forbid, we can’t 
help. 
 
Municipalities. What did we say there? The Liberals again, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, said we have to help, we should be helping. 
We would, if we were in government we would help. And what 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

did the NDP say? Oh, God forbid, we can’t help. We can’t help. 
 
Policing. Another one of the member of the Liberals saying that 
we’ve got to put more money in, we’ve got to hire more police. 
And the NDP said no we can’t, but then at the last minute said 
yes we can, we’ll hire 200 more. But what are they doing now? 
Now they’re saying, well wait and see. A normal NDP tactic. 
 
Highways, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I believe it was the Liberal 
leader himself that said we should put all the gas tax back into 
the roads. All the gas tax back into the roads. Now has the shoe 
ever jumped to the other foot. Because now, yes they upped the 
money for highways a little bit — 250 million — but that’s the 
first year of, I believe, a four-year commitment so far, they’ve 
come anywhere near to putting the $2.5 billion that they talked 
about over a 10-year plan. In fact, I believe, it’s about 200 
million short to this day. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a good example is out in my constituency. 
I have a highway that runs from Wroxton to Kamsack. Two 
years ago they came out . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, good 
example. The leader says, do you call that a highway? Well not 
really, but two years ago they come out and fixed half of it and 
then they disappeared and I don’t know if they will ever be 
back. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member for 
Athabasca on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To introduce a guest, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Again, I apologize to the member from Saltcoats but it’s not 
every day we have somebody from northern Saskatchewan that 
probably travelled nine hours from Buffalo Narrows to here, to 
be here this evening. And I would ask all members, to you and 
through you, to please welcome a gentleman from Buffalo 
Narrows. I believe he’s the deputy mayor of Buffalo and he is 
also one fine hockey player. And his name of course is Mr. 
Brian Morin and I would like all members to welcome Mr. 
Morin here this evening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Cline, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 
Romanow that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, as I was saying, there’s a highway from 
Wroxton to Kamsack that was fixed I believe two years ago 
halfway. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s like replacing every 
other link in a worn out logging chain because it will break just 
as quick. It just doesn’t work. You either fix it all or you might 
as well stay at home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also like to 
touch on municipal funding in this budget because we see very, 
very little for the actual roads out there. There’s a few dollars 
more, but there’s very few actually designated to go out and 
help build, rebuild, our municipal roads. 
 
And you know where they could have got some of this money, I 
believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a couple of places that this 
government has spent money that I don’t think needed to be 
spent . . . we have a Garcea report, went around the province, 
asked people what they wanted, come back, really I don’t 
believe listened to the people, promoted the NDP agenda 
across, and cost $750,000. A lady at SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) convention, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I thought hit the nail on the head. She said, you know, 
Mr. Garcea, we didn’t have a problem until your government 
invented it. And doesn’t that really tell the whole tale. 
 
Here we have municipal governments out there that have never 
run deficits, don’t really go in the hole as the present 
government had. So they’ve kept their house in order, and what 
are we doing now? We’re going out and saying, well now we’re 
going to do some restructuring — not of ourselves, but of the 
exact people that have kept everything in order out there, cut to 
the bone, and ran a very tight ship. I find that totally amazing, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Couple of the recommendations in that report I find amazing, 
and I talked about municipalities, towns, and RMs can’t deficit 
finance. Some of the recommendations for these new district 
municipal boards are that, one, they can deficit finance. I find 
that one very interesting. Cautiously interesting because is this 
just another way of this government downloading onto 
municipalities and saying, well you can run a debt. It’s okay. 
We’ll cut your share from us. You go out and run up a debt. But 
they go on. They expand their borrowing powers. They expand 
their taxing abilities. And that one’s a little interesting, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. How far is that one going to go? Is that going 
to let each district municipal body out there — say — put four, 
five cents a gallon on gas? And one of the recommendations 
said we have to get each municipality acting as one. Well this is 
completely going to be the opposite of that. We’re going to 
have five cents here on gas, three there, two and one because of 
these expanded powers out there. 
 
I think it’s nothing more than another way of this government to 
download onto municipalities and say, but you have the ability 
to raise money now. We saw it before. I think we’re going to 
see it again. 
 
There’s a lot of meetings out there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, right 
now with a lot of very upset people, and it’s not just rural 
municipalities. Now we’re seeing the towns realize that . . . 
Towns of what 1,500 to 2,000, will not have councils anymore 



436 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

as RMs are being done away with, RM councils. To me this is 
amazing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have towns of 2,000 people, 
1,500, 1,000, 500, that will have no local input. But yet we will 
have somebody somewhere, maybe appointed by this 
government — wouldn’t surprise me — setting now both our 
mill rates: the school rate and the municipal rate. Scary, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when you look at it that way. 
 
I might mention that the Minister of Municipal Government I 
notice lately has been passing on a few of his invitations to 
functions. I was at one the other night in Wroxton, 250 upset 
municipal people, and I noticed the one person that was missing 
was the Minister of Municipal Government. I found that 
amazing because some of the people there were from Yorkton, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a riding that that minister represents. 
 
In this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I commend the government 
on a couple of spots here: $25 million to put some of that 
education money back in the farmer’s pocket, and I thought this 
is good. I believe it averages out, we were told by the Finance 
minister, to roughly $440 a farmer. I mean that’s a positive; 
nobody can see anything bad with that. We also saw the fuel tax 
lowered for farmers; I commend them for that. 
 
But in the same breath, a couple of days later, the Minister of 
Education said, if school divisions don’t think they have enough 
money, guess what? Go out and raise the mill rate. Well there 
goes your $440, Mr. Farmer, plus probably a lot more. Your 
fuel tax rebates probably are going to be ate up too and guess 
what, you’re going to gain nothing — in fact you’ll probably 
end up in the hole. This is the same minister, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, a couple of days ago was bragging about the vision he 
had. He said this government, the NDP government, was 
fiscally responsible but he was the one with the vision . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, exactly, a hallucination, and I 
would believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that minister must be 
very near-sighted if he is the one with the vision on that side. 
 
I’d like to talk also about the expansion of the PST and some of 
the calls I’ve had. Car dealers in my area . . . and I have small 
car dealerships but very good community people that hire a lot 
of staff out there, and some of them are saying now what this 
might do to them is the last nail in the coffin. They’ve been 
trying to weather the storm in low prices in agriculture and bear 
through these bad times so that when things pick up they’re 
there. And by expanding the PST I think the feeling out there is 
they may not be able to make it. In fact, one told me it’s to the 
point where you close the doors here and again head for 
Alberta, a place that the members opposite know well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk just for a second on some 
of the things that the expansion of the PST will affect, and just 
go through some of them. Repair services: taxable repair 
services include labour charges to repair, install, assemble, 
dismantle, adjust, restore, recondition, examine, test, refinish, or 
maintain tangible personal property. Tangible personal property 
includes vehicles, equipment, appliances, furniture — 
everything. Everything that moves; some of it doesn’t even 
move. We’ve got her taxed now. Computer services. The list 
just doesn’t stop. Used goods, business assets. 
 
Here’s a good one. This is a way to promote business — 
business assets. Tax must be paid on the purchase price of used 

assets that are acquired for business purposes. What better way 
to drive more businesses to Alberta or somewhere else. 
Personal goods, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The list goes on and on. 
 
Here’s a good one. Non-prescription drugs and medicines. 
What a better way to hurt the seniors and many low-income 
families in this province by taxing non-prescription drugs. 
Maintenance contracts, bedding plants, trees, shrubs. 
 
Here’s one that’s near and dear to my heart, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Veterinary fees, veterinary drugs, medicines and pet 
food. And why that really hits me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
because I have a little dog. Her name is Bugs. She’s probably 
home in my apartment tonight watching this and I don’t want 
to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, be scaring her but now that there’s tax 
on pet food . . . about the 27th, 28th of the month, she may be 
cut off eating. And I’m sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a good 
job, a well-paying job, but if it’s going to affect me, can you 
imagine what that’s going to do to low-income pets. 
 
This list goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Dry cleaning, laundry 
services, telephone answering service, real estate fees. There’s 
an example of millions and millions of dollars I would bet in 
this province that that added tax is going to generate for this 
government. 
 
Credit reporting and collection services. Security and 
investigative services. Flyers and papers and that are sent out. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s just another example of 
give a little, take a lot back in. I don’t think we saw the tip of 
the iceberg yet. When all the details get laid out there, it’s 
probably a way more than 160 million a year. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those additional taxes by expanding 
the PST are going to hurt growth of business in this province; 
they’re going to hurt jobs and once again, as we said before, 
going to drive our young people out of this province. 
 
Another amazing thing, and I think it was amazing to a number 
of members on that side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was the so-called 
flush fund — the liquor and gaming fund. The one that the 
Provincial Auditor thought after the election had $350 million 
in it, and lo and behold, now when the budget comes out, it 
actually has $695 million. 
 
And I found that amazing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
looking on the faces of that side of the House that day when the 
budget was on I think there was a lot of amazement on that side. 
There was a lot of NDP MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) I don’t think knew that that money was sitting there. 
Only the powers to be on that side knew that this government 
had hid away $695 million of liquor and gaming money. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, where on earth was this money when the 
farmers in this province were asking for help early in the spring, 
in fact as far back as a year ago last fall? A wee bit of this 
money would have really helped get the federal government to 
the table. And maybe, number one, we wouldn’t have been 
stuck with a useless AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster 
Assistance) program; and, number two, we might have had a 
decent payment out of them a lot sooner than the ones that are 
supposed to be coming now. Too little, too late, Mr. Speaker, 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 437 

and another give and take example of this budget. 
 
Health care is another example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of an area 
that needs a good look to be taken at it. We need to audit that 
whole system and find out what’s being done right and what’s 
being done wrong. 
 
And what’s the solution on that side of the House? To hire 
Louise Simard, the past Minister of Health in this province who 
was, by the way, the person that started this whole mess, 
reformed health care . . . got us in the position we are. And what 
are we going to do? As a government, we're going to put the fox 
back in charge of the chicken house once again, and here we go 
again. God help us, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — An example of health care and the array it’s 
in is in my area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the East Central Health 
District, the district where the board disappeared. Both 
appointed and elected members gone. And you know why, I 
believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is because that health district, 
trying to supply health services to Swan River, Manitoba; 
Preeceville, Sturgis — a big, big area out there — had a $20 
million debt built up. 
 
There’s a problem with our whole health care system, but there 
was a big problem out there. They were doing what Louise 
Simard had told them to do, and they ran up a $20 million debt. 
And how are we going to fix that? Fire the health board and hire 
Louise Simard back. What a solution to our problems in health 
care. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it just goes on and on. 
 
You know, I had . . . one of the members mentioned here at 
supper, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is how do you start a small 
business in Saskatchewan? And the solution is that you invest 
millions of dollars, build up a big business, and then sit back 
and wait, and before long it’s a small business. Right? With our 
taxing system in this province, you couldn’t have hit a better 
example, and you don’t have to wait long. After this budget, 
it’ll happen quick. 
 
(2100) 
 
Another area I’d like to touch on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we 
could have saved a few bucks. Today was an example. An 
ex-member of this House, Harvey McLane, the people of Arm 
River said in the last election they didn’t want him. And now 
what do we do? We hire Harvey McLane as an advisor to Exec 
Council. I think this is amazing. The other one we have done in 
the last week — and I shouldn’t say “we” because we had no 
part of it; it was the Liberals and NDP coalition — Neil Collins, 
plum job, ex-Liberal candidate. 
 
You know, if I was an NDP candidate that tried to win in the 
last election, I’d be very, very offended by what’s happening 
here. Well they’re not getting the plums, at least yet. All the 
Liberal ex-candidates are. Like who’s next? Gerard Aldridge, or 
the short-term member from Wood River who won’t be with us 
long. He’s going to need a job, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Like where 
does it end? 
 
The one good thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the only other 

four Liberals in the province I saw in the gallery the other day, 
and they were even shaking their head with disgust with this 
budget. So the list isn’t very long. We should get the Liberal’s 
patronage appointments over quick and we’ll start on the NDP 
next. Have patience. It’s coming, I’m sure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on and would love to, but I’d 
better let some of my counterparts speak. So, you know, in 
closing, how many seniors and low-income people, young 
parents raising families, could have been helped with this 
budget if the NDP government had saw fit to just lower taxes 
— not put them up, not take a tax, just lower taxes. You know, 
and it wasn’t too late. One of our members, I believe, is in Swift 
Current, found a solution to help everybody in this province. 
Paul Martin offered a nickel a litre on gas if this government, 
this coalition government, had the gusto to match it. And it’s a 
win win. When you get a dollar of our money back from the 
federal government by matching with a dollar, we win a dollar 
in every case. It was a good, good, sound plan. And what does 
the Finance minister say? Oh we can’t. This government is 
stuck on we can’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as you probably can see by now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
couldn’t support this budget in a million years but I certainly 
can support the amendment brought forward on the gas tax. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to stand here this evening before this 
House to support the first budget of the 21st century — the first 
budget for this century but the seventh consecutive balanced 
budget for this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are 
practical people, people who have struggled and persevered 
throughout the years to build a home and a province that we can 
all be proud of. Through good times and bad, we have proven 
ourselves to be innovative and a very hardy bunch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not that many years ago in my constituency of 
Moose Jaw Wakamow, we went through some very tough 
economic times. You could have walked down Main Street and 
seen any number of empty buildings. Businesses had closed, 
changed, moved away. A lot of jobs had been lost. Our city 
looked like it was going to fade away. Mr. Speaker, the people 
of Moose Jaw didn’t turn out the lights and all move to Alberta. 
No, the citizens of Moose Jaw, with that true Saskatchewan 
spirit, took a hard look at our situation, took stock of the assets 
and qualities that our city had, and decided that if the old 
businesses were no longer there then we would find our niche 
and develop new opportunities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I invite you to walk down 
Main Street Moose Jaw today. Our city has been revitalized 
through the hard work of our citizens, our business people, our 
city council. And with the support of this government Moose Jaw 
is alive and well. 



438 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Our old Land Titles building is now an art 
gallery lovingly restored by well-known local artist Yvette Moore 
and her family. Our CPR station that sat empty for a number of 
years is now a very unique liquor store. Mr. Speaker, I could go on 
and on. The list is long. But an important part of Moose Jaw’s 
heritage revitalization and our tourism growth is that our city has 
been rejuvenated. And Mr. Deputy Speaker, with this 
rejuvenation, Moose Jaw has attracted new businesses: a new 
department store, new hotels, additions onto current hotels, food 
outlets, restaurants, a furniture store, and as recently as Friday, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, an announcement of an Alberta company, XL 
Foods Inc., purchasing the Western Canadian Beef Plant in our 
city. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Imagine Mr. Deputy Speaker, an Alberta 
company expanding into Saskatchewan. Maybe the grass is 
greener on the other side of the fence, and some of the members 
just haven’t realized that we’re already on the right side of the 
fence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, optimism breeds optimism. It’s 
contagious. I’m amazed by the projects that are in the works in 
Moose Jaw. The feeling is everywhere that anything is possible. 
 
This budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, also has that same feeling of 
Saskatchewan vision for growth and opportunity. Our responsible, 
balanced approach has supported the longest period of sustained 
economic growth since the 1970s. As practical people, the citizens 
of Saskatchewan expect our government to be fiscally 
responsible. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And we are. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Fiscally responsible and to live within our 
means, the same, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we all do at home. 
But also to provide the best possible services within that fiscal 
responsibility. In this budget, we have again stuck to those 
values. And with the new Fiscal Stabilization Fund we will 
have even greater security for our citizens in the province. 
 
Lately we have heard a great deal about the future of medicare. 
We need not look far to see that true Saskatchewan spirit of 
innovation and perseverance right here within our Health 
department and our health districts. Not long ago, I attended an 
announcement for a mobile CT (computerized axial 
tomography) scan unit that will travel between Moose Jaw and 
Swift Current. This CT scan will provide service for patients in 
the five health districts in the southwest corner of 
Saskatchewan. The hard work of the Department of Health, the 
five health boards and the staff of the health facilities has given 
us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just one more unique 
made-in-Saskatchewan solution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this kind of commitment to what at times 
may seem like insurmountable problems and with our 
government’s commitment to medicare, I have no doubt that 
Saskatchewan health care will remain the envy of others for 

years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can stand here and brag about Moose Jaw’s 
rejuvenation. But I believe good news stories such as these are 
happening throughout the province. This government’s 
continued support for education, agriculture, economic growth, 
and research and development laid out in this budget speaks 
well for our government’s commitment to our province today 
but also our vision for Saskatchewan of the future. 
 
Finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I must say a few words about our 
government’s tax reform. Over these last few months, many 
hours have been spent at many meetings discussing the tax 
reform package proposed by the Vicq report, listening to 
constituents, friends and yes, even getting advice from family. 
It has been an interesting and worthwhile experience. 
 
As human beings, it’s our nature to be leery of change and 
when that change involves taxes, a topic that affects us all, but 
is understood totally by few, we are even more leery. How 
would changes affect low-income families? Students? Business 
people? Seniors? The possibilities were endless. 
 
I must commend the Department of Finance for answering the 
never-ending stream of questions and for doing a never-ending 
amount of calculations to answer those questions put forward 
by all us backbenchers before the final decisions were made. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — The three guiding principles of tax reform: tax 
reduction must be sustainable and be funded from new 
revenues; it must be matched by investment in public services; 
it must be fair and progressive. These principles were important 
and enforced our government’s commitment to a balanced, fair 
approach for all Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
The PST rebate for lower income earners and for fixed income 
seniors will be an important part of the tax reform package in 
my constituency. It will help to offset any added costs for those 
in the most need. Going to a three-rate structure of a tax on 
income and getting rid of the dreaded flat tax, debt reduction 
surtax, and the high income surtax will also be seen as a 
welcome improvement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this is a good budget, a budget 
that holds a promise of growth and opportunity for all of us in 
Saskatchewan, and it gives me a great deal of pleasure to put 
my support solidly behind it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. I have the honour here today to 
stand in the House to reply to last week’s budget address. The 
residents of Arm River, which I’m proud to represent, are 
clearly very concerned with the contents of the budget this 
government has set forth. 
 
Over the past few days, I have listened closely to the concerns 
to my constituents about this budget and save for a couple of 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 439 

small issues, the people of Arm River have given this budget a 
failing grade. 
 
The reasons are, of course, the immediate tax grab at midnight 
that night of over $150 million — the glaring . . . (inaudible) . . . 
of critical press reports. And just a number of services that have 
been taxed by this government. Number one of them . . . I won’t 
mention like some of my other colleagues have, but one of the 
ones I’ve mentioned to us, mentioned to me from Arm River 
and from the cities here, is a tax on services. People that go out 
and just work with their hands, you’re now taxing them. You 
find that . . . people find that very disturbing. 
 
The Saskatchewan taxpayer should be worthy of our highest 
respect as we serve this noble office, but the way this 
government treated the tax issue shows me very clearly that this 
government has little respect for the hard-working people of 
this province. Of course we all know now that the so-called 
historic tax cuts are in reality a tax hike this year for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
My colleagues have done a good job of accurately sorting out 
this mix in numbers that the government has set before us so it 
seemed redundant on my part to repeat the numbers yet again. 
Suffice it to say that we leave the mixing and numbers to the 
Finance minister who is very good at mixing them up. 
 
As I spoke to my constituents these past few days, the message 
I received regarding tax relief was one of disappointment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. My residents clearly said that while drastic 
across-the-board tax relief was not expected, at the very least 
they wanted to see some form of tax reduction this year. 
 
We did not get anything that even resembled a meaningful tax 
relief policy by this government. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan understand that taxes are needed to 
maintain services but a tax increase without any major 
improvement to the health care, education, roads and aid for 
farmers is the last thing this province needed. 
 
This along with the government’s obvious intention to close 
more hospitals, more schools, more court houses, and remove 
local government through forced amalgamation, clearly 
indicates that this government is abandoning all hope for the 
rural way of life. 
 
Health care in this province does not see any hope of lasting 
improvement in the wake of this budget. As the health care 
system continues to struggle, this government saves hundreds of 
millions of dollars for a rainy day while the very integrity of the 
health system and the people’s lives hang in the balance. 
 
I am at a loss to understand how this government can hide 
under an umbrella of taxpayers’ money while the people of 
Saskatchewan continue to be soaked with economic 
uncertainty, declining services and declining population. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Health minister has set aside $150 
million for a health transition fund. I ask the minister: what is 
this money being set aside for? Will this be used to administer 
the closing of hospitals in this province? 
 
My constituents are very concerned with this question and I’ve 

had many calls over it. Perhaps a new title of this department 
could be the hospital closure department. Why would you even 
put it a fund? Why not just drop it in the health care system? 
This makes us out here very, very nervous. 
 
(2115) 
 
However when we look at the agriculture policy addressed in 
this budget, there are a couple of small but welcome efforts 
made by the Finance minister. In response to unrelenting 
pressure by our party and the people of Saskatchewan, we have 
seen at least some good news for farmers. 
 
Dropping the cap on farm fuel rebates will be most welcome for 
producers faced with higher fuel prices in the year 2000; 
however this only applies to gasoline purchases which makes 
up a small part of the farm fuel bill. Diesel fuel prices are also 
very high this spring, and I believe we need to work hard to 
lower these critical costs to producers. There is a road tax on it. 
 
A modest rebate of farm property tax is also welcome though 
it’s probably a classic case of cause and effect — the cause 
being tax revolt meetings, the result being his usual band-aid to 
a bullet wound. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there still needs to be a more concrete, 
long-term support system put in place for our farmers. Are our 
provincial farmers doomed to a future of demonstrating through 
the winter at the legislature, resulting in only half measures and 
. . . (inaudible) . . . programs cooked up by this government and 
Ottawa? For the sake of the entire agriculture community, I 
hope there is more. 
 
My constituency . . . the local papers are full of land for sale, 
land for rent, and equipment auctions, more than I have seen in 
over two decades. Sadly, many farmers have come to the 
conclusion that enough is enough with very little in the way of 
either monetary or at the very least moral support from this 
government. Some of them are throwing in the towel. The 
damage being caused to the rural social fabric is devastating. 
 
What this government has called the rural transition, many 
farmers are now deciding this has become an exodus; get out 
while you still have something, is this spring’s catchphrase. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s turn our attention over to the 
education portion of the budget. Our hon. Education minister 
must be very proud of his effort for Saskatchewan students. 
Today the costs are now higher for all higher levels of 
education thanks to the PST expansion and the freeze in 
educational funding levels. Both students and teachers are 
finding an increasingly difficult situation to deal with on a daily 
basis. 
 
The minister’s response or lack of response to the education 
problems was to endorse what was obviously a strike at the 
future of young people in our province. If the minister who 
claims to be a Liberal would begin to work with the students of 
Saskatchewan rather than against them, perhaps then the issues 
of education begin to improve. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for a government, you seem set on 
expanding provincial education health tax, they’re certainly not 



440 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

improving in any way the very institutions they claim they are 
collecting for. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we’re well aware, springtime in our 
lovely province has arrived, and for farmers who are able to, 
thoughts of seeding are at the foremost of their minds, the grass 
begins to turn green. Flowers begin to grow, and of course, 
pavement in our highways begin to fall apart. How ironic it 
seems to have high gas prices versus crumbling roads. Now the 
average Saskatchewan resident has two reasons to stay at home. 
Once again . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. All hon. 
members, I just wish to point out that the level of noise is rising. 
There’s no individual at fault here, but I ask all hon. members’ 
co-operation in keeping the noise level down, so our guest in 
the gallery can hear what’s going on. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well maybe 
I’ll just have to talk louder. 
 
As I was going, again our far-sighted government decided to 
put forth only a small portion of what’s really needed to renew 
our infrastructure. Perhaps the reason is that the government is 
afraid to lose its support of the automotive repair industry 
which provides millions of dollars worth of shocks, struts, tires, 
wheels, and hubcaps to Saskatchewan’s battered vehicles each 
year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I look through the budget, one of the 
numbers that I’ve been looking at, Sask Water budget . . . it 
seems that this budget has doubled, something that I, as Sask 
Water critic, is interested in. Since I may have been responsible 
for the result of that since the many requests I’ve made to the 
minister over there, clearly for all the work that needs to be 
done throughout the province, such as channel clearing, 
increased funding for conservation development authorities, 
bridge repair, drainage products, channel work infrastructure, 
and assistance for rural potato producers affected by the 
previous government policy. 
 
Since I feel I’ve been instrumental in getting this increase, I feel 
that I should have a say in how it is spent because I believe the 
minister can use all the help he can get. The only concern I have 
with going over the Sask Water budget too, another one I found, 
was the last major increase budget occurred in 1996. Possibly, 
that was before my time, possibly the year that SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) was 
formed. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hope that Sask Water does not 
intend to use this extra money to invest in another failed 
venture. 
 
I cannot help but come back again to the issue of the expanded 
PST and its far reaching implications. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
what real benefit has this government attained by its highly 
touted Vicq report that’s recommended a drop in the PST to 5 
per cent, taxing almost everything, only to keep it at 6 per cent 
and tax whatever it felt like taxing? Only an arrogant and 
out-of-touch government would have implemented such an 
off-handed policy on the backs of the electorate. 
 
And it seems that this government left no stone unturned in 
their bid to extract tax dollars from hard working residents. Yes, 

this government gave the full package deal to Saskatchewan 
families. Their motto was, after we take more of mom and dad’s 
pay cheque and reduce the quality of the kids’ education, we 
will complete the package by taxing Rover’s meal. They even 
tried to tax Ronald McDonald but that didn’t pan out. As I said, 
they left no stone unturned. While this may seem humorous, it 
only underscores the length to which the NDP will go to further 
build up their slush fund while ignoring essential services to 
residents. 
 
Expansion of the PST for off-reserve purchases is another 
policy brought forth by this government. While the noble 
people of Saskatchewan First Nations believe firmly in the ideal 
of fairness, quality, and the true spirit of negotiation, they felt 
like most other Saskatchewan residents, that they had been shut 
out of providing any valuable input towards the formation of 
the government budget policy. It is the lack of negotiation and 
that spirit of goodwill which has gravely concerned First 
Nations leaders in the province, and these concerns should be 
addressed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in his speech last week, the Minister of 
Finance referred several times to the historic nature of the 
policy contained in his budget. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find this 
a puzzling term when considering the policy or lack of policy 
that the minister was referring to. A historical event is most 
often an event occurring in the past to which greatness and fame 
can be attributed. I see absolutely no greatness in this budget 
and its contents. I do not see fame; but indeed infamy. Fifty 
years from now this government will be looked back upon for 
what they didn’t do rather than what they did do. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan does have a great history. 
The pioneering spirit to this great land goes back well over a 
century, a spirit forged out of goodwill, determination, and a 
passion for the fundamental elements of democracy. The 
veterans proved the greatness through two world wars fought 
for the cause of democracy and peace. Saskatchewan people 
suffered gravely through the great depression and worked hard 
to build this province to what it is today. 
 
In closing, I would hope that this government rethink some of 
this new policy for further damage . . . before further damage is 
done to the welfare of Saskatchewan people. The people of Arm 
River constituency also hope that this government would do 
better for a brighter future here in Saskatchewan. And I will 
continue to press this government to set this province on the 
right track. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for that reason, I cannot support this budget but I 
will support the amendment brought forth by the member of 
Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to, at the beginning of my remarks, indicate that 
I very much support this budget. As a matter of fact, I want to 
say that I’m very proud on behalf of the people of Prince Albert 
Northcote to be able to support yet another balanced budget by 
this administration. 
 
And I also want — before I begin commenting on the budget — 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 441 

to thank the people from Prince Albert Northcote for sending 
me back to represent them in the legislature one more time. 
 
I just will be brief tonight, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I want to 
make a few observations before I take my place. Firstly I want 
to say that this is a very good budget for the people of 
Saskatchewan that will deliver the largest tax cut in the history 
of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And that’s what people were asking 
members on this side for, and that’s what we’ve been able to 
deliver. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, increasing in very 
important spending areas like health care, $200 million in extra 
funding; education, an increase of 5 per cent; removing totally 
the farm fuel taxes; and as well, a $50 million rebate on 
agricultural land. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I listen to members opposite, they chose to 
ignore the decreases in taxation that was and is a very big part 
of this budget — $260 million a year by the year 2003. And I 
want to say as well that I’m very disappointed in the approach 
that this opposition is taking. So let me speak particularly to the 
new members tonight. 
 
You had a chance to represent your constituents in support of an 
initiative that would reduce their taxes. But you chose not to do 
that because you’re still led by the same old crew who was part 
of the administration that put us millions and millions of 
dollars, billions of dollars in debt in the 1980s. And I want to 
talk a little bit about that tonight, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re 
leading them into asking this provincial government again — 
not unlike the 1980s — to reduce the fuel tax. And they got to 
remember history: $140 million a year that Grant Devine, the 
former premier, reduced the fuel tax — all borrowed money — 
with no consideration with respect to balancing the budgets but 
cheap political expediency. And that’s exactly how that got to 
be part of an initiative that came from this legislature, and I 
want to say shame on them for not remembering the history of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go back just a few years. I want to talk 
about a couple of areas tonight. One is with respect to taxation. 
And I want to remind members opposite where part of their 
caucus was just a few short years ago with respect to sales tax. 
 
And I want to just quote from Hansard. This is from December 
20, 1991. It’s not a long time ago at all. The member from 
Souris Cannington, and he says: “But let me tell you, sir, that 
synchronizing the tax was not bad, was not one of those 
mistakes.” He was referring of course to . . . he said we 
recognize that we made mistakes. But then he goes on to say 
that synchronizing the taxes was not one of them:  
 

The basic premise of this synchronization of the tax system 
is right; it’s economically sound for the people of Souris 
Cannington. It’s absolutely essential. 

 
And that’s what he said. Not an expansion, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to the sales tax, but total harmonization with the Tory 
implemented GST. 
 

And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he went on as well . . . 
same day:  
 

They need to raise some revenues as some point as I 
mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker. Those revenues are going 
to take various forms, and I think the synchronization of 
the E&H tax with the GST, Mr. Speaker, is the preferable 
method. 

 
And this is one of the leaders in their caucus. And today they 
list a member from Swift Current who worked for another guy 
from that era . . . Mr. Gerich was listing a number of items that 
are going to be taxed under the expanded provincial sales tax. 
And he’s probably right. 
 
But I want to go back to the member from Cannington: “How 
do you plan to replace this revenue,” says he. “Will you raise 
personal income tax (and this is a quote) when we were 
eliminating the Bill that harmonized the provincial sales tax 
with the federal GST?” And that’s what he said then. So what 
does he say now? What does he say now, Mr. Speaker? What 
does he say now? 
 
And I want to quote — this is from April 23 of that same year, 
1991 — the member from Moosomin who sits as part of this 
caucus. And here’s what he says: 
 

. . . We may feel that 7 per cent a large tax but in reality, if 
we looked at other areas of not only our country but other 
areas of the world, we would find that the residents of this 
province, in total, really don’t face a great burden . . . 

 
That’s what he said. That’s what he said, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But in this House, faced with a budget that delivers the largest 
tax reduction in this province’s history, they want to focus on 
anything but the tax reductions because they know it’s the right 
thing to do for this economy. They know it’s what the people of 
Saskatchewan were sending us here for and asking us for, and 
they don’t want to talk about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And all of you should know that 
they don’t want to talk about it and why they don’t want to talk 
about it. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, that simply isn’t a good enough 
critique. These from people who were going to deliver us . . . 
the Leader of the Opposition continually says we’re going to 
start delivering some good critique, and we’re going to be a 
responsible opposition. And I say, Mr. Speaker, they had an 
opportunity to start right during this budget, but they chose to 
play petty politics as opposed to doing an honest and a fair 
critique of the budget. 
 
And so I say to you, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to be quoting 
any more from where they were on sales tax because it’s clear 
where they were. They’ve got a number of little items that 
they’ll want to discuss. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Speaker, it’s not what the people of this 
province are asking for. They’re not asking for a $60 million 



442 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

tax cut on fuel when we have delivered just days ago a budget 
that showed an $8 million surplus. 
 
How do you make that wash, I say to the member from Swift 
Current. You offer up $60 million in fuel tax with an $8 million 
budget. But that’s exactly how you guys and your friends got us 
into problems, and that’s why we’re still spending $750 million 
a year to serve the interest on your debt. That’s how you got us 
here and we aren’t going back there, I say to members opposite. 
We’re not going there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to say 
there are some comments that have been made by members on 
the other side that I think all of us need to be reminded of. 
We’ve seen them standing here and ask for increases to health 
care spending, over and above what we budgeted, the 200 
million extra that we budgeted. They’ve asked for extra for 
highways, they’ve asked for extra for education. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s not all. They’ve asked for more into the pockets of the 
farmers and we have done what we can in this budget to 
address, as much as we could afford, assistance for farm 
families. 
 
But I tell you what we’re not going to do. We’re not going to 
follow their suggestions and lead this province back into deficit 
budgeting. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, they say one thing and they do 
another. I want to quote from the Leader of the Opposition in a 
speech he gave in the House of Commons June 2, 1995. Now 
that’s when he was a Reformer of course. He’s not a Reformer 
now, he’s a leader of what they call the Saskatchewan Party. 
But I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, it’s one thing in 
opposition as a Reformer, and I just want to remind him where 
he was. 
 
Week after week after week, he and his party have been calling 
for hundreds of millions of dollars to go into farm support. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we will do what we can. But I want to remind that 
member what he said when he was in the House of Commons in 
Ottawa: 
 

The government must set some priorities. I cannot 
enunciate this strongly enough. The first priority is to get 
out of the grants business 100 per cent; (said he) no more 
grants, period. 
 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, he goes on. He makes another 
couple of points, but then the fourth point was very interesting 
again. And he says: 
 

. . . there should be no guarantees to small business and 
there should be no loan guarantees to . . . (farmers). 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a very, a very short description of 
what this opposition party is about. This is politics, straight and 
simple. It’s nothing more and it’s nothing less. Promise, 
promise, promise, and never ever once consider what you have 
to do to pay for your promises. And the member for 
Souris-Cannington says, from our perspective, it’s tax, tax, tax. 
 

I’ll say to you, Mr. Speaker, that member knows full well that 
there are going to be 55,000 people who are no longer going to 
be on the tax rolls in the year 2003 when this plan is introduced 
and he knows that. He knows that and he . . . He knows that but 
he doesn’t want to talk about it. He chirps from his seat and 
that’s fine. That’s fine. 
 
But I tell you I just want to share with you what a single senior 
at the end of the year 2003 will be saving — a net saving of 
$540, Mr. Speaker, a net tax reduction for a single senior of 
52.7 per cent. That’s what this budget is about and I tell you, 
you can continue your snow job, member, but you know how 
long it’ll last? Till July. Till July when people start feeling the 
impacts of more money in their pocket from the budget that was 
delivered by the Finance minister just short days ago. 
 
And I want to tell you as well that the chamber of commerce 
and the business community know what these changes meant to 
them. And they know what it’s going to mean in their pockets. 
So I say, the member also knows that in this year there’s going 
to be a net decrease of taxes to the people of Saskatchewan of 
$40 million. And he knows that. He knows that. 
 
But I tell you what. All of you continue to play politics and 
that’s fine. What we’ll do is continue to deliver responsible, 
balanced budgets for the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And we’re going to continue to 
lower the taxes in this province and make this province even 
more competitive than it is now. 
 
And I say to members opposite, they can talk about Alberta and 
they can talk about the Alberta advantage all they want. But I 
tell you what. We never had Leduc #1 here in 1949. We never 
had the light sweet crude reserves. But I tell you what we had. 
We had a Tory government in the 1980s that almost brought 
this province to his knees and we’re still fighting our way out of 
it and we’ll bring this province back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, this opposition has 
done more to destroy the confidence of the business community 
and our young people than any single entity that I can think of 
in this province. I never hear a positive statement come from 
the opposition members with respect to the good things that are 
happening in this province and there are good things that are 
happening. 
 
The resource sector, the member from Swift Current knows full 
well what’s going on in your area. There’s been more oil . . . 
there have been more natural gas wells drilled in that area in the 
last three years than you’ve ever seen and you’ve lived there for 
a long, long time. And I tell you what, Mr. Member, there’s 
going to be a lot more. 
 
You got record numbers of heavy wells drilled, we’ve got oil 
and gas being pumped out of the ground in areas where Tri 
Link and Berkley Petroleum are working areas that have never, 
ever been — never, ever been worked. And there are some good 
things happening. But I tell you, you continue to spew gloom 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 443 

and doom and that’s fine. I and my colleagues, this coalition 
government, will continue to deliver a positive message to the 
young people of this province to tell them that there is a good 
opportunity for them to get married, raise their kids and their 
families here in this province. And there will be opportunities in 
the future and they will be created because we’re having a 
responsible administration that’s reducing the debt, that’s 
reducing taxes, and that’s going to continue to create a positive 
environment for Saskatchewan people. And that’s the difference 
between you and us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wholeheartedly support this budget and I will not 
be supporting the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
citizens of the Carrot River Valley constituency, I am very 
pleased and honoured to rise in the Assembly today to 
participate in the budget debate. This is my first opportunity to 
offer a comment on the fiscal competency of the government 
since receiving the confidence of the citizens of the Carrot 
River Valley riding last fall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget debate should represent a turning point 
in the history of this province. Last fall the citizens of this great 
province indicated their willingness to plot a new course for the 
future. The popular vote in September’s election was very clear. 
The governing party was rebuked. 
 
The first budget of this legislature should be a roadmap to guide 
us on a journey of renewal. I am sad to report, Mr. Speaker, that 
the minister appears to have given this important assignment his 
best shot and has proven to be a less than stellar pilot. Or 
co-pilot. We’re not sure which is which anymore. 
 
However, before I offer a few observations and suggestions to 
help the minister focus on the task at hand, I would like to offer 
a few words of encouragement. I would not after all want to 
discourage him any further. His is a difficult and important 
assignment. And after looking at the players filling the benches 
around him, it’s abundantly clear he needs all the 
encouragement he can get. At the outset, Mr. Speaker, allow me 
to congratulate the minister. I know it is unusual for an 
opposition member to offer congratulations to a member 
opposite, but today I believe it is in order. I want to congratulate 
him for having the courage to recognize one fundamental and 
critical fact — that he and his party have been wrong. 
 
The cornerstone of this budget is a profound restructuring of the 
system for financing government operations. At the very heart 
of this year’s budget document is a completely new approach to 
generating tax revenue needed to fund public spending. In short, 
Mr. Speaker, this Minister of Finance, indeed this government, 
has finally conceded that the system they built over the last 50 
years is broken and badly in need of an overhaul. I would like 
to acknowledge the minister’s powers of observation for 
recognizing his government’s fiscal shortcomings. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would further congratulate the minister on 
convincing his colleagues that nothing short of a wholesale 
restructuring of their beloved tax and grab system was the only 
option left. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, I am not surprised we’re 

seeing these changes this year. Some of these changes should 
have been made years ago. Maybe it’s just that the members 
opposite lacked the cerebral dexterity to move quicker. 
 
But all citizens of Saskatchewan understand that this minister 
has been in his current post for only a few years. I have been 
pleasantly surprised that in that short period of time he has not 
only seen the light but has managed to successfully explain 
some of the simple stuff to some of his caucus colleagues as 
well. I am certain, Mr. Speaker, that he secretly would thank the 
members on this side of the House for making his job easier. If 
it weren’t for our electoral success last fall, he would have had 
another dozen or so slow learners to put through his class. In 
fact, he’s done such a good job of helping his NDP colleagues 
come to grips with economic reality, I suspect he’s already 
working on a book entitled “government economics for 
dummies.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget and the Minister of Finance, who has 
taken great pride as its author, offers an extremely distressing 
testament to the state of affairs in Saskatchewan. By adopting a 
completely new approach to taxation, this minister has rejected 
everything he, his government, and more importantly, his party 
espoused for the past half century. In very simple terms, Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Finance rose in the House last week 
and announced that his government and his party, which have 
governed this province for most of the last half century, failed. 
Very simply, as we enter a new millennium the New 
Democratic Party came to the realization under their 
management Saskatchewan is a failed social experiment. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP and their predecessors took a thriving, 
vibrant province built by the pioneer spirit of immigrants who 
came looking for an opportunity to excel and turned it into a 
social test tube. Sadly the evil brew the NDP and the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) concocted has all but 
killed this province’s spirit of enterprise and optimism. This 
budget with its fundamental change in direction amounts to a 
confession by the NDP that their plan is a failure and now 
they’re looking for a fresh option. 
 
The option they have decided upon, Mr. Speaker, is worth 
noting. This minister has, for example, announced that the rate 
on capital gains will be dropped. And why did he do that, Mr. 
Speaker? Because many Saskatchewan people have been 
moving to Alberta to liquidate assets. They are doing it because 
Alberta has a lower tax regime. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, the minister has concluded that this 
insidious doctrine of socialism has failed. Mr. Speaker, after 50 
years of NDP and CCF mismanagement, Saskatchewan is a 
failed social experiment. But I am proud to report an important 
member of the government opposite, no less than the Minister 
of Finance, has now come to the same conclusion. 
 
If this failure had not so severely undermined Saskatchewan’s 
economy and its future, Mr. Speaker, I might actually feel 
sympathy for the minister. After all being the first to recognize 
that your entire life in public service you were misguided must 
be difficult. 
 



444 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, this minister also announced profound and 
fundamental changes to the province’s income tax structure. 
And why did he do that? Because he had to, Mr. Speaker, 
because Saskatchewan under the NDP’s management has fallen 
behind. 
 
It’s very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that this minister has chosen 
to defend his budgetary decisions by announcing that in three 
years Saskatchewan will have a tax system that is as 
competitive as Alberta’s. There it is, Mr. Speaker, the smoking 
gun. The NDP government has announced that Alberta had it 
right and Saskatchewan with its NDP-CCF management team 
got it wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, it is customary for a 
member of the opposition to raise a question of confidence in 
the Minister of Finance and the budget document. Ironically the 
minister himself has called into question the competency of his 
party and previous governments, of which he was a senior 
member, with this document. Even he has lost confidence in the 
approach and the platform employed by the NDP and the CCF 
over the last half century. 
 
I want, Mr. Speaker, to welcome the minister to reality. By 
abandoning a failing system and looking for a solution that has 
worked for provinces like Alberta, you’re showing promise, 
albeit 50 years too late. I’m confident that if the minister 
persists, even some of the brighter ones in the NDP caucus will 
begin to catch on. So in a way, Mr. Speaker, this debate is about 
a good news story. It’s about a government that, after 50 years 
of failed experimentation, has decided to remove the blinkers, 
to expand its horizons and seek an alternative that is functioning 
effectively. The sad news is that it took so long and so much 
damage was done to the province of Saskatchewan along the 
way. 
 
I would ask you, for example, to consider the problems this 
government has inflicted on the community of Carrot River, an 
important centre in the riding I represent to this Assembly. 
Carrot River, Mr. Speaker, is a beautiful town that offers a 
vibrant and wonderful lifestyle. One of the members opposite 
raises the question of the sawmill. I hear rumours the sawmill 
may in fact be relocating from Carrot River because of a lack of 
medical services. So, so much for that. 
 
It blends a combination of enterprising people with the 
blessings of Mother Nature, has a high profile regional park 
complete with a challenging, visually appealing golf course. It 
also holds the promise of a buoyant tourism industry built 
around a remarkable dinosaur discovery. All in all, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a community with a strong history and a 
promising future. Recently, however, this government has at 
best left the residents of Carrot River and area with a feeling of 
disappointment over the handling of their health care delivery 
and at worst, Mr. Speaker, they are angry and feel betrayed. A 
few short weeks ago, residents of Carrot River and district were 
told the community’s hospital would be closed. Just another 
victim of the government’s mishandling of the health care 
budget and system. Once again, Mr. Speaker, we see evidence 
of the NDP’s failed social experiment. 
 

This party that so proudly proclaims from one end of Canada to 
the other that health care is the NDP gift to Canada is also the 
party that takes it away, Mr. Speaker. And the budget delivered 
by this Minister of Finance does nothing to address the 
situation. In fact, he has only confirmed that the people of 
Carrot River need not look to the NDP for answers on health 
care. It is abundantly clear, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
and the NDP Party have lost their way. They revel in living and 
re-living past glories, the heady days of bringing publicly 
funded health care to Saskatchewan and Canada. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, that was 40 years ago. This is an outfit sadly passed its 
prime. Like the boxer who doesn’t know when to hang up his 
gloves, the NDP of today, as represented by the members 
opposite, is a relic of a bygone era. 
 
The NDP, Mr. Speaker, is to modern governance what the 
leisure suit is to fashion. Once on the leading edge, today it’s 
badly out of style. Perhaps the time has arrived, Mr. Speaker, 
for the railwayman’s boy to take a walk in a snowstorm as well 
and to ponder his future about public life. It’s clear to the 
members on this side of the House that after almost four 
decades in politics the Premier and his party have found 
themselves out of step with a rapidly changing world. 
 
Fifty years of socialism have been a bust, Mr. Speaker. The 
government has found itself looking to Alberta for solutions. 
After 30 years in politics, even the province . . . the Premier, 
looks to the West, to Alberta. And what does he see, Mr. 
Speaker? He sees hundreds of thousands of people who grew up 
in Saskatchewan, people who were drawn to a vibrant economy 
built on a people-friendly tax system. In fact, Mr. Speaker, that 
tax system is so friendly the leisure suit crowd across the floor 
has now come to the conclusion it has no option but to copy it. 
 
What a stark revelation, Mr. Speaker. It’s obvious the socialist 
way has failed, even after 50 years of trying. Sadly, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan under the NDP and their predecessors 
have proved to be a social experiment that went wrong. As 
people left the province in droves, those who stayed behind 
were treated to hospital closures. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, it is not difficult to understand why the 
Minister of Finance determined that the tax regimen he and 
other socialist ministers of Finance administered had to change. 
Very simply, Mr. Speaker, it didn’t work. At last one minister, 
the Minister of Finance, has the courage to admit it. For that, I 
commend him. 
 
However, I find it difficult to accept that it took him and those 
of his political persuasion most of the last century to figure it 
out. The people of this province have paid just so the NDP and 
CCF could tinker in their social laboratory. The people of 
Saskatchewan deserve more than to be treated like guinea pigs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have reached a milestone in this province’s 
history. The first one came nearly a hundred years ago when the 
province was formed, a vast piece of the new world that held 
promise for hundreds of thousands of immigrants. The second 
came in 1944 when the great experiment began. And what’s 
really interesting is that my grandfather and grandmother 
immigrated to this country in 1928 and I don’t think that they 
expected, after having escaped a similar type of experiment in 
Europe, that their children and grandchildren would be 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

subjected to the very same thing in this province in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — The experiment, Mr. Speaker, is now 
complete. It failed. Even the Minister of Finance has had to 
acknowledge its demise. That, Mr. Speaker, is the third 
milestone. The NDP lost its way and now they’ve embarked on 
a new strategy, one that those of us who sit on this side of the 
Assembly have advanced since the Saskatchewan Party was 
formed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before allowing my name to stand for election for 
the Carrot River Valley riding I was actively involved in SARC, 
the Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres. It’s an 
organization that makes it possible for people with disabilities 
in our province to fulfill their promise, to make a contribution 
to the best of their ability. It acknowledges a champion’s 
initiative. It’s a symbol of the importance of contributing to the 
growth of an economy and a society. It’s about empowerment 
and making it possible for people with disabilities to feel the 
joys of achievement and the fulfillment of assuming 
responsibility. It’s not about sympathy, Mr. Speaker, nor is it 
about paternalism. It’s about helping people find their way in 
the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, I have seen first-hand how 
powerful things such as initiative and responsibility can be. The 
people of this province have the ability to excel. We have 
proven time and time again that Saskatchewan people can go 
anywhere in the world and gravitate to the top. We are a 
talented bunch. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, too many people who grew up in 
this province have found the best way to achieve those noble 
objectives is to leave this province, to leave Saskatchewan. The 
most common destination has been Alberta. And why Alberta, 
Mr. Speaker? The answers are abundantly clear. Like 
Saskatchewan they made a choice. Fifty years ago in the wake 
of the Great Depression and the dust bowl of the dirty thirties, 
like Saskatchewan they were feeling pretty low. About the only 
thing they could really count on was a deep-seated faith in 
religion and both chose to follow charismatic preachers. One 
province turned left, the other turned right. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, the final chapter in the story of these two 
provinces has been completed. Alberta, Mr. Speaker, is 
thriving. Although it had fewer people and a smaller economy 
than Saskatchewan when both provinces embarked on the 
journey in the last 50 years. Alberta stands today with a 
population base three times ours. They not only caught up to us, 
they passed over us three times. And who, Mr. Speaker, 
presided over Saskatchewan’s stagnant half-century — the 
members opposite and their predecessors in the CCF. And I 
found the comments very interesting during this debate about 
we shouldn’t be referring to Alberta. 
 
And I was particularly interested in the comments of the 
member from Regina Dewdney. We were talking about Alberta 
too much. Well I’d like to talk to the member about my 

sister-in-law. My wife’s youngest sister. She is close enough to 
my children they consider her their oldest sister. She was laid 
off from a job she had with a major grain handling company 
last fall. Where did she go to find a job? Alberta. She followed 
the last of my mother-in-law and father-in-law’s children to 
Alberta. When she wanted to come back home she was given a 
recall date at her previous job. They couldn’t honour it. It was 
this Monday because things were still uncertain. They couldn’t 
honour it. They told her to come back more towards the end of 
the month. If there isn’t a job there for her at the end of the 
month, she’s going back to Alberta. 
 
How can I not think about Alberta when I have three children 
that are constantly asking me where is auntie? Where is uncle? 
Can we visit them? When are they coming home? Constantly. 
And I would invite the member from Regina Dewdney to come 
back home to Porcupine Plain with me this weekend and 
explain to my children how they are supposed to stop thinking 
and talking about Alberta when everything and everybody they 
hold so near and dear and loves so much is in Alberta. 
Sometimes we have to be careful about what we ask for. 
 
The experiment has led to stunted growth. It’s led to 
out-migration. If all of the residents of Calgary who grew up in 
Saskatchewan were to come home, Mr. Speaker, it could create 
the third largest city in Saskatchewan. It’s led to the 
deteriorating infrastructure and declining services. The loss of 
acute care services in the community of Carrot River is the 
NDP’s gift to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP-CCF plan simply didn’t work. It chased 
productive people out of this province. It led to one of the 
highest tax rates in the western world and declining service 
levels. Mr. Speaker, I am not surprised that the Minister of 
Finance, in the second paragraph of his budget address, said this 
is a time “for not looking back to what was, but ahead to what 
can be.” 
 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, when he looks back over the NDP-CCF 
record of stunted economic and population growth, even this 
staunchly partisan minister concluded he had no choice but to 
concede failure. Little wonder he went on to say, “I say to the 
people of Saskatchewan that it is time to move forward.” 
Looking back over 50 years of NDP-CCF management is not a 
pretty sight. 
 
(2200) 
 
And how has he chosen to move forward? By introducing a 
completely restructured income tax system. He has concluded 
that the Alberta model, the one that has attracted more than 
100,000 Saskatchewan people to the city of Calgary, is working 
and the 50-year-old NDP-CCF legacy of tax and stifle has 
failed. 
 
He has decided, Mr. Speaker, to reform the NDP-CCF tax 
system but the method he has chosen to deliver reform suggests 
he is still quite low on the learning curve. On one hand the 
minister proudly proclaims in every media interview that he can 
get that these tax changes mean that Saskatchewan will be 
competitive with Alberta in three years. In three years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



446 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

He just doesn’t get it. People in this province are making their 
choices today. My sister-in-law, Dianne, will be making her 
choice soon. They can’t wait for three years to get competitive 
tax rates in Saskatchewan. Or they can move to Alberta today to 
get competitive tax rates. 
 
For too long, Mr. Speaker, the NDP-CCF has advanced a 
philosophy that anyone who was tax sensitive has already left. 
Well that’s bad public policy, Mr. Speaker. It’s a philosophy 
that promotes negative attitudes and headlines. It fosters a belief 
that that we cannot succeed. It caused literally hundred of 
thousands of people to leave the province in search of a more 
positive environment. What a sad record of achievement for the 
NDP and their forebearers, the CCF. They claim ownership of 
caring but in reality all they achieved was to chase their own 
citizens away. This is not a badge of honour to be worn 
proudly, Mr. Speaker; it is the symbol of failure, a failed social 
experiment. 
 
Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, in fairness, I should probably look 
something positive in all this. Well while that’s a difficult 
assignment, I have managed to come up with one reason to 
congratulate the NDP. They have been a wonderful catalyst for 
economic growth. Unfortunately the economic development 
they generated occurred in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario and 
around the world as they chased out our best, our brightest, and 
most productive. 
 
On top of it, Mr. Speaker, in the face of the revelation that some 
of the highest income tax rates in the western world just might 
be a bad idea, the NDP had the audacity to contradict its own 
budgetary theme of lower taxes by raising sales tax revenues. 
The folks on the government side of the House may be nice 
people, Mr. Speaker, but they don’t win awards for consistency. 
While acknowledging on one hand that exorbitant income taxes 
must be reduced, the minister and his colleagues, the very 
people who have masterminded the failed social experiment, 
fall back into their default position: back to the old and failed 
formula increasing tax levels as a mechanism for growth. Mr. 
Speaker, this strategy has failed for 50 years and will continue 
to fail. A higher tax is a higher tax is a higher tax. That this 
minister and his caucus colleagues would actually believe 
raising one tax today in order to lower another in three years is 
sensible is perhaps the most telling statement of all. Welcome to 
wonderland, Alice, is the only line missing from the budget 
address. 
 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is a province with huge potential. 
It has a vast and productive land base populated by innovative 
and hard working people. They don’t want much, just a chance 
to let their initiative flourish, to assume responsibility to look 
after themselves, and to have enough left over at the end of the 
month to put a couple of bucks away for their old age. 
 
They don’t want the government reaching into one pocket to 
put some in the other pocket. They don’t want to spend holidays 
travelling to Alberta to see their children and grandchildren. 
Instead, Mr. Speaker, they just want a chance — a chance to 
build better lives for themselves, to decide on their own if the 
acute care facility in their community should close, not to have 
some faceless bureaucrat in Regina impose that decision upon 
them. 
 

This is not complicated stuff, Mr. Speaker. The people of this 
province just want to do well, to get ahead and not spend their 
lives fighting off the insidious hand of government at every 
turn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Minister of Finance may slowly be beginning 
to catch on — ever so slowly — learning to listen to the people 
of the province, and to those of us on this side of the House, the 
party reflecting the largest share of the popular vote in the 
election. At last it appears he’s heard the message. Income taxes 
are too high. Unfortunately he is a lone voice amongst the 
leisure suit crowd across the floor. The rest of those polyester 
retreads persist in pursuing the tired worn out philosophy that 
undermined this province for 50 years that government knows 
best and more government is even better. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, the minister did all he could. He’s just one 
person. He gave it his best shot and, not surprisingly, he failed 
— didn’t make the grade. The rest of them continue to sing 
from that worn out old NDP hymn sheet, once again 
proclaiming that old NDP adage: more government is better 
than less, that higher taxes today in exchange for a mere 
promise of cuts in three years is the NDP version of progress. 
And in the end, nothing really changes. 
 
This minister spends months in consultation and then proudly 
proclaims he has found a new economic strategy. Then he rises 
in the Assembly to unveil his magical plan. What does he come 
up with? He announces that he has once again raised taxes. 
 
The member from Kelvington-Wadena had it right earlier this 
evening when she said this minister must think he’s Olive Oil’s 
brother Wimpy, the cartoon character, as he proudly proclaims, 
for a tax grab today I’ll gladly give you a reduction in three 
years. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is not the cartoon world of 
Popeye and Olive Oil. It’s a real place with real people who 
have real dreams and aspirations. All they want is the 
environment to turn those dreams and aspirations into reality 
through their own hard work, imagination, and innovation. 
They don’t want government that grows larger and larger, 
draining their economic strength. 
 
Mr. Minister, I commend you for realizing the course you and 
your predecessors charted for the last half century was wrong. I 
concur with your conclusion. It was and is wrong. Nonetheless, 
I cannot support this budget because, like your political test, 
your political philosophy, it fails to meet the reality test. On one 
hand you admit that taxes are too high. On the other hand you 
increase taxes. Maybe next year you’ll get it, or if the people of 
Saskatchewan have their way, it will be a Saskatchewan Party 
minister of Finance with a vision for success instead of a legacy 
of out-migration, failing infrastructure and services, and a 
misguided social experiment at the public expense. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at this point, as much as I know the members 
opposite would love to have me continue, I would like to move 
that we adjourn debate. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 447 

BILL WITHDRAWN 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Regina Victoria: 
 

That by leave of the Assembly, that the order for second 
reading of Bill No. 8, The Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training Act be discharged and the 
said Bill be withdrawn. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member for Regina Victoria. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:12 p.m. 
 



 

 


