





























































Hansard: May 10, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1117 
 May 10, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand today to present petitions from some of my 
constituents who would dearly love to have much better cellular 
telephone coverage in their areas. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 
 

And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Bruno, 
from Prud’homme; also from Wakaw, and Aberdeen, and from 
the Vonda area also. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens still concerned about the high price of fuel. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
community of Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 
regards to the high cost of fuel. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And this petition is signed by people from the Candle Lake 
area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
stand today to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens concerned about the high cost of fuel. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 

government. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And it’s signed by people from Kinistino, Melfort, and 
Ridgedale. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
people in Swift Current and area who are concerned about the 
high cost of fuel. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by the federal and provincial 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in Swift 
Current and Herbert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
from citizens who are opposed to forced municipal 
amalgamation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And it’s signed by residents of Govan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned about the high 
price of fuel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions are signed by people in the Melfort, Kinistino 
area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to read a 
petition concerning the high price of fuel tax. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 



1118 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2000 

provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

From the people from Melfort, Tisdale. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
with citizens concerned about poor cellular service. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
ensure reliable cellular service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
The petitioners are from Vonda, Warman, Aberdeen, and 
Prud’homme. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present on behalf of citizens concerned about the high tax on fuel. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the petitioners come from the communities of Dysart, 
Cupar, and Saskatoon. 
 
I do so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 

Cellular service to Watson and area; 
 
Reduction of fuel taxes; 
 
Confiscation of municipal reserve accounts; and 
 
The grandfathering of vehicles that were tax paid on 
budget day. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
hon. colleagues. I’d like to introduce to you and through you, 
Mr. Speaker, a distinguished guest who is seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to introduce him and describe 
his visit just briefly and then ask him to stand. 
 

In the Speaker’s gallery today we are blessed with a visit by His 
Excellency Sandor Pàpp, ambassador of Hungary, and his wife 
Mrs. Klàra Pàpp, who are accompanied as well by Irene Janz 
from the protocol office. 
 
The ambassador is visiting Regina today and on his first official 
visit to Saskatchewan since taking his appointment as 
ambassador from Hungary to Canada. While here he is meeting 
with the Lieutenant Governor, the Speaker of the Legislative 
Assembly, the Minister of Economic and Co-operative 
Development, the mayor of Regina, and representatives of 
Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership. 
 
He’s also meeting with officials from SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) in regard to the 
working relationships with SIAST International. 
 
And tomorrow, His Excellency and Mrs. Pàpp will travel to 
Moose Jaw, I’m happy to report, where they will tour 15 Wing 
NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) at the training base 
there. 
 
I also had the honour of meeting with His Excellency this 
morning and hosting a luncheon in his honour, and I would ask, 
Mr. Speaker, if all hon. members would join me in welcoming 
to Saskatchewan and to our legislature, His Excellency Sandor 
Pàpp and his wife Klàra Pàpp. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I too would like to welcome the ambassador 
from Hungary and his wife, His Excellency Sandor Pàpp and 
Mrs. Klàra Pàpp to the province of Saskatchewan. We’re very 
pleased to have you in our great province. 
 
I’ve not had the privilege of visiting the country of Hungary, 
but my wife has been to Hungary and she tells me it’s a 
beautiful country, a lot of farmland which is similar to 
Saskatchewan, and she quite enjoyed her time there. 
 
So we welcome you to Saskatchewan, hope you enjoy your 
stay, and will come back again some time. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege again 
this afternoon to introduce more distinguished visitors who are 
in Regina for the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations) governance negotiations. They are seated in your 
gallery. 
 
I’d ask them to kindly stand. They are Morley Watson, First 
Vice-Chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, 
accompanied by Joe Quewezance, tribal chief of Saskatoon 
Tribal Council, and Joan Greyeyes, the president of the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies school. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today to introduce to you and through you to the 
Assembly, 26 students from the Almighty Voice Education 



May 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1119 

Centre, the One Arrow Reserve, near Bellevue, Saskatchewan. 
And accompanying the students are Roger Petrisor, Christine 
Baldhead, Janet Galler; Warren Paul and Deloris Paul, who are 
also chaperoning the group today. 
 
I look forward to meeting with you, students, and with your 
teachers a little bit later on in the day, and I do hope that you’ll 
enjoy the proceedings that you are witnessing today in the 
Assembly. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, 
26 students from MacNeill School. These students are sitting in 
the west gallery and they are accompanied by their teacher, Ms. 
Debbie Kivela, and parent volunteers, Ms. Josephson and Mr. 
Bowering. 
 
I welcome them to the Assembly and ask you to join with me in 
welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Seated in 
the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, is a wonderful teacher, Ms. 
Michelle Prytula. There are three chaperones, Mr. Toovey, Ms. 
Senga, and Ms. Inac. They are accompanying 32 students from 
St. Luke School in Saskatoon. 
 
I have to say, Mr. Speaker, these are some of the best students 
from one of the best schools, in definitely the best city, in 
indisputably the best province, in absolutely the best country in 
the world. Please welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
add to the acknowledgement of the Minister of 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs by introducing and 
adding to the information related to three very special guests 
who are here today for first reading of a landmark piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As already introduced and I’ll ask them to stand again, they are 
here in this capacity today for this purpose. Morley Watson, 
First Vice-Chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations; joined by Joan Greyeyes who was president of the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technology; as well as Joe 
Quewezance who is chair of the Saskatchewan Indian Institute 
of Technology board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the request of the FSIN, the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training together with 
SIIT (Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies) has 
developed The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies 
Act. And this unique legislation will make it easier for First 
Nations students to continue their education or to find jobs 
when they graduate. The proposed Act acknowledges SIIT as a 
technical institute governed by the FSIN that will issue 
certificates and diplomas for its programs. 
 
These credits will better be recognized by employers and other 

post-secondary institutions. The proposed legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, reinforces government’s commitment to support First 
Nations people in accessing quality training and education. 
 
And I’ll ask hon. members again, Mr. Speaker, to join me in 
welcoming these three leaders to the Assembly. I believe that 
they represent Saskatchewan’s greatest natural advantage for 
the future, our young people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
today to all members of the Assembly, friends of this 
Assembly, Mr. Gordon Gunoff and Mr. Pat Therrien from 
IBEW (International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers). Let’s 
all welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I thought that as well from 
northern Saskatchewan, I would give a great welcome to the 
members from a tremendous institution like SIIT. And as well, 
Mr. Speaker, in Cree I would say: 
 
(The member spoke for a time in Cree) 
 
And with due respect, Mr. Speaker, I was saying that it is great 
to see that self-governance of First Nations take place in the 
institutions of education in this province. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
take the privileged opportunity on behalf of the official 
opposition to welcome also the members of the FSIN here. And 
I wish you very well with the conference that you’re partaking 
in, in Regina at this time. Thank you. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you I also want to join my hon. colleague from 
Humboldt to introduce some of the students we have in the 
gallery up, up above there; and to also welcome the people that 
are here — Mr. Quewezance, and of course Mr. Watson, and 
Ms. Greyeyes. 
 
I think it’s very important for all the students that are here to 
appreciate some of the work that’s being done in the Assembly 
here. But to, more importantly, to appreciate each other as well. 
 
And I want to point out that, Mr. Speaker, that we do have the 
present leadership here in terms of the FSIN and the First 
Nations community of Saskatchewan and to . . . (inaudible) . . . 
do we have the future leaders here of the First Nations 
community. 
 
And I want to welcome them both and say that there’s a lot of 
room in the Assembly, and I certainly hope that your visit today 
is very informative and pleasant. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1120 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2000 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Tuesday’s Debate on Funding of Film Festival 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP (New 
Democratic Party) has never let logic stand in the way of 
politics, and yesterday was no exception. 
 
During the debate on government-funded pornography, the 
member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley said that even if we 
don’t agree with it we need to have a frank and open debate 
about pornography and it was not the Saskatchewan Party’s 
place to limit that debate. He then moved a motion to cut off the 
debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member for Saskatoon Southeast said the majority must 
never be allowed to silence the minority. The NDP then used its 
majority to end the debate and silence the opposition who for 
the time being are the minority in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not one of the so-called defenders of tolerance and 
free speech would ever acknowledge the inherent 
inconsistencies of their actions. That’s because the NDP don’t 
truly believe in tolerance and free speech. To the NDP these are 
simply Orwellian slogans to be used to stifle free speech and 
promote the intolerance of differing views. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no one who understands how to use the 
tyranny of the majority like the NDP. They have proved it many 
times in the past; they proved it again yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Businesses Not Relocating 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Speaking of 
inconsistencies: first it was the bat cave story — good plot, 
wrong facts. Then it was AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster 
Assistance) — eloquent Leader of the Opposition, bad script. 
Last week, the oil and gas industry was leaving due to a tax that 
does not exist. Need we mention, Mr. Speaker, that no one on 
the government side is promoting pornography. 
 
And yesterday, we had the member from Cannington in the 
deep south of the province — about as far away from Saskatoon 
as you can get — announcing that Saskatoon businesses are 
leaving. And he said, Mr. Speaker, that his claim was quote, 
“accurate.” 
 
Well, today’s front-page headline in The StarPhoenix says, 
“Businesses not going anywhere, survey says.” Mr. Dale 
Botting, Director of Saskatoon’s REDA (regional economic 
development authority) said his organization has been tracking 
753 Saskatoon and area companies since last summer, and none 
of them have left. Not one in ten, Mr. Speaker, as the member 
claimed. None. Period. 
 
These facts make me feel good, Mr. Speaker. Of course, the 
members opposite want Saskatchewan to fail, that’s why they 
don’t deal very well with facts at all. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tuesday’s Debate on Funding of Film Festival 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I would 
like to share with my colleagues in the Assembly the great 
disappointment I am feeling. Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, is one of 
the sorriest days in the history of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party brought forward a motion 
that would have given the government an out — a motion that 
would have saved them from further embarrassment on the 
issue of taxpayer-funded pornography. It was our way of 
putting out a helping hand to say, here’s your chance; pull the 
funding for the porn and make things right. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have found out where the members 
opposite stand on this issue. Mr. Speaker, they support 
taxpayer-funded pornography. They support using the money of 
the good people of Saskatchewan to fund porn. And this is a sad 
day, indeed. 
 
We heard the member from Saskatoon Southeast stand up and 
talk at length about how she supports artists and free speech, 
but ignored the fact that the people that voted her in would have 
some of their tax money going to support porn. 
 
We also heard from the member of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
He stood up and agreed with the use of taxpayers’ money to 
fund porn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a sad day in our province, indeed. The 
members opposite generally support the use of taxpayers’ 
money to fund pornography. Mr. Speaker, the Titanic known as 
the NDP is sinking. And yesterday, the members opposite 
accelerated the plunge to the bottom. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Rivers School Division Reduces Mill Rate 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are fond 
of thinking out some facts but not all the facts. It’s getting so 
the public cannot tell exactly what the Sask Party means when 
they say facts and reality. They might say they are dealing with 
the facts, but frankly their thoughts are incomplete and convey 
impressions that are wrong. 
 
The Sask Party says that the Saskatchewan Rivers School 
Division is facing enormous rate hikes. However, Mr. Speaker, 
an article appeared in the May 9, yesterday’s, Prince Albert 
Daily Herald proves their facts are incomplete. The title of the 
article is “Saskatchewan Rivers passes mill rate decrease.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — This article goes on to say that besides the 
mill rate decrease, the budget allows for the addition of a 
second speech therapist, the replacement of 140 computers, and 
the expansion of a microwave system. They are also budgeting 
$75,000 to upgrade playground equipment, $116,000 to 
upgrade computerized library programs, $100,000 to renovate 
the education centre. They have also allocated $550,000 in its 
transportation budget to replace six school buses. 
 



May 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1121 

All this new spending, Mr. Speaker, plus a decrease in the mill 
rate. Somehow this doesn’t look like the same picture painted 
by the Sask Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sask citizens are getting weary of the Sask Party 
selling our province short. It’s time for them to admit all the 
real facts and impose . . . rather than impose their reality of 
gloom and doom. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Democrat Constituency Meeting 
 

Ms. Julé: — Well, Mr. Speaker, more good news for 
Saskatchewan. Even the NDP is getting sick of the NDP. I 
would like to quote, Mr. Speaker, quote from a recent article in 
the .Melville Advance entitled “NDP members grill Regina 
MLA”, and I quote: 
 

The guest speaker at Melville NDP Constituency 
Association annual meeting Thursday talked a lot about 
vision . . . 
 
But Roy Romanow’s government’s position on several 
controversial issues had members (there) seeing red 
instead. 

 
Regina-Qu’Appelle MLA Mark Wartman and the 
Romanow government in general received a rough ride . . . 
from the less than a dozen members over . . . (such issues 
as) municipal amalgamation . . . farm aid . . . and rural 
economic development during the three-hour meeting in 
Melville. 
 
Wartman was also put on the defensive over expansion of 
his government’s taxation policies . . . the meltdown of the 
rural economy . . . and the timing of last September’s 
harvest election. And the MLA further received a verbal 
broadside from a long-time local member . . . who accused 
the urban-based Romanow government of displaying 
arrogance . . . and the lack of appreciation for the party 
faithful in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the review this government is getting from 
NDP members and all less, less than a dozen of them at that. 
 
Just imagine, Mr. Speaker, what the rest of Saskatchewan is 
saying. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Carrot River Health Care Facility 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, well, well, well, 
three times in one day. Three misrepresentations, one right after 
another — four if you throw in a small film festival. Even for 
these guys . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I heard the member comment on 
misrepresentations, which is what you can’t do; you can’t do 
indirectly what you can do directly. And I would ask the hon. 
member to just rephrase and apologize for that statement. 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Three times in one day 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — I just would ask the member to apologize. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Three wrong facts, one right after another — four 
if you throw in a small film festival. Even for these guys, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s pretty good. The members from Saskatoon and 
Prince Albert have straightened out two crooked roads. Here’s 
the third. 
 
On August 12, 1999, before the current member from Carrot 
River was even elected, the Minister of Health wrote a letter to 
the North-East Health District which said, quote, “I am pleased 
to provide approval-in-principle and to confirm provincial 
funding for this project . . .” 
 
The funding — $2.3 million. The project — a new integrated 24 
health care facility. And for who, Mr. Speaker? The people of 
Carrot River. An integrated facility providing 24-hour nursing 
care, acute beds for palliative care, acute observation and 
convalescent care, rehabilitation and respite care, X-ray 
services, home care, education and emergency services. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this project is unfolding exactly as approved 
nearly one year ago. The North-East Health District and the 
community of Carrot River are to be commended for working 
in partnership with the health district. The member from Carrot 
River Valley should be ashamed of himself for trying to take 
credit for their work. 
 
But then shame is a strange word to them . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. the member’s time is up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Volunteer Medal for Mr. David Shurry 
 

Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 
this opportunity to pay tribute to a constituent of mine, Mr. 
David Shurry. 
 
David was honoured in the past year by being awarded the 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal and was invited to take part in 
last week’s honour ceremonies with Her Excellency the 
Governor General, Adrienne Clarkson. However because of his 
affliction with multiple sclerosis, David was unable to make the 
trip to Regina. But I would like to acknowledge this remarkable 
man nonetheless. 
 
Despite being confined to a wheelchair since 1969, David 
Shurry has been a leader in the community of Battleford. A 
lawyer by trade, he has been a constant volunteer, primarily in 
the area of sports. In 1983 he founded the Saskatchewan 
Baseball Hall of Fame and authored a history of baseball in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
David has worked hard and very closely with a paraplegic 
group and has been a member of the Kinsmen Foundation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people like David Shurry are a constant 
inspiration to each and every one of us. They are a reminder of 



1122 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2000 

a legacy we can leave despite the hurdles that might be put in 
our way from time to time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join with me in 
expressing our congratulations and appreciation to David 
Shurry and his family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Trade Union Legislation 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today my 
question is for the Minister of Labour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister accused me of spreading 
misinformation. She said, and I quote. I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . there is no standing union contract in the province that 
requires the use of union subcontractors. 

 
Well, Madam Minister, I have a copy of the metal . . . the 
provincial sheet metal workers’ agreement. I also have a copy 
of the provincial carpenters’ agreement and I have a copy of the 
provincial operating engineers’ agreement. Every one of these 
contracts clearly states that subcontractors must be hired under 
the collective agreement. 
 
Madam Minister, you are the one, you are the person that is 
spreading misinformation. Why are you spreading this 
misinformation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I always 
appreciate an opportunity to expand the knowledge on these 
issues because quite often these matters aren’t discussed in 
school. 
 
But where the member opposite is not quite understanding the 
interpretation of these agreements is the subtrade does not have 
to be union nor do the workers. But if there’s a contract 
agreement for certain benefits and wages on that job, then they 
would pay those benefits and wages but are not required to be 
unionized and are not required for the employee to be 
unionized. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard the folks on 
the other side talk about if it looks like a duck and it sounds like 
a duck . . . Well this certainly looks and sounds like a duck. All 
we need to hear now is the quack, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister simply doesn’t have her facts straight. And that’s 
because the research she is doing is checking her bank account. 
She’s counting on the big donations from her union friends and 
she’s not going to let the truth stand in the way of a good 
political payoff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is she spreading misinformation in this 
House, we understand she’s been feeding the same lines to her 

Liberal colleagues. I understand the Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs has also been telling the construction 
industry that subcontractors are not bound by union contracts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the minister is basically honest, so 
he’s clearly being misinformed by the Minister of Labour. 
 
Madam Minister, why are you telling people that subcontractors 
are exempt from the union agreements when that clearly is not 
the case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The member opposite may be familiar 
with the concept of fair wage policy which exists at the federal 
level. And that doesn’t say that you have to become union. It 
says that you have to pay the fair wages that have been agreed 
to in the union contracts in the same environment. So what he’s 
doing is he is confusing the need to be unionized with the need 
to provide a comparable level of compensation. 
 
But I will add, Mr. Speaker, that it seems to me that his 
benefactor, Mr. Conrad Black, has been trying as hard as he can 
to oppose unionization. And if their $75,000 requires them to 
get up in this House and argue against unionization, Mr. 
Speaker, I would say that they got more money than we did and 
maybe they ought to examine their principles a little more 
deeply. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister who’s in a conflict of interest because the unions 
provide her party with $300,000, has a lot of nerve talking 
about another party who only takes a free-will donation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the implications of the minister’s comments are 
enormous. This will not only mean the forced unionization for 
spinoff companies . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask all members to please 
come to order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re hitting a 
raw nerve over there. This will not only mean forced 
unionization of spinoff companies, it also means forced 
unionization for all the smaller subcontractors who work for 
those companies. 
 
Madam Minister, these contracts clearly state that if a project 
falls under a union agreement, all the subcontractors must also 
follow that agreement. Madam Minister, this is unfair. It’s 
undemocratic and it will drive businesses and jobs out of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, why are you now attacking subcontractors 
and their employees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, this law is extremely 
similar to every law that exists in every other province; it hasn’t 
driven anybody in droves out of those provinces. 



May 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1123 

And I’d have to say for the members opposite who purport to 
support working people, they voted against a budget that 
removed 55,000 poor people off the tax rolls, that has protected 
low-income people on every front, provided the largest single 
tax break in history. And I ask them, what have you got against 
working people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

District Health Board Consultations 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, yesterday we asked you to confirm that the 
NDP has placed a gag order on health district boards. We asked 
you to confirm that you’re planning to close hospitals in 
Lanigan, Watrous, and Wynyard. And we asked you if you 
were planning to get rid of the Living Sky Health Board if they 
didn’t approve your plan. 
 
Madam Minister, you responded by accusing us of misleading 
the public and not getting our facts straight, and then you went 
outside the House and confirmed to the media every single 
word we said. You said indeed there were plans to close the 
Lanigan Hospital. You said the Living Sky Health District 
Board would be dissolved if they didn’t follow your plan. And 
they said that, and they said that you were not allowing them to 
speak freely about this. 
 
Madam Minister, will you stand in the legislature today and 
apologize for the statements you made during yesterday’s 
question period? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I find so interesting 
about the member’s question and line of questioning is that he 
is accusing the province of putting gag orders on health boards 
across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then I have to say this to the member: why is it, 
member, that on May 3 of the year 2000 you were in the 
Assiniboine Valley Health District at a public meeting in 
Canora discussing their 2000-2001 budget plan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there’s a gag order, I’m sure the member would 
have seen muzzles on the health members’ noses or rags in their 
mouth. And I want to tell that member, why were you there if 
there was a muzzle? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question for the minister. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
there was no muzzle on me; the muzzle’s on the board. Because 
what they said is that they could only talk about the options 
they had and they couldn’t say what the final plan was until you 
approved it, Madam Minister. That’s the gag order. 
 

Madam Minister, yesterday you said, and I quote from 
Hansard: 
 

Mr. Speaker, everyday in this legislature these people get 
up and they make false statements about everything, Mr. 
Speaker. They are simply misleading the public. 
 

That language is clearly unparliamentary. 
 
My question to the minister is simple. Yesterday you confirmed 
that there are plans to close the Lanigan Hospital. You 
confirmed that the district health boards were told not to talk 
about the budget till you approved it. And you acknowledged 
that if they didn’t follow the plan, you would consider getting 
rid of them. Will you stand up today and apologize for those 
statements? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, across the province, 
health districts have been holding stakeholder meetings; they’ve 
been holding public meetings about the various options that 
they’re preparing. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. members, these are some 
very serious questions and answers, and I would ask all 
members to come to order in order that the questions . . . Order. 
I would ask all hon. members to co-operate and allow the 
question to be heard and the answer to be heard as well. These 
are important questions to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the point that I am 
making is that this member across the way had an opportunity 
to attend a public meeting in Canora to discuss the 2000-2001 
budget plan for the Assiniboine Valley Health District. Mr. 
Speaker, he has a copy of this because there were handouts that 
detailed a number of options the district was considering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each day in the House these members get up and 
indicate facts that are incorrect. We heard from the member 
about Saskatoon, about P.A., (Prince Albert) and about Carrot 
River. All I’m saying to that member is it’s time they got their 
facts straight and stopped misrepresenting facts to the public, 
given that they were at a public meeting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question again for the 
minister. Madam Minister, you’re again misleading people 
because you’re not saying . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Hon. members, I would ask to kindly 
words . . . choose your words judiciously. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I retract that word and I apologize. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s unfair for the minister to characterize the 
meeting in that way because it is not the whole facts about how 
the meeting was conducted. The board . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I was there; you were not. The board explained 
the options of what they had to do. They explained the options 
and they clearly said, and they said . . . 
 



1124 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2000 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask all hon. members 
not to engage in debate across the floor. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
the boards clearly said they could discuss their options with the 
public but they couldn’t discuss their final plan until you signed 
off and approved it. That’s a gag order, and if they are not going 
to comply, then with what you decide and what you agree upon 
they’re going to be dismissed if they don’t implement them. 
 
Madam Minister, that’s what’s going on in this province right 
now. That’s what going on with your so-called consultation 
process. Boards are forced to be quiet about their final decisions 
about the budget until you sign off on it. 
 
Madam Minister, is that your way of closing hospitals without 
letting anyone know in the communities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in the province of 
Saskatchewan we have 32 health districts. Each year health 
districts design health plans that are sent to the Department of 
Health for ministerial approval. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year the health plans came in in September, 
October, November, December, and into the new year. Mr. 
Speaker, this year . . . and there was a strike . . . this year I 
asked the health districts to have their preliminary plans to the 
department by May 15. This year, Mr. Speaker, I indicated that 
because of the federal budget it was going to be a rough year for 
health care. We had 113 million new dollars but, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s not enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health plans are not yet in. They will be in by 
May 15. We will have an opportunity to review all of those 
health plans within a provincial context, which is important 
because there is this thing called . . . (inaudible) . . . of 
Saskatchewan. And those health districts will have an 
opportunity to take . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the truth hurts, Madam 
Minister. And the truth is you confirmed to reporters yourself 
yesterday is that the Living Sky Health District is going to plan 
and be asked to close hospitals in Lanigan, Watrous, and 
Wynyard in order to comply with your budget requirements. 
 
Is that what you’re doing, Madam Minister? You’re forcing 
these budgets on these district health boards. You’re forcing 
them to make these kinds of decisions. And then you’re saying 
to them, don’t tell anybody because the communities affected 
may get upset. 
 
Madam Minister, if that’s your direction, what’s in store for the 
rest of this province when you do your consultative budget and 
put it all together? How many more hospitals are you closing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, there were consultations 
before the plan was sent. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the Living Sky 

Health District spoke to people in their health district. I now 
have a copy of the plan. I understand the members opposite 
have a copy of the plan. It is one of two plans that I’ve received. 
There are another 30 plans to receive. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, they will have an opportunity to speak to 
their public about the health plans. The health plans may be 
confirmed, they may be varied, or they may be denied. There is 
nothing secret about this process given that these members have 
the information and given that that member attended a meeting 
where the health district laid out its options dealing with its 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Amalgamation 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Municipal Affairs. The Big Gully 
Regional Economic Development Authority hired an 
independent business and economic consultant to review both 
the Garcea and Stabler reports on municipal restructuring. 
 
They felt they had to do this, Mr. Speaker, because of the threat 
made by the Minister of Municipal Affairs that he would bring 
in legislation that would force amalgamation on municipal 
governments, and because of the weight the NDP-Liberal 
government was giving to the Garcea task force and the Stabler 
paper. 
 
So now we have this report from Mr. William Mackness, who is 
former dean of the business at the University of Manitoba, 
senior vice-president and chief economist which one of 
Canada’s major banks, and this report raises serious questions 
about the analysis done by both Garcea and Stabler. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you saw this report and what is your 
response to it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say to 
the member from Saltcoats and to the House that I’ve not yet 
seen the report. I understand the report was issued this morning 
and that the copy of that report will be making its way to the 
ministry and to the departments so we’ll have a chance to see 
that fairly soon. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that on Monday of this 
week, we had our first round table meeting. We selected our 
facilitator; her name is Ms. Barb Walter . She’s going to be 
working with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association), and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) and the provincial government in working 
towards an action plan and some timetables so that we might be 
able to take a plan to the municipal regional meetings sometime 
in the middle of June. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that throughout the course 
of that discussion, we’ve established some of those timelines 
and some of those parameters, and we see that it’s being a very 
good working opportunity for all of us. 
 



May 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1125 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I’ll explain some of that report to you. Mr. Speaker, 
this report by Mr. Mackness confirms everything the Sask 
Party, SUMA, and SARM have been saying all along — that 
the Garcea and Stabler reports both lacked any evidence to 
suggest there would be benefits of a municipal amalgamation. 
 
He also said that there was no cost analysis . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — In his report, Mr. Minister, he also talks 
about no cost analysis done by Mr. Garcea. This reports calls 
both Garcea and Stabler’s report narrow and presumptive in its 
attempt to tie the province’s, and I quote: 
 

. . . long, unsatisfactory economic performance to a 
perceived lack of size of municipalities and insufficient 
empowerment of municipal governments.  
 
To single out efficient municipal governance as a principal 
culprit in Saskatchewan’s economic under performance, is 
unwarranted and risks drawing attention away from large 
and rectifiable deficiencies at the provincial and federal 
government levels. 

 
Mr. Minister, were these your instructions to Joe Garcea and 
Professor Stabler? Did you direct them to create these reports so 
the public might blame municipalities for your government’s 
dismal economic performance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite that 
if the creation of 10,000 jobs in this province is not an 
important record for this province or a direction, I’d say to the 
member opposite you can . . . you provide us with some better 
direction in that area — 10,000 jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
I say to the member opposite that I . . . if you’re taking attack 
today, if you’re taking attack today on the Garcea report, and 
you don’t respect the wisdom of people like Mr. Westby, and 
you don’t respect the wisdom of people like Mr. Konenoff, then 
I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that you’re, you’re flying 
in the face of some people today who have a lot more 
intelligence or knowledge about municipal reform in this 
province, in Saskatchewan, than either you do or I do. These are 
long-term people in this community. 
 
So I say to the member opposite, over the next couple of weeks 
we’re going to do a number of things. We’re going to table all 
of the reports at the round table that we’ve been working on, 
which includes Stabler and Garcea and the work that was, that 
was done throughout the ’70s and throughout the ’80s. We’re 
also going to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
pretty clear now we have another academic review of the two 
reports the NDP government commissioned, two reports they 

spent $1 million of taxpayers’ money on. And that person says 
the government commission reports aren’t worth the paper 
they’re written on — the same response the public, urban and 
rural, municipalities gave of these reports, because people 
involved in local governments could not understand the logic 
behind the conclusions drawn by Garcea and Stabler. 
 
And when Mr. Mackness was doing his study and trying to 
validate the stats provided, especially by Mr. Stabler with his 
telephone poll, he didn’t get any co-operation. The survey was 
paid for by the public and Professor Stabler refused to release 
the full survey — questions and results. He even admitted he 
had not seen the full survey and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order please. The hon. 
member has been quite lengthy in his preamble, and I would 
ask you to kindly go to your question. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, will 
you tell the House who conducted the telephone survey referred 
to in the Stabler report and will you table that survey in the 
House today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Just to the final point of the question first 
— that report that Stabler provided to us, he commissioned that 
review on his own. Whoever he got to conduct the review is the 
work of Mr. Stabler. And you could go to him and ask him that 
question. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, to the House today that in the next couple of 
weeks we are going to be tabling all of the documentation, 
information to the round table, everything. And I say to the 
member opposite that there has been some criticism that there 
hasn’t been a cost analysis provided on each of the . . . or any of 
the reports in the way in which we’d like to see it. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that in the next sitting of the 
round table, we’re going to provide a cost-analysis review, an 
analysis of the report that was done, and of some of the 
modelling that was done in the province. We’ll provide some of 
that, and it will be tabled to the round table so that we can 
proceed with our discussions about what kinds of municipal 
renewal and municipalities and the government believe are 
necessary in Saskatchewan. And we’re going to do it on a 
voluntary, conciliatory basis in the way in which we said we 
would always do this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the round table discussions are a step in the right 
direction. We’d be the first to agree with that. 
 
But, the task force process Mr. Garcea started is still underway. 
Mr. Garcea is still going ahead, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, it 
was brought to everyone’s attention this morning that, if you are 
not going to force amalgamation, why is Mr. Garcea still going 



1126 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2000 

ahead? Why are you spending good money after bad, wasting 
taxpayers’ money on a report you evidently have no intentions 
of listening to? If you’re not forcing amalgamation, retire Mr. 
Garcea. Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — First, I want to say to the member opposite 
from Saltcoats that the Garcea report was scheduled to provide 
its final legislative information to SUMA and SARM sometime 
at the end of August. That was their job, to provide the 
legislative agenda. And the member from Saltcoats should 
remember that this particular review was conducted in 
Saskatchewan at the request of SUMA and SARM, Mr. 
Speaker. They requested this. 
 
And so today they consulted across the province with the 
committee that was there and they provided, Mr. Speaker, some 
information to us which we’re going to table at the round table, 
and we’re going to discuss it; and we’ll be deciding at the round 
table how in fact we’ll engage the legislative portion of 
discussion that needs to occur by the committee of Garcea. 
 
Now whatever that municipal round table decides that the 
legislative agenda should be for the next several months, that 
round table will decide it. 
 
I say to the member opposite you’ve been looking for a parade 
again. You said earlier in this House that hysteria doesn’t 
happen on its own, that you create hysteria, that you whip it up, 
and here you are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Film Classification Board 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, yesterday 
you were asked why the Saskatchewan Film Classification 
Board is allowing over 90 films to be shown at the Queer City 
Cinema without, without any of them being rated by the board. 
You said, Mr. Minister, you said that’s for the board to explain. 
But now the Film Classification Board is refusing to comment. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are ultimately responsible for the Film 
Classification Board. Why are you allowing these movies to be 
shown without being rated? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, well, Mr. Speaker, my 
understanding is that members of the Film Classification Board 
have been making clear their views as to their decision today, 
Mr. Speaker. Maybe the member is unaware of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the member needs to be clear that this 
board is a separate, independent board from the ministry of 
Justice and separate from the minister. There is a legislative 
guideline, Mr. Speaker, which sets out how they make their 
decisions. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, what the board has decided as I understand 
it, is that these movies . . . none of these movies, Mr. Speaker 
. . . or, Mr. Speaker, that these movies will be shown, but will 
not be shown to anyone under 18. There will be a check to 
make sure nobody under 18 gets into these movies, Mr. 
Speaker, and there will be a visible sign making sure that 
people know the content of these movies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Jones: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly a former colleague of mine and a very good friend, 
Mr. Greg Eyre. 
 
Greg is seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And he’s a staff 
representative with United Food and Commercial Workers, 
Local 1400. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Federal Grain Transportation Reform Legislation 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise in the House today to speak on an issue of 
great importance to the people of this province. 
 
I’m referring to the federal grain transportation reform 
legislation that was announced this morning. We are pleased 
that the federal government has taken action on this important 
issue. The new legislation has been long awaited. 
 
At first glance, the proposed legislation looks good for 
Saskatchewan’s producers. And fairness to producers was one 
of the key points that we also asked the federal government to 
address. Of course, we’ll have to see all the final details before 
we can make a complete determination. 
 
The legislation deals with revenue caps, the 178 million or 18 
per cent annual freight rate reduction from 2000-2001 levels . . . 
2001 levels will help farmers who are already dealing with low 
grain prices and increased production costs. Our initial estimate 
is that Saskatchewan’s share will be in the order of $100 
million. 
 
We also note there are measures to address the branch line 
abandonment and transfer process. Provisions to support 
short-line development and discourage the abandonment and 
transfer of grain dependent lines are a move, we think, in the 
right direction. 
 
We understand there will be monitoring of these proposed 
reforms and we expect the federal government will be 



May 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1127 

transparent in its monitoring and reporting practices because we 
will certainly be keeping an eye on things and making sure 
there is a measure of accountability. 
 
We’ve also said that any changes to grain handling and 
transportation must maximize returns to the producers. And the 
monitoring process should give high priority to this key point. 
 
It’s positive to note that the federal government has committed 
to fund road improvements resulting from damage caused by 
grain being transported over road instead of by rail. 
Saskatchewan is already faced with incremental annual road 
impact costs of about $50 million per year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Due to continued rail line abandonment and elevator 
consolidation, road impact costs could reach 85 million by the 
year 2005. We will be looking at this legislation very carefully 
to assess its effect on the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
We have always said that the Wheat Board must have all the 
tools it requires in order to effectively market wheat on behalf 
of Saskatchewan producers. We would hope that it is clearly 
demonstrated first that the 25 per cent tendering that takes effect 
in August is successful and maximizes returns to producers. We 
would want the federal government to ensure that before . . . 
ensure that, before moving to 50 per cent tendering in 
2002-2003. 
 
Saskatchewan supports the move to a more commercial, 
competitive, and accountable system. Measures will be needed 
to promote rail competition to maintain competitive rates and 
services for farmers. 
 
I would like to point out that the review of Canada’s grain 
handling and transportation system started at the request of 
Saskatchewan and the other Western provinces on behalf of 
their producers following the transportation backlog faced in 
the winter of 1996. At that time the Western provinces called on 
the federal government to take the initiative to reform and 
modernize the system so that producers can benefit. 
 
We emphasize our position of maximizing returns to producers 
in both stages of the review process — first under Justice 
Willard Estey and then under Arthur Kroeger. We will be 
closely reviewing the legislation when it comes down. 
 
We expect that the monitoring will encompass performance 
measures to ensure that the system improvements are achieved 
and shared with farmers. We want those dollars savings 
captured by the grain . . . we would want those dollar savings 
captured by the grain companies and railroads flowing back to 
the farmers. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to respond 
to the minister’s statement? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have indeed as well 

been made aware of the changes that the federal government is 
proposing with regard to transportation, and this is something 
that farmers across Saskatchewan have been waiting for for 
some time to see what the federal government’s direction is. 
And certainly a big part of this and concern on behalf of 
producers is will this money indeed go back to the actual 
farmers, the producers of this province, or will it be funnelled 
back to the province to determine where they want to allocate it. 
 
We indeed are of the opinion that it has to be moved as quickly 
as possible back to the actual shipper, the farmers of this 
province. I don’t think they certainly . . . they don’t, nor do we, 
trust this government with those funds in any way, shape, or 
form. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — The other concerns as well are what kind of 
impact this will have on short rail line opportunities and options 
for farmers here to ship product out of Saskatchewan. Rail line 
abandonment is indeed an important part of this, and we’ll be 
watching to see that the farmers’ interests are taken into account 
with any changes in that area. 
 
Key to this, key to this proposal is the part about moving to a 
more commercial system on car allocation and we are very, 
very supportive of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We feel that if you are going to be asking for competition in the 
rail industry, you certainly should be asking for competition at 
the car allocation process as well. And that’s important and 
farmers will be looking very carefully to see that that is 
included in these proposals from the federal government. 
 
A final offer arbitration is something that we will be wanting 
and looking for clarification from the federal government. And 
I’m sure the minister will be taking an interest in that as well. 
We want to know what their thoughts are in this area because it 
is very, very important that the producers’ interests be taken 
into account in this area as well. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, in the area of roads, we are agreeable and 
certainly support the fact the federal government will be taking 
a more . . . an area of more responsibility in road construction 
here in Saskatchewan. We need a national transportation policy 
in this country and we hope this is a start of that. 
 
(1430) 
 
We also hope though, Mr. Minister, that you will start taking 
some responsibility for highways and secondary roads in this 
province. We have seen, we have seen the most dramatic 
reduction in the quality of our highways and secondary 
highways that we have ever seen in this province. And all you 
have to do is travel the highways and byways of this province to 
see potholes; as one farmer told me the other day, you have to 
turn your headlights on in order to get out of in Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s the kind of problems that farmers are faced with in terms 
of getting their product to market. There are highways in this 
province, Mr. Minister, that are basically untravellable. You 
simply cannot ask for on one hand help from the federal 
government and not live up to the responsibilities that you have 



1128 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2000 

as a government. 
 
So we’ll be watching with great interest to see what kind of 
impact this report will have on the producers; and indeed as 
people who represent rural Saskatchewan and largely are the 
only ones that represent rural Saskatchewan in this legislature, 
we’ll be holding this government accountable and the federal 
government as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I also have a ministerial statement, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Province’s Credit Rating Upgraded 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise today 
to announce to the Assembly that the Dominion Bond Rating 
Service has again upgraded our province’s credit rating. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This time, Mr. Speaker, from the previous 
A-low rating we had to a straight A from the DBRS (Dominion 
Bond Rating Service). Mr. Speaker, one reason why credit 
rating upgrades are significant is that they represent the views 
of objective third parties from outside the province that examine 
our books and finances. They look at the books and finances of 
all governments and major corporations. And that can be 
distinguished, Mr. Speaker, from political debate in the 
legislature for example. These are the views of objective third 
parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has made more progress than any 
other Canadian province in improving its financial reputation. 
Today’s upgrade is the second upgrade from DBRS and the 
sixth Saskatchewan has received from all rating agencies since 
1995, Mr. Speaker. And most significantly, we have now 
moved back to straight A’s across the board. We have a straight 
A credit rating, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I want to point out to the House, Mr. 
Speaker, that the bond rating service lists one of 
Saskatchewan’s key strengths as, and I’m quoting: “Its track 
record of good fiscal management.” 
 
Now what does this mean for the people of Saskatchewan? It 
means, Mr. Speaker, that they can have faith in their 
government’s commitment to carry out the affairs of the 
province in a sound, responsible, and accountable manner. It 
means they have . . . can have confidence that their government 
will do what it says it will do. 
 
And most importantly, Mr. Speaker, it means we are building a 
solid foundation on which to continue to build a future of 
opportunity and growth. And I want to quote the DBRS in this 
regard, Mr. Speaker, they say: 
 

The province’s balanced approach to fiscal planning has 

not only strengthened its financial profile, but has 
contributed to the improvement in Saskatchewan’s 
economic fundamentals. In addition, the province’s 
economic base has become more diversified. 

 
This means, Mr. Speaker, reduced debt, lower interest 
payments, improvements in priority public services, and lower 
taxes for every Saskatchewan person. These, Mr. Speaker, are 
the rewards of sound planning, commitment to goals, being in it 
for the longer term, and the desire to work with people across 
the province to build a bright future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the financial turnaround this province has 
achieved is a fundamental strength that supports our plans for 
the future. DBRS has looked at our record and they’ve looked 
at our plan, the plan for growth and opportunity that was 
delivered on budget day, Mr. Speaker. And they have 
determined and reported that the plan is sound. And I’m quoting 
from their report, Mr. Speaker, where they say, quote: 
 

The effect of the tax reductions over the last five years, 
combined with the tax cuts announced in this budget, 
should improve the province’s competitiveness and its 
economic growth prospects. 
 

That’s what they say, Mr. Speaker. It’s a plan that will result in 
continued debt reduction, further improvements to priority 
services, increased economic diversification and investment, 
and a competitive tax structure that will save the average 
Saskatchewan family about $1,000 per year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this latest credit rating upgrade demonstrates to 
Saskatchewan people that we have every reason to take on the 
future with confidence. And just as we delivered on our promise 
to turn our finances around, we will deliver on our plan for 
growth and opportunity, bringing tangible benefits for all 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — With leave to respond to the minister’s 
statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Finance comes to the legislature and brags about an improved 
credit rating. Well it’s no wonder his credit rating has improved 
because he’s sitting on a $400 million slush fund. It was $700 
million from the liquor and gaming account. Well obviously, 
Mr. Speaker, any hard-hearted banker is going to be pleased 
about a Minister of Finance who’s sitting on a big pile of cash 
and will not give tax relief to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only does this minister refuse to give tax relief 
to the people of Saskatchewan but he’s also the minister that 
refuses to provide proper services to the people of 
Saskatchewan. So it’s pretty easy to get a better credit rating 
from a hard-hearted banker when you won’t fix the highways of 
the province, when you put people’s lives at risk every time 
they drive down a road in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty easy to get a good credit rating when 



May 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1129 

you’re closing hospitals in Saskatchewan. They’re going to 
close the hospital in Lanigan and a number of other hospitals. 
One of these days they’re going to announce that they’re going 
to close the St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you go to New York and tell them you’re 
going to close hospitals, yes, you can get a good credit rating. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty easy to get a good credit rating 
when you starve school boards of proper funding for education 
in your province and just tell the banker, well they’re going to 
leave the province anyway to get their jobs, we don’t have to 
worry about education in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget increase, the PST (provincial sales tax), 
it increased fees. Mr. Speaker, the government has increased 
utility fees, utility bills in this province. And so he’s sitting on a 
pile of cash and has the nerve to come to this legislature and 
brag that he’s improved his credit rating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is fat. This government is fat but 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are starving. This minister 
should be ashamed of his record. He should not be gloating in 
the House. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 39  The Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 39, The 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 
Act, 2000 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 40  The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 40, The 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, a point of order before 
orders of the day. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll ask the hon. member to briefly state his 
point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I waited until 
today to bring this forward because I wanted to review 
Hansard. 

Yesterday the Minister of Health, in question period, breached 
the traditions and rules of this House. On page 1094 she said, 
and I quote from Hansard, the Minister of Health: 
 

. . . and they make false statements about everything, Mr. 
Speaker. They . . . simply (mislead) the public. 
 

Further on another response, Mr. Speaker, she said: 
 

. . . and make statements that are not true . . . (and) not 
based on fact. 
 

Normally this is corrected immediately by the Speaker, without 
reliance on the members to rise on a point of order. I ask that 
the Speaker rule that the member, the Minister of Health, 
breached the protocol of this House and that she apologize to 
the member from Melfort, and that she apologize to this 
Assembly, and that she unequivocally withdraw her remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, I would require to be allowed 
to review those tapes if I may, and return with a ruling later to 
respond to your point of order, hon. member. If anybody wishes 
to speak to that point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to just 
make a short comment to say that it’s my understanding of the 
comments that it was referring to misleading the public, not 
misleading the House. And I think that is up to interpretation. 
 
I think in members’ statements today I think we clearly 
indicated that there has been misrepresentation to the public, of 
issues. That’s our opinion and I think we’re perfectly within our 
rights. And I’m sure when the record is reviewed, that the 
record will be that this referred to misleading the public that the 
minister referred to, and I think that is our opinion. And we 
look forward to the ruling from the Speaker. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — On another point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Please. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
your ruling yesterday talked of disrespectful behaviour of one 
member towards another in this Assembly. In particular, that 
there have been several instances when aspersions were cast or 
when the motives of members were impugned. 
 
Yesterday on pages 1105 of Hansard, I direct your attention to 
the remarks of the member from Saskatoon Southeast. Twice 
she stated the member from Kelvington-Wadena was not 
homophobic, that the member from Moosomin and Kindersley 
were not homophobic, that the member for Rosthern was not 
homophobic, or that the Saskatchewan Party was not 
homophobic, while all the time her statements were trying to 
indicate otherwise. 
 
This is indeed a device used by Shakespeare in his play of 
Julius Caesar, and to quote, “Brutus was an honourable man” 
was stated by Mark Antony when his entire speech — Marc 
Antony’s — was an attempt to prove otherwise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tradition in this House is that you cannot do 
indirectly what you cannot do directly. And that is exactly what 



1130 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2000 

the member from Saskatoon Southeast was doing. She was 
calling the members of the opposition homophobic and was . . . 
which is an accusation that is patently untrue. And the fact of 
the issue was that the gay and lesbian lifestyle was only an issue 
in the minds of that member and her NDP colleagues and was 
not the issue or case of the debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you review this breach of the rules and 
traditions of our Assembly, and that the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast withdraw her remarks, apologize 
individually to each of the members that she named, and that 
she apologize to this Assembly, and that she apologize to the 
members both in this House and across the province of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Does anyone wish to speak to the point of 
order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate that 
I wasn’t present for all of the debate yesterday but I did have a 
chance to look at the Hansard. And I believe that the issue 
being discussed was an issue of great importance to the public, 
an issue of censorship in someone’s mind, an issue of the rights 
of people with alternative lifestyles in other people’s minds. 
 
And when I read the verbatim of the speeches I think both the 
opposition and government were stating in debate format their 
position and ideas, and I think that’s what debate in this House 
is all about. 
 
But while I’m on my feet discussing about the issue and 
decorum raised by the member opposite, I must say, Mr. 
Speaker, I was shocked while the ambassador was being 
introduced today, heckling constantly from members of the 
opposition. 
 
And when we’re talking about decorum in the House . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, we’re just speaking the point of 
order raised by the official opposition. Hon. members those are 
. . . Order, order. I would ask the hon. members to kindly curtail 
their debate across the floor. And I’d like to inform the 
Assembly that the points of order that were made need to be 
taken seriously. And I will review the transcripts and I will rule 
on those points of order. And I thank the hon. member for 
bringing it to my attention. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On a point of 
order, please. 
 
The Speaker: — State your point of order briefly. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
believe another member — the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley — also breached the traditions and rules of 
this House in his statements yesterday. 
 
Your ruling yesterday talked of casting aspersions and lack of 
respect for members. I draw your attention to the words of the 
member from Regina Qu’Appelle yesterday in Hansard, pages 
1107 and 1108, and I quote from the member: 

We want to talk about a moral high road and their history? 
We can do that. We can talk about the convictions, the 
criminal convictions, of (the) people on the political right. 
 

Further, Mr. Speaker, I go on to quote: 
 

And I’ve got to say very clearly I raised the issue of 
criminal convictions and the history and, you know, what 
we faced in this province . . . 

 
Another quote: 
 

What I was saying was that the people on the opposite side 
of the House do not own the moral high . . . (ground). 
 
In fact, historically, again I . . . repeat, that they have 
shown very clearly . . . they’re proportionately many, many 
convictions, (and) many, many problems dealing with 
moral issues . . . 

 
The member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley is clearly casting 
aspersions and questioning the honour of all members of the 
opposition. In doing so, he questions the right of opposition 
members to sit and to speak in this Assembly, when those 
members were democratically elected by the good people in 
their constituencies, indeed, most with a greater plurality than 
his own. 
 
His comments raise questions of the right and the honour of any 
voter to oppose his, or his government’s point of view. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you rule on this most serious breach of 
rules and traditions of this Assembly and that the member for 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley unequivocally withdraw his remarks 
and apologize to all members, indeed to the entire legislature 
for dishonouring all of the members of this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Does anybody wish to speak to this point of 
order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would agree on the 
one issue with the member opposite, that it’s my belief that all 
members come here with the best intent to represent their 
constituents. And not only the constituents that vote for them 
but I think it’s fair to say that once you are elected, you 
represent everyone in your constituency whether they voted for 
you or not, or whether they voted at all. 
 
But when it comes to the issue of debating the role of MLAs 
historically in this Assembly, this is in fact a debate going on in 
our community at the present time as indicated by one of our 
writers in The Leader-Post, I think, as recently as yesterday, 
who talked about, in a very open way, about the importance of 
members of the legislature ensuring that they carry out their 
term in office in a way that is credible to their constituents. 
 
And so the issue of the debate about the role of MLAs that you 
raised here today I think is one of debate. And I say to the 
members opposite, and I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, to in fact, 
we support your ruling on this very issue. 
 



May 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1131 

The Speaker: — I thank hon. members, and I appreciate that 
you recognize the seriousness of words that are spoken in this 
venerable institution. And I will review the Hansards and I will 
come back with a ruling very shortly. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote I invite the Hon. 
Minister of Justice to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, I’m pleased to introduce on my right, John Whyte, 
the deputy minister of Justice and Deputy Attorney General; 
Doug Moen on my left, the executive director for public law 
and community justice; behind me is Colleen Matthews, the 
executive assistant to the deputy minister; and behind the 
deputy minister is Elizabeth Smith, the director of 
administrative services. As well, Mr. Chair, there will be other 
officials in the room who may be assisting from time to time. 
 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of 
committees. I’d like to welcome the minister and his officials 
here today for a review of the Justice estimates. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess the first thing I would like to start off on is 
one of my personal pets, and one that I know you have had 
some things to do with because you attended a gun control 
meeting in Saskatoon the same as I did. 
 
This is an issue that has been ongoing in this country for 
approximately five years now, six years. And Saskatchewan has 
been very much in the forefront of the fight against the federal 
Bill C-63, the gun control Act. And the fact is, Mr. Minister, I 
and my colleague at that time from Rosthern, introduced the 
first motion in this Assembly that urged this Assembly to fight 
that particular piece of legislation. And I’m proud to say that we 
received unanimous support after we presented that legislation 
to this House. 
 
Initially that support was not as forthcoming as it could have 
been. We had actually asked the member at the time for Indian 
Head-Milestone, who was the minister of — I guess he wasn’t 
the Minister of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) yet; he was a backbencher at the time; 
later became the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management — to second our motion. But the current 
minister of Justice at the time, Bob Mitchell, was reluctant to 
become involved in that particular issue. 
 
And only after we had raised the issue on the floor of the 
Assembly did the members opposite decide to vote in favour of 
our motion to send our concerns and our reluctance to have Bill 
C-63 brought forward in the Parliament of Canada. 
 
Since that particular point in time, that Bill has been 

implemented by the federal government. We have seen the start 
of its implementation. We have seen many presentations made 
and delegations sent to Ottawa from this Assembly, all-party 
committees to voice our displeasure and our reluctance to 
become involved in this, the entire registration process of 
firearms in Canada. 
 
Bill C-63 dealt not only with registration but with a number of 
other matters dealing with sentencing and penalties for abusive 
firearms, and those we supported. The members of this House 
supported those particular pieces of legislation but found it most 
troubling, the registration portions of Bill C-63. 
 
The provincial government, after that point in time, became 
involved in the court case launched by Alberta along with the 
provinces of Ontario and Manitoba, the Northwest Territories, 
and the Yukon. And I believe Ontario was also a part of that, 
Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister. 
 
My question to you is, what were the presentations made by 
Saskatchewan on behalf of Saskatchewan firearm owners to the 
court case, both in Alberta and in the subsequent appeal to the 
Canadian Supreme Court? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chairman, let me thank the 
member for his question. This is a matter of concern to all in 
this province. The member asks the questions, what did our 
lawyer, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, on behalf of 
the Government of Saskatchewan, present to both the Alberta 
Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court of Canada? 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . I didn’t mean to give you a promotion. The 
legal argument, Mr. Chairperson, was that the forum’s 
legislation, Bill C-68 as the member referred to it, was both 
unconstitutional of the . . . was unconstitutional in terms of 
being beyond the jurisdiction of the federal government because 
it intruded into matters of provincial jurisdiction. I think the 
member is aware of the arguments which were presented. Those 
arguments were not successful in the Alberta Court of Appeal, 
as the member will know, and we’re awaiting the decision from 
the Supreme Court of Canada. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
under what you say were unconstitutional, under what clauses 
of the constitution was the province launching its appeals in 
conjunction with the other provinces and the territories? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The argument was . . . the federal 
government’s argument was that they had the jurisdiction under 
their Criminal Code powers under section 91(27). In other 
words that this was part of addressing issues from the 
perspective of criminal law. And the federal government also 
argued that they had this power to pursue this type of legislation 
under the peace and order and good government provisions of 
the constitution. 
 
Our arguments, Mr. Speaker, and the arguments indeed of the 
provinces and the territories engaged in the litigation both 
before the Alberta Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court of 
Canada, is that the appropriate part or section of the constitution 
under which this type of legislation could be introduced was 



1132 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2000 

section 92(1) which is basically, Mr. Chairperson, a provincial 
civil rights. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Was not the 
argument also, my understanding, based on section 92(13) of 
the constitution, dealing with property rights? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I’m sorry, I couldn’t read my deputy’s 
writing here — 92(13) was right. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have a 
similar kind of writing. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have presented to this House a number of times, 
probably five times at least, property rights legislation for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Every time that I have brought this 
forward, every time we’ve actually had an opportunity to debate 
it — which has been rarely, but it has been debated in private 
members’ day motions at least once — the government opposite 
has been absolutely against the idea of implementing property 
rights in this province. 
 
In fact it was Premier Allan Blakeney, prior to the 1982 
repatriation of the constitution, along with I believe the premier 
of Prince Edward Island, who opposed the institution or the 
implementation of property rights into our Canadian 
Constitution. 
 
I find it somewhat surprising then that this provincial 
government supports the arguments on the debate against Bill 
C-63 and the use of section 92(13) property rights as a . . . 
property rights being an empowerment of the provincial 
government, using that argument to defend this particular 
position. I like the fact that you’re using this argument; I just 
find it surprising that you are. 
 
Mr. Minister, would it not strengthen the position of the 
province, the position of firearms’ owners in Saskatchewan if 
we actually had a property right Bill, a property right piece of 
legislation passed within this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Chairperson, the point the 
member raises about personal property is one which is, first, 
complex, but we should, first of all, say that there is I think no 
one in this House who denies the importance of personal 
property rights as a vital part of our democracy. 
 
We all possess things of importance to us. The Criminal Code 
protects our right to have those things unaffected, Mr. Speaker. 
Without doubt, we are committed to ensuring and to reinforcing 
that. 
 
But the member speaks on behalf of a party which constantly 
argues against adding power and adding authority to judges and 
to courts across this land. And, Mr. Speaker, I think the member 
would agree that if we added property rights to the constitution, 
that would add further powers to judges across this province 
and across this country. 
 
Would it be his view, Mr. Chairperson, that he would want 
every matter that we adjudicate in this House, every matter we 
discuss, scrutinized by the courts of this country from the 
perspective of whether those decisions interfere with personal 

property rights? 
 
I doubt that he would, Mr. Speaker. But that seems to be the 
implication he is drawing. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Indeed I do 
not support the idea of allowing judges to have more and more 
sway over our lives. And in fact is, I would argue, that 
providing property rights would diminish that. They are already 
intrusive in every — every — segment of our lives. They make 
the determinations. 
 
We pass laws in this legislature, in every legislature across the 
country, and the Parliament of Canada. And yet the judges 
make the determination as to whether or not those laws apply, 
how they apply, where they’re going to apply, and whether or 
not they should remain in place. And the fact is in a number of 
instances judges have used their prerogative to rewrite laws or 
to write laws. 
 
And I believe that is wrong; that if laws need to be changed, if 
laws need to be written, then it’s the legislature’s duty to do that 
not the judges of this country. 
 
And I think property rights, having a property rights Act in 
place for the citizens of Saskatchewan would be a greater 
protection against the interference by the courts and by the 
government than not having it in place. 
 
We clearly have seen under Bill C-63 that we don’t have 
protection. The minister talked about protection under the 
Criminal Code for property. We don’t have that under the 
Criminal Code. Because there was 533,000 pieces of property 
confiscated by the federal government under Bill C-63 with no 
compensation whatsoever. At a minimum, a property rights 
legislation would provide for compensation for property 
confiscated by governments, be it federal or provincial. We 
don’t have that protection now. 
 
We don’t have the protection that if this government today, or 
the federal government, wanted to expropriate a piece of land, a 
piece of chattel, that they could do so and not have to pay 
compensation. Because they’re certainly not paying 
compensation under Bill C-63. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re prepared to utilize section 92(13) to argue 
the case against the federal government. And I thank you for 
that and every firearms owner thanks you for that. But why not 
expand section 92(13) and give the people of Saskatchewan real 
property rights? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well let me thank the member for his 
continued question. Mr. Speaker, the issue of Bill C-68 — he 
keeps calling it Bill C-63 but he means Bill C-68 — is really a 
matter of whether or not this is criminal law or civil law, Mr. 
Speaker, not a matter of property rights, it seems to me. I’ll 
make another point about that in a minute. 
 
But the issue before the courts and the argument that we made 
was based on our view that Bill C-68 was an attempt to 
interfere with property and civil rights in the province. And the 
argument that the member is making that we should take a 
stronger, if you want, property rights aspect I don’t think would 



May 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1133 

have helped in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not . . . In fact there is no occasion in which 
I think we should legitimately criticize the courts for doing the 
job they do. The members opposite like to criticize the courts 
every time they interfere in a way which is not acceptable to 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chairperson, this is not an argument 
against judicial activism. It’s an argument against judicial 
activism they don’t like; and, Mr. Speaker, in this democracy in 
which we, this democracy in which we live, Mr. Chairperson, 
we accept things we don’t like in return for things we do like. 
And we’ve heard much of that over the last few weeks. 
 
So I would say that it’s not our view — and I repeat what I said 
before — not our view that we would want the courts to 
interpret everything that we say in this House from the 
perspective of whether or not it interferes with one or more 
person’s property rights. We don’t, Mr. Chairperson, think that 
moving from the balance we presently have in that direction 
would in fact achieve either the member opposite’s aims or the 
aims of the citizens of the province. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy 
Chair of committees. Mr. Minister, I believe it’s the role of the 
legislatures to make the laws of this land and it’s not the role of 
judges to change those laws. If there are changes or expansions 
or diminishing of laws that are needed, then that’s the role of 
the legislature not the role of the courts — no matter which side 
of the argument they may be on or that I may on. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could table the legal arguments 
that you presented or that your department presented to the 
Alberta Court of Appeal on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Of course, Mr. Chairperson. We’d be 
happy to do that for both the Alberta Court of Appeal and the 
Supreme Court, the factums which were presented which 
contain the arguments in writing that were made. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That would be 
most appreciated. 
 
Mr. Minister, what do you see as the future in the struggle 
against Bill C-68? I admit I had the numbers wrong. I am 
perhaps a bit dyslexic when it comes to reading my own 
writing. If you could please tell us what you foresee happening 
within that court case, when we might see a resolution of it, 
what kind of comments have come down from the court on that 
appeal up to this point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — With regards to the member’s 
question, it would be improper for me to comment on the matter 
which is presently before the Supreme Court of Canada, but we 
anticipate the decision this year. And we will then know the 
court’s decision. 
 
He will have . . . the member will have read the discussions or 
read the newspaper coverage of the presentations before the 
Supreme Court of Canada, as I and others have. I would add 
merely, Mr. Chairperson, that the position of the province 

remains that we will not play a part in enforcing the regime 
developed under Bill C-68. We continue to take that position; 
we will continue to take that position. And we then, we have 
then, I think, taken as strong a measures as we can with regards 
to that, the legislation which the member has been focusing on. 
 
I’d also say, Mr. Speaker, that we take, and I take personally, 
every opportunity I can to present our position on Bill C-68 to 
the Minister of Justice. The position of the province of 
Saskatchewan is well-known in Ottawa, and we will continue to 
ensure that the interests of gun owners in this province are 
respected to the greatest extent we possibly can. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I look forward 
to questioning you further on this particular issue, on the 
province’s involvement in the administration of C-68 and a 
number of the other firearm related laws. But at the present 
time, I would like to pass this off to my colleague from Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, and 
thank you to all of the officials from the department who are 
here today. I maybe want to start by thanking the officials, and 
through them, thank many of the staff in the Department of 
Justice. 
 
As the Justice critic, frankly, Mr. Minister, I’ve found the 
department to be very co-operative. Most of our concerns it 
seems relate to maintenance enforcement concerns that we get. 
And I know that particular area of the department works very 
hard; some would say is overworked. And they are . . . even 
when they can’t respond as immediately as we would like, 
they’re never impolite and they’re always very professional. 
And we certainly appreciate the work that they’re doing. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Minister, because it’s topical, and frankly because I think 
the House would like a few answers or the committee would 
like a few answers, I’d like to ask a few questions with respect 
to the relationship between the minister and/or the department 
and the Film Classification Board and explore that a little bit as 
to exactly what that relationship would entail. 
 
And I guess that would be the first question: a request that you 
characterize the relationship between the minister and the Film 
Classification Board here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chairperson, and let me 
thank the member for his comments on the work of the officials 
in the department. They indeed work long and hard and do their 
utmost to respond to our sometimes unreasonable questions and 
demands. And they are to be congratulated for the work they 
do. And many of them are here today — well, some of them are 
here today. 
 
In response to the member’s question, the member will know 
that while the legislative framework for the Film Classification 
Board rests within the Department of Justice and therefore falls 
within my responsibility, the members of the commission . . . or 
the board is an independent quasi-judicial administrative board 
made up of three members. They exercise their . . . the powers 
specified in the legislation in an independent, arm’s-length way 



1134 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2000 

from the department. 
 
The member will know that as part of various changes made in 
the . . . three or four years ago, the decision was made to seek 
the assistance of the BC (British Columbia) Film Classification 
Board for them to view the films and videos which were to 
come to the province and to classify them on our behalf. 
 
Since that time, since 1997, there has been no appeals from that 
classification by the British Columbia Film Classification 
Board. I take it from that that we have then a similar set of 
community standards by which we have been able to rely upon. 
 
In addition, Mr. Chairperson, in other measures to save precious 
taxpayers’ dollars, we have made some changes to the 
appointees on the board. There is one . . . there are two 
government . . . in fact Department of Justice officials who sit 
on the board, Keith Laxdal and Al Dwyer, and other member of 
the board is Melissa Wallace who is not a member of staff. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, I think the member will know 
from the events of the last week that the minister does not 
exercise any authority in the sense of determining the board’s 
criteria for allocating . . . for deciding the classifications and 
exemptions other than that which is prescribed in the 
legislation. 
 
So the relationship, to answer the member’s specific question, is 
one of independence and arm’s length. But as the member will 
know, two of those members of the board are members of the 
Department of Justice staff. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
Mr. Minister, what discretionary power then, if any, does your 
department have with respect to altering any decision of the 
board and/or what are the prescribed methods for appealing a 
decision of the Film Classification Board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The nature of any appeals from the 
Film Classification Board are as follows, Mr. Chairperson. 
There is an appeal board — I don’t remember the name exactly 
— comprised I think of two members. So if a person who 
wishes to show a video or a movie and objects to the 
classification or the lack of exemption, that person can appeal to 
that appeal board. 
 
But there’s no ability, nor should there be, on the part of the 
Department of Justice or myself to interfere in that process. The 
process is laid down in the legislation. The decision of the 
appeal board is final, Mr. Speaker, and indeed that 
independence is assiduously protected by the Department of 
Justice as it should be. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, the 
question . . . an additional question to the minister with respect 
to the Film Classification Board. When a decision is made by 
the board, what is the policy? And I’m sure if there is one, it’s 
probably similar to other agencies of government. Frankly, 
probably similar to the policies of your government. 
 
What is the policy for communicating not only the decision that 
has been made but also the rationale for the decision? And I’m 
speaking of course with both the classification of films as well 

as the decision to possibly exempt films from classification. 
 
And I know that today, I think, there was an official from the 
Film Classification Board here at the legislature. I think he was 
just outside our legislature here after question period and he 
was providing some of the rationale for the recent decision by 
the Film Classification Board to exempt I think 11 films in the 
festival upcoming this . . . well, the festival that will be . . . 
that’s happening currently in Regina. 
 
And so I guess there’s a bit of a concern. Because yesterday you 
will know, Minister, that it was CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) radio and other outlets that were reporting that the 
minister couldn’t comment on the rationale for an exemption. 
But neither would the Film Classification Board. 
 
And I wonder what would have happened if there would have 
been no media attention paid to that fact. I wonder, if we hadn’t 
raised it in the legislature today in fact, would there ever have 
been a rationale provided for what was a fairly weighty decision 
and one that’s certainly topical, one that people and taxpayers 
are interested in? 
 
So I wonder if you could outline what the policy is for the Film 
Classification Board to explain to the taxpayers the decisions 
that it has made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chairperson, I think the 
appropriate response to the member’s question is that generally 
decisions of the board, based as I say upon the advice of the 
British Columbia board, are not matters of public debate. They 
are responses to an application made by someone who wishes to 
show a movie or a video. 
 
Now the criteria the board pursues is clearly laid down in the 
legislation. And they would apply then . . . the British Columbia 
board and our board would be applying those criteria to the 
content of the movies or videos in question. 
 
Mr. Chairperson, with regards to a film festival — and the 
Yorkton film festival is a good example — attention is paid to 
the nature of the audience, the nature of the publication, the 
nature of the showing of the movie. Festivals and those which 
are designed for particular artistic purposes like the Yorkton 
film festival are generally given exemptions. They are not 
movies often which are designed for wide public exposure. 
 
To go through the process of classifying a movie or a video, the 
cost is about $400 so generally, Mr. Chairperson. The board 
would make an exemption based, as I say, on the nature of the 
showing and the nature of those who are to watch it. 
 
So generally the decision of the board will be . . . (inaudible) . . . 
always, the decision of the board will be based upon the criteria 
laid out in the legislation. And the rationale such as it might be 
explained, would presumably then be that, if the movie did not 
contravene any of the prohibitions or fell within the appropriate 
guidelines for exemption, that the reasons for granting the 
classification as granted or granting the exemption are that the 
criteria contained within the legislation have been appropriately 
followed. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Thank you, Mr. 



May 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1135 

Minister, for that answer. Subsequent to the media coverage 
yesterday . . . Basically the media coverage I’m referring to is 
that which highlighted the fact that neither this legislature, or 
neither the minister, the department, nor the Film Classification 
Board would provide a rationale for the decision they made 
with respect to the Queer City Festival. 
 
Was there . . . Subsequent to that, was there any contact 
between your office and the Film Classification Board either 
from your office or from the department, as it relates to 
explaining the rationale for this decision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, with . . . Mr. 
Chairperson, with . . . Everybody’s becoming a Speaker. Mr. 
Chairperson, the communication I had with . . . my office had 
with the Film Classification Board was with regards to their 
preparedness to explain the decisions they had arrived at, or it 
had arrived at. And my understanding is, and I think I’m pretty 
clear, that that’s what happened today — the members of the 
board were available to explain their position. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. In 
your answer just prior to this one, you outlined the fact that the 
Film Classification Board uses some fairly set criteria in 
evaluating applications that it has before it. And you mentioned 
too, that there are also classifications . . . or rather there are 
fairly narrow or at least fairly strictly defined criteria for 
granting an exemption from classification. 
 
Now as I read it, and I’m reading from a document that I think 
highlights the . . . that I know highlights those criteria. And 
basically I point to this, Mr. Minister: 
 

The board is not required to disapprove a film or require 
the removal of a portion of a film that contains scenes 
mentioned in subsection (1) . . . 

 
And subsection (1) you will know highlights in very . . . well 
frankly, unwanted and explicit conduct that might be depicted 
in movies. So: 
 

. . . contains scenes mentioned in subsection (1) where the 
board considers the theme, subject matter or plot of the 
film to be artistic, historical, political, educational or 
scientific. 

 
Now as I understand, outside here at the legislature when the 
representative from the Film Classification Board was now 
explaining the rationale per your request yesterday from your 
office, I’m not sure he touched on that. I’m assuming that when 
he agreed to come and explain the rationale for his decision, he 
probably outlined it to you yesterday when you talked to him, 
or this morning, or whenever it was. 
 
So I wonder if you could tell us which of these areas, or maybe 
there’s more than one, that the Film Classification Board . . . 
upon which the Film Classification Board made their decision 
to grant the exemptions. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — We’re both looking for a specific 
section that we can’t find, but the . . . I would say first of all I 

should clarify one point. I did not ask the Film Classification 
Board for its reasons. That I think would not be proper. But 
what I did ask was whether the Film Classification Board was 
prepared to . . . or was going to, was planning to explain its 
position and I was assured that it would. 
 
In making a decision to exempt a film or a video, Mr. 
Chairperson, the member will know that there are essentially 
three things the board will take into account — and this is 
contained in the legislation — whether the general public or any 
specific group is invited to attend the exhibition, firstly; and 
secondly, whether people invited to attend are otherwise warned 
about the content of the film or films or videos; and whether, 
given the group involved and the nature of the film being 
exhibited or distributed, approval by the board, classification 
information, or restrictions are necessary. 
 
In other words I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear that the 
classification board looks at the nature of the showing of the 
video or the movie; looks at the nature of the structure within 
which that is being done, i.e., is it a movie theatre or is it a 
festival,; and then makes decisions as to whether or not there 
should be conditions attached to the showing of any particular 
movie or video. 
 
And in this particular case with regards to the . . . We should be 
trying to shed some light on the other side over there I think, 
Mr. Speaker. The . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Maybe 
electricity isn’t quite enough. The, the . . . and of course now 
I’ve lost my train of thought. 
 
But the classification board as the member will know placed 
three restrictions or three conditions on the film festival in 
question: that no one under 18 would be permitted to view the 
movies or videos; that there would be a process of checking age 
at the door; and that there would be a sign visible from six feet 
away warning potential viewers of the nature of the films and 
videos. 
 
So I think the object here is to ensure that people know what is 
expected, what they can expect, and that those under the age of 
18 are not permitted to watch anything which you or some of 
the other members might seem untoward. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, I 
wonder then, you know, the next section goes on, section (3) 
goes on to say, and I won’t read the whole thing but just some 
highlights: 
 

In exercising its duties (the Film Classification Board) . . . 
to clause (1)(b), the board shall consider: 
 

(a) the extent to which the film: 
 

(i) degrades or denies human dignity; 
 

(ii) exploits men, women or children by portraying 
them in a manner that denies their essential worth and 
dignity as human beings; and 

 
(iii) has capacity to stimulate illegal conduct. 

 
And those are a few of the . . . a few of them also: “the 



1136 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2000 

standards of tolerance and propriety prevailing in 
Saskatchewan” is the next one. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I think it’s a very worthwhile discussion 
and certainly a worthwhile question to ask. I understand, and 
you’ve outlined the arm’s-length nature of the Film 
Classification Board from the Government of Saskatchewan, 
specifically from your ministry, but I think there comes a point 
when we need to have a discussion about the accountability of 
decisions made by quasi-judicial, as you’ve characterized it, 
quasi-judicial, fundamentally government organizations as this 
one is, that expend taxpayers’ dollars and that make decisions 
on behalf of taxpayers, those decisions that affect the lives of 
taxpayers who have a wide range of views in society. 
 
I know that . . . and we talked a little bit about some of the 
content in one of the movies that has received the exemption 
under this clause yesterday. And one of those . . . one of those 
movies, as you know, involved lesbian bikers who kidnapped 
the children of straight parents to make them into sex slaves. 
And frankly, after I hear that I don’t care how graphic the 
movie is, in terms of what it depicts. Just the storyline and the 
fact that that’s the way it proceeds frankly flies in the face of a 
lot of what I had just read earlier. 
 
And at some point, Minister, where is the accountability? 
Where can the people of Saskatchewan go if they 
fundamentally object to a decision that has been made by 
people that work for them, as it relates specifically to this Film 
Classification Board and the decision that they’ve made to 
exempt these movies from classification. Where can they go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairperson, it 
seems to me that the member should first of all be careful not to 
assume that the movie is . . . or the video in question or indeed 
any movies which are classified in this province do the very 
things that he suspects they do. He probably hasn’t seen the 
movie. I haven’t seen the movie; I don’t want to see it. I don’t 
think many of us want to see it. And we might regard, and 
certainly we would regard, I think, that type of story as 
offensive. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that some would make the argument 
that this is some kind of parody and that it is in fact not what the 
member is saying it is about. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, it does seem to me that in a 
democracy with the appropriate levels of tolerance and 
open-mindedness and respect for others, Mr. Speaker, that we 
in fact accept as part of the price of living in a democracy of 
this sort, that things will be done that we don’t approve of, and 
that we will have done things which we do approve of. 
 
And there’s a quid pro quo — there’s a social contract if you 
want — an acceptance that not all things will be exactly as we 
would want them to be. That would be essentially totalitarian. 
None of us want to live in that kind of state. 
 
So, Mr. Chairperson, what we are then faced with is an attempt 
through the Film Classification Board to apply general 
community standards to the movies and videos which are 
available in this province. 
 

I don’t think it would be very difficult for anyone in this House, 
or indeed in this city or this province, to find things, find videos 
or movies which are available for rent or shown in movie 
theatres which they would regard as offensive. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m sure that that would be the case. 
 
The issue is not that. Surely the issue is the appropriate level of 
tolerance that we have in our society for the rights and interests 
and preferences of others. The board is set with the task of 
assuring, of ensuring that not our values, not your values, but 
community values — generally accepted community values — 
are respected with regards to things that are shown in videos, 
movies, and of course also plays and various other activities. 
 
So it is an expression of general community values — not 
yours, not mine. And the board will then apply the various 
criteria which we have set out in the legislation. 
 
Now it would be appropriate, or it would be open for you to 
initiate discussion in this House as to whether that is 
appropriate, I suppose. But I would say, and the member surely 
knows this, that the Film Classification Board process we have 
in Saskatchewan is essentially the same as in every other 
province. Ontario has a very similar process to ours. 
 
The community standards which are applied are essentially the 
same across this country. And we live in a free and democratic 
society where I think it’s appropriate for us to respect the rights 
and interests of others, notwithstanding that it is our desire and 
our responsibility to ensure that community standards are 
respected. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Minister, and Mr. Deputy Chair. The 
minister spoke quite rightly, frankly, about the community 
values being the standard by which this board or any other 
similar to it would have to operate. 
 
And that goes to the heart of my question. His concern or his 
opposition to a direction that would lead us to anything that 
would sort of even marginally appear to be totalitarian is a 
similar concern I have. And frankly it’s the basis of my 
previous question. And where I’m going with . . . 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time due to a power 
outage. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Members, members of the Assembly, 
I’m going to suggest that we . . . Order. I’m going to suggest 
that we come to order again and resume proceedings. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I’m ordered by the committee to 
report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 



May 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1137 

The Deputy Chair: — Members will be familiar with this 
department starting on page 111 and 112 because this is a 
continuation of committee estimates that started on May 4. 
Before I call the first subvote, I will invite the Hon. Minister of 
Social Services to reintroduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated 
beside me is Dan Perrins, the deputy minister; seated behind 
Mr. Perrins is Bonnie Durnford, the assistant deputy minister. 
Seated behind me is Bob Wihlidal, who is the executive director 
of financial management. 
 
And seated at the rear of the room are Phil Walsh, the executive 
director of income support; Richard Hazel, the executive 
director of family and youth; Dorothea Warren, the associate 
executive director of family and youth; Deborah Bryck, the 
director of child daycare; and Ron Hart, the community living 
programs manager. 
 
Mr. Chair, while I’m on my feet, when we were here previously 
the member from Moosomin made a number of inquiries and 
asked a number of questions. And I take this opportunity if one 
of the pages could assist me, to provide him with the answers to 
those questions. Thank you. 
 
Subvote (SS01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and to your officials. Mr. Minister, we were 
addressing a few issues the other day and I just want to go back 
to a couple of them for a moment. 
 
One of the issues we were addressing was the funding for 
individuals on assistance to help them gain the educational tools 
that were needed to give them the opportunity for gainful 
employment. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you had tossed out the idea, brought forward 
the idea, that maybe we could at sometime or other in 
conjunction with the Department of Post-Secondary Education, 
maybe have a bit of a debate in regards to that to see where 
we’re going to address some of the concerns and the needs that 
individuals have in receiving the required educational tools to 
give them a real opportunity to become productive and 
gainfully employed individuals. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m just wondering if indeed you’ve had an 
opportunity to talk with the minister responsible for 
Post-Secondary Education and whether or not that might be a 
possibility that we could sit down as the two departments. 
 
And I think as I indicated to you after our discussion the other 
day, it wouldn’t necessarily mean having all the department 
officials here at any . . . from both departments, but basically 
specifically dealing with education. And I’d just like a response 
to that matter, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I have considered the 
suggestion. I don’t believe that at this point we’re ready to 
proceed in that fashion, although I note that there are proposals 
for changes to the rules of the House which might see some of 
the estimates dealt with in committee rooms other than this 
room. Perhaps that might be a proposal that might be 

entertained there. 
 
Having said that, I want to again underline the member’s 
concern, and my concern as well, that there is this overlap in, if 
not, responsibility certainly for some of the clients that we have, 
and then become their responsibility; and whether it might 
assist all members to provide some briefing by officials from 
both departments to members that are interested about the 
overlap if any, or the relationship if you like, between the 
Department of Social Services, the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training on these 
particular issues. And we can certainly arrange to provide that 
for members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, thank you. I think, Mr. 
Minister, you can appreciate the fact that as opposition 
members the frustrating part we face is where there is overlap, 
and when we get into questions that are specifically related to 
Post-Secondary, we have you and your officials here. The 
response is, well you’ll have to wait until the minister 
responsible is available. And then at that time then, well that’s 
an area that you should discuss with the Minister of Social 
Services. 
 
And I guess that’s one of the reasons that we’ve put forward the 
idea of in some ways having a bit of a correlation between the 
two departments, especially where we have discussion taking 
place that . . . where there is information that overlaps and 
relates to trying to help people get on with their lives. 
 
So this is something that, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I think we 
need to certainly pursue and look at and maybe in the future 
we’ll find a way to address that concern, so that we can identify 
some of the issues, identify some of the concerns and some of 
the problems, and come to a clear understanding of what the 
role of both departments is. So that when individuals indeed 
come to us, as you indicated earlier, we can give them the 
information that they need so that they can follow up and 
proceed with questions to the right and appropriate departments 
to address the problems they’re facing. 
 
On another matter, Mr. Minister, I notice by the paper that — 
and unfortunately I don’t have a copy in front of me — but in 
regards to rental properties, we discussed the last time we had 
met the problem that many individuals on assistance are facing 
in regards to the level of the rental rates and the reimbursement 
that individuals receive from the department. 
 
And just the other day I understand that the suggestion was 
made about a rentalsman again. Or not a rentals . . . setting a 
rate process in place. And I think you had indicated at that time 
that what your department is attempting to do is look at ways in 
which you could build or provide properties rather than getting 
into a debate about limiting or holding the line on rent, rent in 
the city on different properties so that people on social 
assistance would be able to have access to quality living 
facilities at a reasonable rate. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, since that discussion and the most recent 
debate that has taken place, I’m wondering what your 
department has pursued in regards to that matter of rental 
properties? 
 



1138 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2000 

(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, if I remember correctly 
— and at my advanced age I don’t always remember from one 
day to the next exactly what we discussed — but it seems to me 
that we were discussing the question of shelter allowances 
versus the question of supply of housing. The notion being that 
if you can do things in a way to affect the supply of shelter, you 
might in that way ensure that there is a supply of safe, decent, 
affordable shelter for low-income people, whether they were in 
receipt of social assistance or whether they’re low-income 
working people, as opposed to the idea that shelter allowances 
should be increased because there are clients for whom shelter 
costs are increasingly a concern. 
 
And I indicated at that point that my personal preference would 
be that we deal with the question of the availability of housing. 
There are other initiatives. And I know this sounds very similar 
to the previous discussion we just had, but the Department of 
Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing, which is responsible 
for the matter of housing policy has, as I understand it, a rent 
supplement program to assist some low-income persons to be 
able to have decent housing at affordable rates. 
 
They also have public housing which is administered by 
housing authorities throughout the province. And it’s my 
understanding that they will also be undertaking a discussion or 
consultation with respect to funds that are budgeted for in the 
area of social housing to see what the most appropriate response 
would be in Saskatchewan to deal with the question of 
expanding the supply of decent, safe, affordable housing. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, in the article 
I was talking — in fact it’s today’s paper I guess is what it is — 
they’re talking about Regina’s vacancy rate being so low right 
now and the fact that we may not have affordable housing 
readily available in low rental housing if you will, or public 
housing. And individuals are going to be facing the fact that, I 
believe the shelter allowance’s max at about $385, and you’re 
looking at rental rates currently averaging in the 450 and 
moving up to the $500 range. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is the department doing to address the 
problem that is currently out there in view of the fact that we 
may not have the type of housing that we’re talking of readily 
available for individuals looking at housing, and unfortunately 
having to rely on social assistance and the shelter allowance 
that is allowed from the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, in short the 
government has set aside an extra $5 million in the budget 
under Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing to deal with the 
question of the availability of decent safe shelter, affordable 
shelter for low-income people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, the other day I as well asked about 
when a person finds that they’re really digging into their other 
allowance, their food budget and what have you, food and 
clothing allowance, to supplement, you had indicated that there 
is an appeal mechanism. 
 
And outside of just coming to your office . . . And I 
unfortunately didn’t have the time just to quickly peruse the 

information you gave. I was just wondering if you had . . . Yes, 
you do, you do. I believe it’s in here — the information 
regarding the appeal and how we . . . who we should . . . people 
in touch with. And so I appreciate, appreciate that information; 
we’ll go through it and pass that on to the individuals that have 
been calling us. 
 
Mr. Minister, another area I’d like to go to for a moment, and 
then I know some of my colleagues have some information or 
some questions that they would like to get into. And this comes 
back to the whole debate about child welfare and the well-being 
of children and even going to the Child Advocate’s report on 
Children and Youth in Care Review: Listen to Their Voices. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I’m raising it because of the number of 
issues that have come across my desk in the past few weeks in 
regards to how children are cared for by your department, and 
the concern that in many cases children are removed from an 
environment that they have grown up with, that they’re quite 
comfortable with, and put into basically a strange and whole 
new environment; and an environment that may not necessarily 
be a very positive environment in the enhancement of their 
character and building of their character, as they’re so far 
removed from family. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, you may have . . . may be aware, and 
I’m not sure if you’ve had a chance to go through this document 
totally, but certainly the Child Advocate is strongly suggesting 
that we need to look at ways and means of which we . . . and 
where we have situations where children maybe have to be 
under the custody of child and family services for a while, that 
we look rather than just strictly foster care, but that we begin to 
look at extended family, extended family members for care of 
those children. And certainly even closer to the family 
environment, so that those children are made to feel and have 
the opportunity to feel that they’re still part of the family rather 
than removed from it. 
 
I’m just going to read a comment from a Legal Aid lawyer and 
this comment is this. It says: 
 

The way DSS manages the program, contact with natural 
parents is seriously limited. When reunification is a stated 
goal, one hour per week in an artificial environment is 
insufficient contact. 

 
And that, as soon as I read that it stuck out very clearly in my 
mind because of most recent time and events. I’ve had different 
individuals — and certainly fathers more than the mother — 
have been coming to me because while the courts have awarded 
them a period of custody they’re finding that they do not have 
that opportunity and that contact. And that’s another matter, 
that’s a matter that we have to deal with Justice on that matter. 
 
But in regards to Social Services, when you apprehend a child 
— and maybe that’s the wrong word; maybe I shouldn’t be 
using the word apprehend — but when a child is removed from 
a home because of complaints that have been raised with your 
department, what efforts if any are your department taking to 
take a closer look at where they can place that child that is more 
of a family environment. 
 
And I know it goes beyond the white community. I know the 



May 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1139 

First Nations community feel quite strongly about this too. 
They really feel and certainly they . . . the committee that I’m a 
part of in addressing child prostitution in this province, one of 
the issues that was raised very strongly was the fact that we 
really haven’t looked at working with First Nations people and 
with family members to help address this concern. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would like to know what your department is 
doing to address this concern, to address this issue? And what 
plans are you putting in place to come up with a better scenario 
that indeed looks at children and looks at the family ties and 
comes up with a way in which we can provide more of a home 
environment for young people to help them to continue their 
development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, first of all, I might 
point out that approximately a third of the children that come 
into our care, come into our care for a period of less than six 
months and then are returned to their families. 
 
We have been making some improvements in the area of 
kinship care during the course of the last few years. This was an 
issue for us before it was raised in the Children’s Advocate’s 
report. And would point out that there are funds within the 
budget this year to help us expand the option of kinship care for 
those children that come into our care as opposed to placing 
those children in foster care situations with families that aren’t 
known to them. 
 
We are also consulting with the Child Welfare League of 
America as to the use of kinship care and where it’s appropriate 
and where that might raise difficulties, and their experience 
from all the jurisdictions in North America, so that we can 
make the best use of kinship care. And we are very pleased to 
be able to have that consultation with the Child Welfare League 
of America. 
 
I would also point out that during the course of the last number 
of years, we’ve seen the development of Indian child and family 
services agencies that provide child protection services on 
reserves — or most reserves now, I think, in Saskatchewan — 
and approximately 380 children have been, if you like, returned 
to the care of the people in those communities through their 
ICFS (Indian child and family services) agencies. And we are 
pleased with that development. 
 
Having said that, the provincial or the Children’s Advocate 
clearly outlines a need to do more. And we agree. And that will 
be the challenge for us in the coming year. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I feel quite strongly it’s something that we certainly 
need to pursue. And I appreciate the fact that it’s something that 
you’re talking about, especially when . . . read comments such 
as this, “Social workers need to learn to work with us, rather 
than try to have power over us.” And that comment there 
reverts back to a statement to me back in the fall in regards to a 
parental situation where a baby wasn’t even allowed to be with 
the parents; the parents were deemed to be unfit of having this 
child and never did see the child other than in hospital. 
 

And the comment at that time was that . . . from the worker, that 
was related to me, was that the worker made the comment that 
they even have more power than the police. And I was really 
bothered by that, and I realize that under legislation there are 
certain agreements and powers that the department has, 
especially when it comes to an allegation against . . . about child 
abuse, in investigating that. 
 
But I strongly think and believe, Mr. Minister, that we need to 
find ways of not being confrontational. Like I think many times 
they do end up being more confrontational than we are in trying 
to work with people to address the concerns that are raised with 
us. And I think while that comment may relate to the odd 
worker, it probably doesn’t reflect all of the workers. I think 
there are a lot of workers out there who sincerely work very 
diligently and think of the needs of the children that they’re 
working with and involved with. 
 
Mr. Minister, when you talk kinsmen, I take it from that 
comment you’re talking about an extended family. You’re 
talking, say, brothers or sisters who may not be that far away, 
but an extended family are part of still the family ties so that 
there is a tie there; that you can . . . certainly helps in the 
development and the fact that that child still feels they’re part of 
family. 
 
There was a comment here on page 49, another comment I 
wanted to read: 
 

There is a concern that it’s supposed to be a family-centred 
practice, but it gets fragmented right away, so then the talk 
is about child-centred things, rather than looking at the 
family and looking at solutions that way. It’s a 
deficit-based system rather than looking at the strengths of 
the family. 

 
And then just a comment, immediate: 
 

DSS stepped into our family — in a nice way at first, but 
DSS can destroy your life in a way you can never recover 
from. 
 

I realize, Mr. Minister, that when we’re dealing with children, 
and certainly when accusations are made and Department of 
Social Services is asked to call, to step into situations, that it’s 
very difficult when you’re walking into a situation to really 
understand what you’re walking into or to know what you’re 
walking into. An accusation has been made, and of course for 
the worker out there, especially when it may be an assault — it 
doesn’t matter whether it’s an abusive situation or sexual 
assault — those things are very serious accusations. And a 
person needs to look and give some very serious thought to 
them because if indeed that is a problem there, you need to be 
able to protect the child on that matter. 
 
And yet on occasion I think it’s quite possible and quite 
conceivable as well that somebody who is well meaning may 
make a comment about a neighbour or a neighbour’s child or 
somebody else they don’t even know. And the department . . . 
the call comes into the department, the worker is sent out. 
 
That worker is walking into an environment that they’re not 
really totally aware of, based on the information they have, 



1140 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2000 

removes the child without — and I’m using the word, without, 
and I may be wrong there — but it seems to me walks in, 
removes the child, and then decides afterwards to do an 
assessment. And that assessment of the home environment may 
be two, three, four weeks down the road. And in the meantime, 
you’ve got a child in your care that maybe doesn’t have to be in 
your care. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what is in place right now? 
So when a social worker is asked to go and investigate or to 
follow up on a complaint that that worker has that opportunity 
to really sit down and do a total assessment, even if they’ve 
gone to the home to see whether or not this is a legitimate 
complaint, whether or not I should remove this child 
immediately, or whether we can work with this family, or 
whether the accusation is more of a malicious accusation — 
something said in anger rather than an actual accusation that 
should be taken very seriously. 
 
What guidelines are set in place to give workers an opportunity 
to really assess the concerns that are raised so that they aren’t 
just immediately plucking children up from the home when it 
may not be necessary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I’m advised that in any 
year we would have approximately 5,500 investigations that we 
commence as a result of complaints that are lodged with the 
department. A significant number of those investigations would 
never result in any child being apprehended or taken into care. 
 
Having said that, we do practise a policy of zero tolerance. We 
do have a responsibility to ensure that the lives of children . . . 
that we’re there to protect them, and that if complaints are 
lodged, either of neglect or abuse, then we must investigate. We 
don’t have an alternative to that. 
 
Our people who do the investigation are trained and, I venture 
to say, as a result of a previous report by the Children’s 
Advocate, are better trained. Also better educated than they 
might have been some years ago because of general 
improvements in the education level provided by the University 
of Regina and other schools. 
 
Our first option, and the first direction that we go, is to look for 
ways to maintain the child in the family. Our goal in the long 
run is always to reunify the family. And so if that’s our goal, 
then we try to do what we can to maintain the child in the 
family to the point sometimes of assisting that family with 
parent aids that might assist a family in a matter of crisis. 
 
Where that is not a realistic goal, then we seek the co-operation 
of the family to have a child come into our care by agreement of 
that family. 
 
Finally, when that is not a possibility and we feel that the issues 
of neglect or abuse are real and must be dealt with, we can 
apprehend, can take children into our care, but recognizing that 
the matter ultimately has to be adjudicated by a third party, that 
is to say, the courts. We can take action, but ultimately the 
courts have to make the decision as to whether the action we 
took was warranted — was the right action. 
 
I think that it’s fair to say that in any family, that when we’re 

called in, it will be a very, very difficult time and will raise very 
strong emotions for all concerned. When we have to respond to 
complaints of neglect or abuse and, if you like, intrude with the 
family, there will always be very strong emotions raised. 
 
(1630) 
 
The Children’s Advocate points out in her report, in the 
introduction, that the review team and the panel that she had to 
advise her on the report that she prepared and tabled with the 
Legislative Assembly, is that one of the conclusions that they 
all shared, recognizing that they might have differing opinions 
on some of the recommendations and some of the proposals in 
the report, the one conclusion that they all shared, in addition to 
a need for us all, wherever we sit, on whatever side of the 
Legislative Assembly, that when we deal with the needs of 
children, we should listen to children. 
 
The conclusion that they came to was that we should be doing 
more to prevent children from coming into care in the first 
place. And that for us will be a considerable challenge in the 
coming year to try and find ways that we might do exactly that 
and I think also respond to the member’s concern. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Why is the Minister of Intergovernmental 
Affairs on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I wish to ask leave to 
introduce some guests to the members of the Assembly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, it is my distinct 
pleasure to introduce to you some students from my home 
constituency of North Battleford from the Saulteaux Heritage 
School. 
 
And I would ask all hon. members to join me in saying tansi to 
the eight students this afternoon who are accompanied by 
teacher Audrey Night — please stand — and chaperones Norma 
Jean Night and Lorraine Moccasin. 
 
And students too, please stand so that you can be acknowledged 
by the members of the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
Subvote(SS01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and certainly we’d like to 
extend a warm welcome to the students that have come to join 
us this afternoon and as . . . debate in the Assembly, and an 
opportunity where opposition MLAs have the privilege of 
debating with a minister regarding his department and having 
his officials handy to address a number of the issues and 



May 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1141 

concerns and provide answers, as my colleague says. 
 
Mr. Minister, in regards to the apprehension of children, and I 
think, just thinking back and reflecting back on your comments, 
one of the most important things is to take some time to listen to 
the children. And one of the areas of concern that certainly 
seems to be coming to the forefront, is are we, or the question 
is, are we really listening to the children? 
 
Because I think when a situation comes forward of an 
accusation of abuse or what have you, a lot of times those 
accusations can come as a result of anger in a home, of anger 
with one spouse over the other spouse. And sometimes those 
comments can come when a spouse is trying to get at the other 
spouse by making an accusation in regards to the children. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I think it’s important to sit down with the 
children and to hear their side of the story as well, because I 
think children know exactly what their feelings are. They 
certainly have a love and appreciation for their parents, and 
unless the parent is very abusive, and I think a child would be 
very honest in indicating that’s the situation they’re facing. 
 
Most children are going to be very honest in indicating as well 
how well their parents treat them even if they have to discipline 
them at times because they have misbehaved as a result of some 
guidelines that have been set up. 
 
So the question I have for you, Mr. Minister, what initiatives 
are taken when a worker goes into a home or is called to a 
home, to actually sit down where it really affects children, to sit 
down with the children independently, whether it’s the worker 
or someone who is . . . I think you’d have to find someone who 
the children could identify with and be confident with. Because 
to send someone with authority in doesn’t necessarily mean that 
that child is going to be able to really open up and relate to 
them. 
 
If the child is fearful of the person that they’re sitting down 
with, then they’re not going to be very honest and open with 
that person. But what I think is important that we have — 
maybe I could use the word — someone who’s almost got a 
mother’s ability to listen to that child. 
 
What initiatives are taken to sit down with children to hear their 
sides and hear their concerns and to certainly get their 
perspective before they’re even removed from an environment 
as a result of issues and accusations that may have been raised 
with the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, all our workers are 
trained in methods of engaging children, if you like, to elicit 
information from children as much as we try to obtain 
information from other members of the family to help us get the 
facts as to what is actually taking place, if anything is taking 
place, so that the worker can then come to some conclusion 
about what needs to be done, if anything should be done. And 
that’s the approach we take. 
 
They are specifically trained to engage children and to obtain 
the input of the children before any decisions are made, 
recognizing of course, there’s a question of the age of the child. 
But that’s the direction that they’re supposedly taking when 

they do these investigations. We have a comprehensive training 
package for them. 
 
If the members like we could certainly send across, Mr. Chair, a 
copy of the training package so that the member can be satisfied 
that that is the expectations that we have of workers, that the 
children clearly be involved in any discussion about complaints 
that have been raised. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, when it comes to 
training, and while I think you have a manual that sets out 
certain guidelines, I think no matter how long and how many 
hours you spend on studying a manual it still doesn’t give you 
all the tools and maybe give you the abilities to really 
understand specific circumstances. 
 
And I guess the question I would have, Mr. Minister, what areas 
of training do you have or avenue do you have where people are 
actually working in some practical experiences — and maybe 
not necessarily on their own, but with other people who have 
already worked in the field — to get some feedback and 
training and ability to understand the circumstances they might 
be facing versus just reading out of a textbook. Because we all 
can read out of a textbook, but we’re going to understand it 
differently. That doesn’t necessarily give us all the tools that are 
needed to address certain situations. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, are there some practical training experiences 
that a person goes through? Because I believe many of the 
workers out there aren’t even parents or haven’t really had the 
. . . or may not be parents yet. And so they don’t . . . in that 
matter they won’t understand the different realities of what it is 
to be a parent, what it is to raise a child. 
 
So the question I have, Mr. Minister, is what practical tools do 
you have outside of just learning from a textbook? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the member raises 
what is, for the department, a significant challenge and to . . . 
one is to ensure that we're able to attract social workers who 
have the appropriate training. And I believe, oh about 
two-thirds of all those that we hire in child protection have a 
social work degree. A social work degree that would also 
include field experience or a practicum setting if you like. 
 
Once they’re hired, we provide a further orientation as to how 
the department works and what is expected of them within their 
particular roles. Then we get into a more detailed training — 
which is both classroom and then follow-up after a period of 
time — to review specific cases that might have been provided 
to those workers, where both supervisors and the experienced 
staff who provide the training are able to review in detail with 
the new workers: how is that you approached this case, what 
were the questions that you asked, how did you implement the 
education and the skills that hopefully that you’ve developed 
through your training. That’s the approach we take. 
 
(1645) 
 
Having said that, I think I indicated in a speech a few weeks 
ago that it was my feeling that to be a child protection worker is 
arguably among the most difficult jobs in our society. That no 
matter what experience you have, and skills that you have, and 



1142 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2000 

no matter what support that you can obtain from supervisors 
and colleagues as to the individual decisions that you’re 
making, it is an extremely difficult task to try to be absolutely 
certain as to whether or not you made the right decision after 
receiving a call to investigate a complaint of child abuse or 
child neglect. To investigate that complaint and then try to 
decide after you’ve reviewed the situation in the family, 
gathered all the information, gathered all the facts, whether or 
not you’ve made the right decision. 
 
It is an extremely difficult decision and I venture to say that 
there’s always social workers who’ve investigated, who will 
leave the home — not having apprehended the child — who 
leave there thinking, did I make the right decision? Is this child 
going to be subjected to abuse or neglect? Did I get the right 
facts? Or, after taking the child, thinking did we make the right 
decision? What impact will this decision have on the life of the 
child? 
 
So I think that the job is very difficult. It is a significant 
challenge for us to ensure that our workers not only have the 
requisite education, academic education, have the appropriate 
training which is a coming together of classroom work and 
training on the job, but to do it in a way that always responds to 
the challenges that are there. 
 
But the member points out a very significant challenge for the 
department. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I guess what I would say to that is all the letters 
behind your name does not, does not necessarily make you a 
good social worker. You can have all the degrees, you can have 
followed up on all the training, on all the education, I think it 
still comes down to finding people who really fit into the job. I 
think people fit jobs. And going into social work may be a good 
thing to do, but you may not be always that compatible. 
 
So I think there’s . . . beyond the educational training and 
receiving the degrees, we certainly need a format that looks 
very carefully at whether or not that individual is going to be 
compatible and fit the role and the requirements of the job that 
they are called to do. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Minister, I know a couple of my 
colleagues have some comments or questions they’d like to get 
into and a couple of areas to address, and so I’m going to step 
aside for a while. And the member from Humboldt would like 
to get into the debate at this time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good afternoon to 
the minister and his officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I understand that family mediation services in 
Saskatoon, Saskatoon regional office, lost nine workers that 
were withdrawn from mediation services. I know that that 
service was offered and it was a great help and instrumental in 
dealing with family mediation especially needed in, in 
especially the Riversdale area, and people there brought this to 
my attention. 
 
So I’m just wondering if, you know, this is something you’re 
aware of? And if you could comment on why the government 

would withdraw those workers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the member must be 
confused. We did have the Department of Justice in earlier who 
have responsibility for mediation services. But we’re now 
dealing with estimates for the Department of Social Services. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Minister, I quite realize that but I know that it was 
certainly social service recipients that were benefiting from 
some of the services that this family mediation was providing. 
And if you’re not aware of this, that’s fine. I would be happy to 
address the Minister of Justice on it at another time. 
 
So there’s another issue I would like to bring to your attention. 
Mr. Minister, it’s my understanding from one of my 
constituents, who are on social assistance and also divorced, 
that she’s had a great deal of trouble accessing maintenance 
payments from her ex-husband for the children. She gives me 
the information saying that, if there is problems with someone 
who is on social assistance in accessing maintenance and 
receiving payments, that the Department of Social Services will 
take over that role and they will then make efforts to access 
maintenance. If they were not successful in doing that, then the 
Department of Social Services actually provides the funding in 
lieu of the person who is supposed to be making the funding. 
 
Now if that is the situation it’s in, it is pretty evident to myself 
and I think others that the Department of Social Services and 
taxpayers are putting money in for the delinquent payee of the 
maintenance, and that certainly is alarming I think. 
 
And I was wondering if you could comment on whether or not 
this is accurate and whether this arrangement is in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, as the member 
indicates, someone applies to us for assistance because of a 
breakup of the family, and there is an expectation that there will 
be maintenance payments made by the other spouse. Then if 
there is no arrangement in place, we will refer the client to 
Legal Aid to try and get the order for the maintenance 
payments. 
 
If maintenance payments still aren’t forthcoming, we refer the 
person to the Department of Justice maintenance enforcement 
office to try and see what they can do, whether it’s . . . whatever 
actions they can take to try and make sure that those 
maintenance payments are being made, so that those 
maintenance payments can then be taken into account in any 
determination of social assistance that might be provided to the 
other party and the children. 
 
Maintenance enforcement has over the years — how should I 
say this — improved their techniques to enhance the ability to 
obtain maintenance enforcement payments, and we applaud 
that. Having said that, the reality is that some spouses might 
undertake to provide the maintenance payments and then stop 
making that, and then for a period of time the mother and the 
children might be left without any income. And we want to 
make sure that they do have the income that they need. 
 
So it does create problems for us. We’d be much happier if 
maintenance payments were made as required, on a regular 
basis, so that the family themselves can plan on that income 



May 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1143 

when they’re making their plans for the future. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 
 
 



1144 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2000 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
On page 1107 of Hansard No. 37A, Tuesday, May 9, 2000 
correct the following: “We want to talk about a morale high 
road and their history?” to read: “We want to talk about a moral 
high road and their history?”  
 
We apologize for this error. 
 


