





























































Hansard: June 13, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1761 
 June 13, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of citizens throughout 
Saskatchewan who would like to see improved cellular 
telephone coverage in the Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and 
Cudworth area. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone services in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Prud’homme and Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today to retain Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Lanigan, 
Watson, and Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the future of their hospitals 
and in particular the communities of Lanigan and Watrous. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Lanigan and Jansen. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition in 
regards to the concerns with health care in Saskatchewan. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from the community 
of Lanigan. 
 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens gravely 
concerned over the health care in this province. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by folks in Lanigan and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions too 
to present on behalf of citizens of the province regarding 
hospital closures. The prayer goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions were signed by the good people in the Lanigan 
area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to read a 
petition from citizens concerned about hospital closures. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good people of Lanigan and Guernsey. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
of good citizens opposed to enforced municipal amalgamation. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Buena Vista. 
 
I so present. 
 



1762 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today with a petition of 
citizens concerned about hospital closures. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And the petitioners are from the communities of Drake, 
Lanigan, Guernsey, Jansen, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition this 
afternoon in regards to the dismal highway system we have in 
this province. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly prayer that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide the necessary resources to restore the private 
access road to an acceptable state. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people from 
Paddockwood and Christopher Lake. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present this afternoon. It deals with health care services. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And the petitioners come from the communities of Lanigan, 
Jansen, Nokomis, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the 
closure of the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from the good citizens of 
Lanigan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with possible municipal 
amalgamation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

And the petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Coderre, Courval, Regina, and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly today to present the petition to retain Lanigan and 
Watrous hospitals. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Semans, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province on the following 
matters: 
 

Protection of children from tobacco abuse; 
 
The amalgamation of municipalities; 
 
Cellular service in Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda and 
Cudworth; 
 
Ensuring that the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals and the 
Cupar Health Centre remain open; 
 
A ban of smoking in public places and workplaces, and 
 
Restoration of the Paddockwood access road. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a notice of a 
written question. I give notice I shall on day no. 64 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how much farmland and 
grazing land does the province own? 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
on day no. 64 I shall ask the government the following 
question: 
 

What are the names of all persons on personal service 
contracts with the Department of Executive Council? For 
each person, what is the purpose and term of the contract 
and the remuneration being paid? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1763 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 64 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Post-Secondary Education: how much 
of all the provincial regional colleges, SIAST campuses, 
the University of Regina, and the University of 
Saskatchewan contributed in this fiscal year to the 
Saskatchewan savings bonds? 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 64 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: is acute care a core service, and 
if so, does it not have to be provided within each health 
care district? 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 64 ask the government the following question: 
 

Has the Department of Health sold the provincial data base 
of personal health and drug records to any drug companies 
or health market research companies, if so, what 
companies; has the Department of Health sold the 
provincial data base of personal health and drug records to 
any other companies, if so, what companies; also what 
amount does the Department of Health receive for those 
sales and where do the funds go upon receipt of payment; 
what safeguards are in place that will ensure the 
confidentiality of those records representing Saskatchewan 
health care clients. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and to all members of the legislature 
23 grade 4 students from Lakeview School which is just a few 
short blocks away the Assembly here. They’re accompanied by 
their teacher Ms. Marian Ready, as well as five parents, Mrs. 
Price, Mr. Furlan, Mrs. New, Mrs. Dietrich, and Mrs. Hart. 
 
Now there’s one student I would like to specially introduce and 
ask her to stand up and that’s Julia Hart. I don’t know if Julia 
can stand up for me. Yes, okay. Julia is a special person for all 
of us here in this legislature because her grandfather was the 
Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, Fred Johnson. And her 
mother is here as well, Sheila, who was the daughter of the 
Lieutenant Governor. 
 
And I think it’s especially appropriate that we welcome both of 
them along with all of their classmates and parents to the 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It pleases me to 
introduce to you and through you to the rest of this Hon. 
Assembly, 19 grade 4 and 5 students from my hometown of 
Pense — of course they’re from the Pense School in Pense — 
and their teacher, Debbie Quinlan, and accompanied by 
chaperones Val Stevens, Joan Martin, and Marlene Tremblay. 
 
I look forward to meeting with these students after question 
period, and I hope that they’ll have a fun and educational day 

here. And I’m sure that all members will welcome them as I do. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to rise today and introduce to you and through you to 
all members of the Assembly two separate groups. 
 
One, and first, would be the grade 4 class of St. Marguerite 
Bourgeoys School seated in the west gallery and accompanied 
by their teacher, Denise Reed. This group attended a very 
exciting occasion for the legislature and put a lot of work and 
thought into establishing a time capsule to replace the bottle 
that was found in the dome so that future generations will know 
what it was like going into the new millennium in the province. 
And so there are many treasures and very interesting 
information in the time capsule, thanks to the students of St. 
Marguerite Bourgeoys. 
 
We had an opportunity to visit then, so today they’ve come 
back to watch the proceedings of the House. And they’re going 
to have a tour. And I’m sure they’ll have many questions to ask 
of the tour guide. 
 
And I would ask all members to join me in a warm welcome to 
the grade 4 class of St. Marguerite Bourgeoys. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: —While I’m still on my feet, Mr. 
Speaker, I also have another very interesting guest seated in 
your gallery. Now I’m going to try to pronounce his name 
properly and I think it goes like this — and he’s very patient 
with me — Helder Mauricio Carvajal Riverof. Helder is from 
Bogotá, Columbia where he lives with about six million other 
people. He is in Saskatchewan, he’s been here about six 
months. He’s taking English as a Second Language and is going 
to complete his English 40 and 50 and may consider staying 
longer. I think, God willing and his parents’ purse, that he could 
continue his education at the University of Regina. 
 
Helder is also accompanied by a very dear friend of mine, 
Noreen Faller. And Noreen is a wonderful ethnic cook and has 
a flair with a garden but also with painting the flowers and 
wonderful depictions on watering cans and plant pots. And I am 
a proud owner of those kinds of artistic temperament from 
Noreen. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me — our special guests 
from Bogotá, Columbia, Helder Mauricio Carvajal Riverof and 
Noreen Faller. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I want to introduce an addition to our office staff. 
In your gallery, sitting next to one of my other office staff, is a 
gentleman by the name of Curtis Littlewolfe, and Curtis is a 
summer student with my office. He’s from the Cote First 
Nations. He’s a recent grad of SIIT (Saskatchewan Indian 
Institute of Technologies) and he’s going back to school this 
September to pursue a degree in administration. And I know 
Curtis is real excited to work in my office because he’s working 



1764 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

with four other women and she’s going to be a tremendous . . . 
or he’s going to be tremendous addition to our entire staff and 
they’re really a great team. So I’d like to ask all members of the 
Assembly to welcome Mr. Littlewolfe to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Alberta By-election Results 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and in particular more good news for 
health care. 
 
The first referendum on the Alberta Tories’ private health care Bill 
took place last night, Mr. Speaker. And Albertans overwhelmingly 
said no to for-profit health care. 
 
Last night Albertans elected New Democrat Brian Mason in the 
provincial constituency of Edmonton Highlands. Mason received 
nearly 60 per cent of the vote — 60 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The 
Conservatives didn’t even finish second; they finished a distant 
third after the Liberals. It is not by accident that the two parties 
who have defended publicly funded health care finished first and 
second, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the surprise is not that the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) won the seat, the surprise was how poorly the 
Conservatives did. The Klein government underestimated the 
anger this Bill created and how it caused . . . now the public has 
spoken. They believe in public health care, Mr. Speaker. Anyone 
who doubts that need only look at the results, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Public Service Week 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly today in recognition of the National Public 
Service Week. Yesterday morning, Mr. Speaker, I had the 
pleasure of attending the celebration to launch Public Service 
Awareness Week at the Scarth Street mall. 
 
The ceremonies included a live broadcast from across Canada, and 
Saskatchewan had the honour of closing the ceremonies with the 
singing of “Oh Canada” led by the Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police and some military personnel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend all of those involved in 
yesterday’s ceremony and congratulate the Public Service 
Commission on all their hard work and dedication to our nation. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Review of No-Fault Insurance 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
the SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) review of PIPP 
(personal injury protection plan), commonly known as no fault, 
has actually begun. Hard to believe, but it has begun. 

I attended one of their meetings last night, Mr. Speaker. It was 
the first meeting that they’ve held. And unless the committee 
has both hearts and minds of stone, there will be some massive 
changes recommended. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, throughout all the meetings I’ve attended, 
either the ones put on by no fault or this one put on by SGI 
themselves, neither Mr. Fogg nor the minister has attended any 
of those meetings. 
 
At the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, that committee will be 
reporting back to the minister and giving him a 
recommendation. What is unfortunate is that, not having 
attended any of the meetings, he will be making 
recommendations and legislation in a vacuum, Mr. Speaker — 
in a vacuum, full of nothing. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cadets Caring for Canada Event 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you. Over this past weekend 
approximately 1,300 cadets in Saskatchewan and 70,000 of 
their fellow cadets from across the country took part in cleaning 
their environment. 
 
This year cadets from Saskatchewan participated in various 
activities — 2293 Army Cadet Corps, 107 Air Cadet Squadron, 
702 Air Cadet Squadron, and 45 Sea Cadet Corps of Saskatoon 
cleaned Saskatoon grasslands and planted wildflower plugs for 
Saskatoon Meewasin Valley Authority. 
 
2804 Army Cadet Corps of Hudson Bay made improvements to 
a local heritage park. 2370 Army Cadet Corps of Regina 
gathered deadfall and cleaned up the White Butte trails. 
 
41 Air Cadet Squadron of Goodeve restored Battersby Nature 
Centre. 248 Air Cadet Squadron of Shaunavon cleaned 
veterans’ gravestones in the Shaunavon cemetery. 
 
And finally, 17 Air Cadet Squadron, 2834 Army Cadet Corps, 
and 114 Air Cadet Corps of Yorkton planted trees and cleaned 
up Jaycee Beach. 
 
The Cadets Caring for Canada event is an initiative that began 
in 1991 to help promote environmental awareness and 
responsibility. The event also helps to promote good 
citizenship, educates people about the environment, encourages 
teamwork, and demonstrates the value of the Canadian cadets 
within the community. 
 
I’d like to congratulate all cadets in our province on a job well 
done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

4-H Achievement Days 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
tip my hat to 4-H’ers across this province. This past weekend I 
had the privilege of attending a number of 4-H achievement 
days in my constituency, as well as the regional show and sale 
in Whitewood on Saturday. 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1765 

Mr. Speaker, 4-H’ers from the clubs of . . . (inaudible) . . . 
Kennedy, Kipling, Whitewood, and Gerald gathered at the 
regional show on Saturday, and it was very interesting to just 
look at and observe what was taking place — the achievements 
that were being shown and exhibited by 4-H members, to see 
them diligently working preparing their cattle for the show and 
for the sale later on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt 4-H has done a lot for young 
people across this province. As one parent said to me he’d 
rather have his children involved in 4-H; that way he knows 
where they’re at and he knows that they’re not on the street. 
 
So I think what we have seen through many years of 
involvement for the 4-H movement has certainly done to 
improve the livelihoods of individuals across our province, and 
I certainly extend my hat and congratulations to the 4-H 
movement. 
 
And as well, just to extend a congratulatory note to the 
Montmartre Army Cadet Corps for their work in improving our 
environment in the Kipling area. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Opening of LutherCare Communities 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, earlier this month I had the pleasure of attending the 
official opening of an intermediate care home in my 
constituency. LutherCare Communities, formerly Lutheran 
Sunset Home of Saskatoon, has opened a new 15-unit 
intermediate care home at 1230 Temperance Street in 
Saskatoon, directly opposite Luther Tower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this intermediate care home means that residents 
at Luther Tower who have more intensive care needs, will more 
often not have to leave the very supportive community at 
LutherCare Communities but can remain close to their family 
and their friends. 
 
This intermediate care home will also be available to support 
residents of Luther Heights and Villa Royale who have 
intermediate care needs. 
 
I would like to extend my congratulations to the board of 
directors of LutherCare Communities under the chairmanship of 
Rick Stalwick. 
 
My congratulations also to all the volunteers who have been 
involved in the planning and fundraising for the intermediate 
care home. 
 
And finally, congratulations to the staff of LutherCare 
Communities under the leadership of executive director Harold 
Hesje. 
 
I wish all the residents of the intermediate care home at 1230 
Temperance Street in Saskatoon many happy times with friends 
and families in their new residence. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wilfred Hunt Earth School Celebration 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m pleased to rise today to tell you about a very important 
milestone for students and staff at one of the many schools in 
the constituency of Regina Wascana Plains. I was delighted to 
represent the provincial government last Friday, June 9, at the 
Wilfred Hunt Earth School celebration. 
 
You may be asking yourself, Mr. Speaker, what exactly is earth 
school? An earth school is the result of a lot of hard work and 
dedication by the students and staff at Wilfred Hunt School. 
The more environmental awareness projects the school 
completes, the higher the environmental grade is for that school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, only two years ago Wilfred Hunt School became 
an emerald school when it completed 500 projects. Since then 
this school has come a long way in terms of environmental 
stewardship. Friday’s celebration including artwork and song 
marked the completion of 1,000 projects for Wilfred Hunt 
School. This upgraded Wilfred Hunt School from an emerald to 
an earth school. 
 
This new grade makes Wilfred Hunt School only one of four in 
Regina with this same distinction, Mr. Speaker, and even more 
so, only 1 of 136 throughout Canada. 
 
I would like to congratulate everyone at Wilfred Hunt School 
on their milestone, including teacher, Ms. Black, who led 
everyone in this project and kept them all on track. More 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, their dedication in promoting 
environmental stewardship and awareness provides inspiration 
for us all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Last Mountain Berry Farm 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 
inform you and members of the Legislative Assembly of a very 
successful berry farm operation in the Southey district, the Last 
Mountain Berry Farm. 
 
Barry and Barbara Isaac operate a plant that produces 4,800 
pounds of product a day — jams, spreads, pie filling, and syrup 
— all on their farm 13 miles north of Southey. They sell their 
product to major food companies across Canada — from British 
Columbia to the Quebec border — to customers such as 
Superstore, Costco, and Federated Co-ops. 
 
The Isaac’s berry farm does over $1 million in business each 
year and they have created employment opportunities. They 
employ eight full-time staff all year round and hire additional 
staff in the spring. By summer, the Isaacs have 20 to 25 staff 
members helping to harvest and hand-pick the berries that grow 
on their farm. 
 
The Isaacs process up to 200,000 pounds of fruit a year — 90 
per cent of it is Saskatoon berries. They are not able to grow all 



1766 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

the berries they need and they can’t even buy all the berries they 
need in this province. The Isaacs say they would like to buy 
more of their Saskatoon berries here in Saskatchewan because it 
would save them freight costs and help to promote 
diversification. 
 
The Isaacs have been in business for about 12 years. They 
started out by planting 2,500 Saskatoon bushes in an orchard 
that now has 15,000 bushes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Isaacs are a fine example of the opportunities 
for diversification in Saskatchewan’s agricultural industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Funding for Highway Maintenance 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
member for Saskatoon Southeast recently claimed that her back 
alley gets more traffic than the highways that the Saskatchewan 
Party is concerned about, like Highway No. 18. Her statement is 
not only inflammatory, it’s just plain wrong. 
 
This morning I drove up to Saskatoon where I conducted a traffic 
count in the member’s back alley. Between 9 a.m. and 10 a.m. I 
saw exactly zero vehicles pass by. Now if you extrapolate that 
over a 24-hour period, that’s a daily vehicle count of zero, Mr. 
Speaker. The daily vehicle count on Highway 18 is at least 185 
vehicles or more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is these highways we’re talking about are 
busy highways. They are important highways and they should be 
maintained. 
 
My question today, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier: when is your 
government going to take responsibility for the entire highway 
system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is the same question 
that the Leader of the Opposition asked yesterday. And nothing 
new to it at all, and I gave the answer to the Leader of the 
Opposition yesterday which I am pleased to give to the member 
again today. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is very committed to a very 
strong, solid highways program. We have an infrastructure 
program everywhere in the province of Saskatchewan where 
possible. 
 
We want to have highways in rural Saskatchewan. We want to 
make sure that they’re properly serviced. We know all the pressure 
that exists on the highways occasioned by the abandonment of the 
Crow rate and the shift from rail back onto highways. We have the 
highest budget in the history of the province of Saskatchewan, and 
that is our concern. 
 
What the member from Southeast was simply saying yesterday, or 
the day before yesterday, was to graphically illustrate the fact that 
like always, to all governments of all political stripes, road counts 

and the like are a factor of this. She was making a point in graphic 
terms. 
 
We are there trying to protect — and we are protecting — the 
roads of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m obviously having a little fun with the member’s foolish 
statement, but I’m also trying to make a serious point. 
 
No one has to drive down that member’s back alley. No one has 
to send their kids to school down that member’s back alley. No 
one has to haul grain down the member’s back alley. No one 
has to take an ambulance to the hospital down the member’s 
back alley. However, all of those things — plus more — happen 
on Highway No. 18 and all of the other highways that the 
NDP-Liberal government is turning back to gravel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Highway 18 is a lifeline for people in southwest 
Saskatchewan. Why are you cutting off this lifeline by turning it 
back to gravel? 
 
Mr. Premier, will you answer that question, please? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I thank the 
member for the question again. As I’ve stated on many 
occasions in the past, Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan doesn’t have any plan to revert thin membrane 
surface roads back to gravel, Mr. Speaker. It’s purely an issue 
of safety. 
 
We understand the concerns of people out in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when thin membrane 
roads that were designed 30 and 40 and 50 years ago, Mr. 
Speaker, for light vehicle traffic are now having to bear heavy 
truck traffic, Mr. Speaker — which we understand needs to 
occur in rural Saskatchewan now, Mr. Speaker — those 
surfaces are breaking up and we need to address that issue. And 
that’s what we’re trying to do with respect to Highway No. 18, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if it were 
simply a matter of safety that was the main concern, we’d also 
be hearing an announcement as to when these highways would 
be repaved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s now clear this government has turned its back 
on the people of the Climax-Bracken area. Yesterday a meeting 
was held in Climax to discuss ways of fixing Highway No. 18. 
The Department of Highways was invited but no one showed 
up. 
 
So the people there decided to fix the highways themselves 
starting at 7:00 a.m. this Thursday morning. They’ve now been 
notified that they will receive absolutely no assistance from the 
Department of Highways — no flag persons, no oiler, no 
equipment of any kind, Mr. Speaker. The government is telling 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1767 

them, you’re on your own. In fact, Highways officials are 
telling them not to fix the highway since it’s going to be ripped 
up and turned back to gravel anyway. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are these people getting absolutely no 
co-operation from your department? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
member opposite knows that the department has worked very 
hard in trying to work with the communities. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my understanding that my department officials have and are 
continuing to meet with the people in the community of Climax, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our number one concern though, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said 
before, is an issue of public safety on two fronts. First of all, we 
believe that the road, when it’s broken up like that, even though 
we would love to provide a structural paved surface, Mr. 
Speaker, at about $250,000 a kilometre — we’d love to provide 
that on every single road in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, if we 
could. We cannot afford it, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we think 
that therefore the only logical alternative is provide a gravel 
surface. 
 
Now our second issue of public safety, Mr. Speaker, is an issue 
of having people who are untrained. Now we understand and 
we appreciate when the public is prepared to get involved and 
work with us, but we are concerned about their public safety, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, just a week ago the Deputy 
Premier was actively encouraging people to go out and fix their 
own highways. He was talking like this was the wave of the 
future, and the Department of Highways would help any 
community that decided to take this step. Now the people of 
Climax and area are getting absolutely no help from your 
government. In fact, they’re being told not to fix the highway. 
 
Mr. Minister, what happened? Last week in Val Marie you were 
giving them cold patch. This week in Climax you’re giving 
them the cold shoulder. Mr. Minister, why is the Department of 
Highways refusing to co-operate with the people of Climax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
understanding that Highways officials have and continue to be 
working and talking with the community of Climax to find a 
resolution that is, first of all — and again I say, first of all — 
safe for the public, Mr. Speaker, by way of transportation, Mr. 
Speaker, and by way of the fact if there are untrained people on 
the highways that they too are safe, Mr. Speaker. That’s of 
paramount importance to us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But on the issue of gravel reversion, Mr. Speaker, I want to also 
just quote if I could from Hansard May 20, 1998. And this just 
for the members opposite who have sort of suggested I — not 
sort of — have suggested that we are the only ones who have 
any interest in gravel reversion, Mr. Speaker. This is a quote 

from the member from Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker. He said: 
 

Maybe there is a point that we would be better off having 
them back in gravel and I don’t think I’d probably have 
many of my constituents agree with me on . . . this point, 
but I honestly feel there . . . (is a point) some point . . . 
where we have to give up. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to give up on this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would say to the 
minister that the government has in fact given up. The people at 
yesterday’s meeting in Climax made one more important 
decision. They are simply not going let you gravel their 
highway. In fact, they are now prepared to barricade the 
highway, to block the equipment that you are sending out to 
gravel Highway 18. 
 
Mr. Minister, these are community leaders — important people 
— mayors, reeves, and business owners, law-abiding citizens, 
who say they’ve had enough and they’re not going to take it any 
more. They are not going to let you step on them one more time 
and they are not going to let you haul gravel onto their highway. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you immediately cancel your plans to gravel 
Highway 18? Meet with the people of Climax and area and save 
Highway 18 instead of gravelling it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I will ensure that 
my officials continue to meet with the community in Climax to 
ensure that proper discussion takes place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out in fact, first of all here, the per 
capita spending on roads in the three western provinces, 
Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta. In Manitoba, they spend 
$191, Mr. Speaker, per capita; in Alberta, $189. Here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we spend $229 per capita in each 
and every year, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again I would say to 
the member opposite and to the community of Climax and for 
any other people who live along the road that is affected, our 
number one concern is safety, Mr. Speaker. On many of these 
roads that were built and designed 20, 30, 40 years ago, the 
surface simply will not withstand the traffic that now exists on 
those roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we could fix it, as I hear a member call from 
across the way, at $250,000 a kilometre, but we spend $2 
million a day on interest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the cost 
per capita in this province for highway construction is 
significant, there’s no doubt about it. But we’re talking about 
the lifeline of communities in the southwest part of this 
province. We’re talking about tourism. We’re talking about 
commercial activity. We’re talking about health. We’re talking 
about survival down there. 
 



1768 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

No amount of money is going to deter them from seeing this 
project prevented. They are not going to allow you to turn it 
back to gravel. 
 
You have a major problem on your hands, Mr. Minister. You’ve 
already let the contract to Highway No. 18 but the people of 
Climax and area say that they’re not going to let that happen. 
They’re tired of being treated like second-class citizens and 
they’re going to make your government pay attention. 
 
Mr. Minister, why don’t you start working with them instead of 
against them? This afternoon I will be moving a motion calling 
on your government to set aside plans to gravel Saskatchewan 
highways and instead to work with local people to develop 
alternative solutions. Mr. Minister, will you please support this 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I say to the 
member opposite, absolutely we will continue working with 
that community or any other community that is involved in 
these sorts of things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say first of all that . . . or to say also, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to the Saskatchewan Trucking 
Association, I've got a quote here, Mr. Speaker, from I believe 
it’s a week or so ago. 
 
The Saskatchewan Trucking Association says the following — 
this is with respect to safety. They say that: 
 

If the gravel surfaces are going to stand up better than the 
thin membrane pavement, then I guess that is what we’ll 
have to do in the interim until there is funding enough to 
put them back into pavement. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, even the member opposite who’s asking the 
questions, from Cypress Hills, has acknowledged in quotes that 
I’ve read in this Assembly on numerous occasions that the 
federal government has to come to the table to help us pay for 
the infrastructure that exists here in Saskatchewan. We simply 
can no longer afford to maintain the infrastructure that was not 
designed for the traffic that it’s having to bear today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I understand that 
your department has asked for a meeting on Friday. That 
meeting is to discuss turning the highway over to the RMs 
(rural municipality) in the region. RMs has been down this road 
before and they don’t want any part of it. 
 
Highway 18 is a provincial responsibility. The people of 
Climax and area, they pay plenty of provincial taxes. And the 
last thing they need is your government downloading one more 
responsibility on the RMs. 
 
Mr. Minister, isn’t that your real agenda here — gravel the 
highways, dump them onto the RMs, and stick local taxpayers 
with the bill? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well it’s fairly apparent to me what 
somebody’s agenda is here, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s purely 
politics, Mr. Speaker. There is absolutely no . . . there is no 
intent or agenda about turning this road or any other road over 
to local governments, Mr. Speaker. The province of 
Saskatchewan, the Department of Highways, maintains right 
now 5,000 kilometres of gravel roads, Mr. Speaker. So there’s 
no agenda here at all. 
 
So when a road gets converted, it’s an issue purely of safety, 
Mr. Speaker. My understanding is that community asked us to 
get into discussions about whether or not they could be 
responsible for the road, Mr. Speaker. We’ve done this with 
other local governments in the past; this would be nothing new, 
Mr. Speaker. But I can assure you this is not an agenda for us to 
download onto local government at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Long-term Safety Net for Agriculture 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, and, 
Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech last fall the NDP 
government promised to develop a new long-term safety net 
program for agriculture. And I’m sure every farmer in 
Saskatchewan has been really looking forward to hearing more 
about that program. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked the minister when we could 
expect this new program. He said it’s already here. He said 
AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance), NISA (Net 
Income Stabilization Account), crop insurance — that’s the 
long-term safety net for the next three years. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s absolutely nothing new here. I don’t think 
it’s what farm families were expecting from your government 
when you announced a new long-term safety net program 
would be developed. 
 
Mr. Minister, why have you broken your promise to negotiate a 
new long-term farm safety net program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, nothing could be 
further from the truth. 
 
The member opposite indicates that the ministers of Agriculture 
across Canada aren’t working on a long-term strategy. He may 
be surprised to know that his counterpart in Alberta, a good 
Conservative Minister of Agriculture, is working very closely 
with us and the other ministers of Agriculture across Canada. 
And we will be meeting, as I told the member yesterday, in 
New Brunswick in early July to sign a memorandum framework 
for a long-term strategy. 
 
Now the member may believe that we can do an arrangement of 
a long-term strategy by ourselves without the other ministers of 
Agriculture, but that’s not the way Canada works. Obviously, 
we’re working very closely with our federal counterpart and 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1769 

other ministers across Canada. And the member should quit 
trying to stir up trouble in rural Saskatchewan for political 
purposes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, first this 
minister says he’s in favour of people fixing their own 
highways; now he says they’re not in favour of them fixing 
their own highways. The minister promises long-term safety 
net; now he says there will be no long-term safety net. You 
can’t believe anything this guy says. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t think anyone is all that surprised. Farm 
families . . . farm families have been waiting eight years for a 
long-term safety net program from this government, ever since 
you ripped up the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 
contracts from farm families. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have betrayed farm families one more time. 
Mr. Minister, where’s the new farm safety net program that you 
promised and the Premier promised as well? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member . . . I want 
to tell . . . Mr. Speaker, the member obviously doesn’t listen 
very well because over the last six months a program has been 
developed for Saskatchewan farmers which has led to 32.5 
million acres being seeded by the farmers of this province, 
when a year ago he was saying 30 per cent of the land wouldn’t 
be seeded. 
 
Those were his comments and he was wrong. The program that 
is put together by the federal and provincial governments, i.e., 
the taxpayers of this country, has allowed the farmers of this 
province to seed a very, very good crop. 
 
I might add the recent rains make it one of the nicest Junes 
we’ve ever seen. And farmers feel pretty good about the 
prospect for this year’s crop. 
 
This has disappointed the member from Kindersley a great deal. 
He doesn’t like success; he likes disruption. He likes big 
meetings of people who are upset. But I don’t think he’ll get 
them going this June because things are going pretty well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First the NDP ripped up 
the GRIP contracts, now the Minister of Highways wants to rip 
up highways. That’s why the people all over this province are 
ripping up their NDP membership cards and joining the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Throne Speech promises and I quote: 
 

. . . a long term safety net program that can actually met 
farmers’ needs in (a) disastrous situations like the one we 
(are) currently (faced with) . . . 

 
When asked yesterday in Estimates, the minister confirmed that 
that is the extent of the safety net program — crop insurance, 

AIDA, and NISA. 
 
Mr. Minister, when will you live up to the commitments that 
you and the Premier have made to the farm families of this 
province to implement a long-term safety net rather than rip up 
GRIP contracts like you’ve done in the past? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
from Kindersley, who had a wonderful rain over the weekend at 
his farm as we did at our farm — and I’m sure the Leader of the 
Opposition should be in a better mood. What I can’t understand 
that the farmers of a province are in a pretty good mood, and 
he’s unhappy about it. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as I was sitting in my 
seat, I heard the member from Indian Head-Wolseley hollering 
across that it’s going to be much worse this fall. 
 
Now I don’t know what’s wrong with the members opposite. 
They want disaster in rural Saskatchewan. When it’s a beautiful 
June day, record rains, record crops being produced — they’re 
very, very unhappy. 
 
Last fall when there was a disaster on, they were very happy. 
They were extremely happy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Out-of-Province Farm Ownership 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the Minister of Agriculture, but I take notice 
that two-tenths of NDP rain and the farm problems just 
disappear in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, earlier this year you were talking about lifting the 
restrictions on out-of-province farm ownership. In fact, we were 
expecting you to introduce legislation this session removing 
these restrictions. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party would 
have supported that legislation. 
 
Mr. Minister, it now appears you’re also backing away from 
this commitment. Why is that, Mr. Minister? What happened to 
your commitment to remove the restrictions on farmers who 
want to sell their land to people from other provinces? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Department of 
Agriculture is at present doing a lot of work in looking into the 
advantages and disadvantages of foreign ownership in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Because I say to the members 
opposite it is not black and white that opening up farm 
ownership to the outside world is the right way to go. But I 
would agree with the member opposite that we should look very 
carefully, very carefully at the advantages, because there are 
advantages, of opening up farm land to other Canadians and we 
will be doing that. 
 



1770 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

And so if the member will be patient on the issue of foreign 
ownership, he will be surprised at how soon we will get back to 
him with the opinion of the farmers because I think that’s 
important what they think of his proposal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I don’t count Canadians as foreigners. We’re all 
Canadians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, it’s absolutely ridiculous that 
farmers who want to sell their land to someone outside the 
province have to get approval through a government board. 
There’s no such requirement in Alberta and there’s no such 
requirement in Manitoba. Only in NDP Saskatchewan has a 
board in place to tell you who you can sell your land to. 
 
Mr. Minister, why is that necessary? Why don’t you just open 
up the borders like the other provinces have done? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the issue of Canadians 
— other Canadians — other than residents of Saskatchewan 
owning farmland is an important issue and one that the 
Department of Agriculture is doing work on at the present time. 
 
To the members opposite, I made no such promise that we 
would move in that direction. It’s under active consideration. 
They will not be changed during this session but I would 
encourage the members opposite, if they have an opinion as a 
caucus, to put that to us and we’ll put it into the mix with other 
farm families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
since you’re not going to bring in this legislation, and you’ve 
made that plain today, the Saskatchewan Party will. 
Immediately after question period I will be introducing a private 
member’s Bill allowing Saskatchewan residents to sell their 
land to Canadians living in other provinces. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know you actually support this idea yourself; 
you’re just having trouble selling it to your socialist friends on 
that side of the House. 
 
Will you, Mr. Minister, will you support this legislation when 
we introduce it later today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
members opposite, it’s curious how they take positions, and 
then when legislation or changes occur, they’re opposed to it. 
 
It’s not that long ago I was talking to the member from Cypress 
and talked about quite openly that he supported some of the 
highways going to gravel. And then when some of it changes, 
now he’s opposed to it. 

What I’d like you to do, sir, before we move on this issue, is 
send us a letter of support from your caucus that when and if we 
opened up the ownership of other Canadians, we would have it 
in writing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, as 
you promised, and all you had to do was put a Bill on the Table, 
we would have looked at it, and if it had done what we’re 
asking, we would have fully supported it. 
 
You made that commitment, and once again you broke your 
promise. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, your government has become 
famous for putting walls around this province — ones that let 
our people go out of this province but block anybody from 
coming back in with their cheque book. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, your high taxes in this 
province — higher than Manitoba, higher than Alberta — our 
long waiting lists in health care — longer than Manitoba, longer 
than Alberta — Mr. Minister, highways are worse in this 
province than they are in Manitoba and Alberta; those walls 
continue to keep people out. 
 
Here’s a chance for you — and not costing any money — to 
take down those walls, let Canadians come in, bring their 
cheque book with them, and make an investment in this 
province. Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite. I’ve clearly indicated that the issue of Canadian 
ownership of Saskatchewan land is under active consideration. I 
would like though that the members opposite would send us in 
writing their position. 
 
Well you’re saying, you’re saying if, if, if. What I would like is 
in writing — writing. Just send a small . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been around here 
for 20 years dealing with Conservatives and your 
Conservatives, and I preferred to get it in writing so that we 
could have it in front of us as opposed to it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 218 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to move first reading of Bill No. 218, The Saskatchewan 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1771 

Farm Security Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day, I 
have a . . . Order, please. Hon. members, before orders of the 
day it is my responsibility to table The Provincial Ombudsman 
Special Report, June 2000. 
 
I so table. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On a point of 
order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise on a 
point of order dealing with members’ statements from 
yesterday. 
 
I believe there was a breach of rule 10(4), by the member for 
Regina Dewdney in his comments when he debated the member 
from Watrous in his comments. 
 
I believe that according to the ruling that was done on May 26, 
that is contrary to the rules and should not be validated, Mr. 
Speaker, and I ask that he withdraw that. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize if I . . . for 
naming the member in the statement. I apologize and withdraw 
the name in the statement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, please. We’ve asked for a 
comment on a point of order. 
 
There’s been a comment from the member, the hon. member for 
Regina Dewdney, and given the level of noise that has been 
here, I’m not sure members on the opposition side have heard 
his comments. And I would ask all hon. members to kindly 
allow members to be heard when speaking. 
 
Hon. member for Regina Dewdney, kindly repeat your 
statement. 
 
Mr. Yates: — I apologize for using the member’s name and 
withdraw my comment. 
 
The Speaker: — I want to thank the hon. member for 
Dewdney. I want to thank the members for bringing that to my 
attention. We’ll continue now with our business at hand. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
government, I’m extremely happy to table a response to 
question no. 173. 

The Speaker: — The answer to question 173 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of an open 
and accountable government, I’m very pleased to respond to 
question no. 174. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 174 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again on behalf of 
an open and accountable government, I’m extremely happy and 
pleased to respond to question no. 175. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 175 is tabled. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 10 — Maintenance of Highways 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I rose 
early and headed up the highway north to Saskatoon. One week 
ago today I got up early and headed down Highway No. 4 to the 
community of Val Marie. I was struck in making the trip today by 
the significant difference in the quality of the two roads. It was so 
apparent, it was just black and white. 
 
One of the interesting things that has developed over the last week 
or 10 days is the highways issue. It’s taken on a life of its own, and 
I think in good part was spurred by the actions of private citizens 
in this province. 
 
The one project that got the most attention of course was the effort 
undertaken by the residents of Val Marie. But I understand that a 
few days prior, residents of the community of Atwater undertook a 
similar project over a much shorter distance. And although they 
did not get the publicity, they in fact set the standard for public 
participation in highway repairs in this province. 
 
The people of Val Marie, however, used the situation and 
condition of their highway to bring very important recognition to 
the problems facing residents in rural Saskatchewan in dealing 
with the highways that they have to travel on a daily basis. 
 
And the people of Val Marie need to be commended for 
recognizing an opportunity to bring this particular problem to the 
attention of not just the media, but the people of Saskatchewan 
and of Canada on that particular event. 
 
(1430) 
 
A week ago this morning there were about 50 people showed up at 
the town office in the community of Val Marie. Now for those 
members opposite who have never visited Val Marie it has a 
very interesting wild west history. It’s in a very desolate, 
underpopulated part of our province in the deep Southwest. But 
it is also home to Canada’s newest national park, Grasslands 
National Park, and as such a lot of attention has been drawn to 
that small community. Unfortunately most recently, the 
attention that’s been brought to that community has more to do 
with the sad state of their roads than it does of the glory of a 
new park. 
 
Fifty people banded together to show their resolve to address a 
difficult problem. My colleague from Cannington and myself 



1772 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

arrived to offer our support and to lend a hand. We weren’t 
there just to lend moral support and we weren’t there just for 
the opportunity of a little publicity. We were there to work. 
 
When we got there we were given hard hats, we were given 
vests, we were given shovels and/or rakes — whatever we 
needed. We joined the crews, we jumped on the back of the 
trucks, we travelled with them, and we worked with them. 
 
And over and over again the people that day indicated to us that 
this was an important event in their lives personally and in the 
life of their community, because they came together to address 
a problem that nobody else was prepared to address, at least not 
on a timely basis. And the importance of that event in their lives 
was to meld that community into a tighter knit community. And 
I think that we need to commend their initiative. 
 
And when I was asked, following that event, by media people 
whether or not I would recommend that line of endeavour for 
other communities, I immediately indicated that it was not the 
kind of thing you would expect any other community 
necessarily to do. Most communities just don’t have the 
opportunity to bring their community together to work on a 
project like this. And if they do, maybe they don’t have the 
manpower or maybe their citizens just aren’t interested enough 
in co-operating on a venture like this. 
 
Many other communities cannot do what Val Marie did. But it 
set an example for additional communities who felt that they 
had a need to do this same kind of effort; that needed to bring 
attention to the crumbling highway that serves their community; 
that needed to bring attention to the issue of rural infrastructure; 
to bring attention to the necessity of having a safe, reliable, 
all-weather road tying those rural communities to larger centres 
around our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason these roads and the state of the roads is 
such a critical issue in rural Saskatchewan is not because there’s 
a difference in rural Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan in 
terms of people, and it’s not a wedge issue that’s trying to 
parlay one group against another. The fact of the matter is that 
the people of rural Saskatchewan over the last ten years in 
particular, and nine years of this government’s administration, 
have seen a decimation of services in rural Saskatchewan. The 
road, in many cases, is the last thing left for them, and for them 
to reach the services that are necessary to life and limb. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you live in a community like Val Marie, as 
far away as they are from an urban centre of any size where the 
only hospital that they can get to might be located, where the 
majority of their grocery shopping and other retail purchases 
need to be made — when you have to travel a highway in the 
kind of state that Highway No. 4 was in to reach those vital 
services, it’s frightening. Not only is it dangerous, it’s 
nerve-racking and it can be destructive to the vehicles on the 
road. The potential for mishap and accident is heightened, not 
to mention stress and fatigue of the people who are driving that. 
 
So what we have is a situation where people look at those roads, 
Mr. Speaker, as absolutely essential to their survival. And that’s 
why when you take away the important element, the last 
important vestige of their services and infrastructure, when you 
take away their roads, they have nothing left. 

What that leaves, Mr. Speaker, is a desperate population. The 
people of Val Marie felt that they were in a desperate situation. 
And in order to address that, they decided to initiate the 
program that they undertook on Highway No. 4 one week ago 
today. 
 
This morning, as I mentioned, I took the divided highway from 
Regina to Saskatoon. I made that trip in an incredibly 
comfortable way — two and a half hour drive, no fatigue, no 
failing highway, no crumbling areas of the road, no 
overwhelming concerns about traffic. I contrast that with 
Highway No. 4, and the dichotomy is startling. 
 
Now I understand that Highway 11, I believe it is, between here 
and Saskatoon is an important commercial artery. That it serves 
a very important part in the economy of this province. No less 
so though, I might add, is the artery that No. 4 ought to be for 
the people of Val Marie and the potential for their future. 
 
With the Grasslands National Park situated there, with the effort 
that has gone into tourism to promote it, to bring people to that 
area; with the tie-in that it naturally makes with the Cypress 
Hills, the new dinosaur museum in the community of Eastend, 
the sand hills of the Sceptre area, the attractions in Leader, the 
many things that there are to offer — to turn parts of the road 
back to gravel or to let them fall into a terrific state of disrepair 
is just inappropriate. And not only that, potentially harmful to 
the area. 
 
What I find really interesting about the decline of rural roads 
under this administration is that most recently this government, 
the NDP-Liberal coalition, has made a fairly significant issue 
out of the matter of economic development in rural 
Saskatchewan, and on the basis of that argument, has pushed 
ahead with an attempt to compel RMs and small communities 
to come together in an amalgamation program. That whole 
effort has taken up much more time and debate, much more 
questioning, much more energy than it ought to have. 
 
If in fact economic development is the primary motivating 
factor in the rural amalgamation concept, then how do you 
expect to achieve the results this government says they want if 
they would let the most basic element of infrastructure decay 
before our eyes? 
 
How can you possibly encourage economic development in 
rural Saskatchewan on one hand when on the other you aren’t 
even able to get raw products in and finished products out of the 
region? How does that help economic development? Would 
some wise person give me the answer to that question? 
 
I think that the most simple economic theorists would say that if 
you have people willing to develop some economic initiative in 
a rural area, at the very least they must be able to get products 
in — raw products in, and finished products out in order for it 
to have any hope of success. Anything less than that is just 
spitting into the wind, frankly. 
 
The roads of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
crumbling around us and we’ve heard time and time again from 
the Minister of Highways and the deputy minister and more 
recently the Premier, that it’s all the fault of the federal 
government. They’re the big, bad guys in this whole story. 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1773 

Well the reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that while rail-line 
abandonment was happening, it didn’t happen overnight. It 
wasn’t announced yesterday. This government has been in 
charge of the affairs of this province for nine years. Rail-line 
abandonment has been a topic of at least nine years in length. 
 
Somebody on that side of the House should have had the 
foresight to see the implications of rail-line abandonment, how 
it would affect rural Saskatchewan, how it would affect the 
roads of the area, how it would affect the economy of the area, 
the negative impact it would have, and start making some plans 
to adjust or at least to compensate for the pending disaster. 
 
Now I would believe that at nine years of age I would expect 
my child to take some modicum of responsibility for his or her 
actions. I think a government that has been in power for nine 
years ought to at least do the same. I would expect this 
government to do as a minimum . . . to accept as a minimum its 
responsibility in the affairs of the last nine years. 
 
To have said it’s all the fault of the federal government is to 
deny the reality of this government’s obligation. And I see that 
these roads going back to gravel is a declaration of failure and 
an abdication of responsibility by the current government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, rural roads are not 
important just for convenience sake, although that plays a very 
important part. I know my constituency very well. I know the 
distances that people have to travel to get any type of service, to 
get any kind of help, to buy any kind of product, to get any kind 
of medical relief, to ship out any kind of produce that they may 
grow on their farm. 
 
I know the distances people have to travel on school buses. I 
know the concerns of the people in the Climax area when the 
Eastend unit school board would no longer allow children to be 
on school buses driving down Highway 18. I understand that. I 
know those people; I know that area. That is a significant worry 
for people. 
 
Those roads are there for, as I mentioned, social purposes, 
retail, and economic purposes. But what I think those who are 
proposing that we allow these roads to go back to gravel 
without serious concern — even though they have indicated that 
safety seems to be the primary issue here — what they have 
failed to realize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that when the road is 
not an all-weather road, when you can’t travel that road safely 
under rainy or stormy conditions, it is no longer simply a safety 
issue. In fact safety becomes a negative component of that 
particular road. 
 
When a commercial trucking company cannot depend on 
all-weather access to a community because the road has been 
turned back to gravel, they’re very reluctant to send their trucks 
into that community. And when trucks carrying commercial 
products will not attend a community to provide them the basic 
necessities of life, what happens to that community? 
 
That store can’t supply their customers. Their chances of 
survival are reduced. If the local community has no retail outlet, 
whether it be groceries or hardware or whatever you may ask, if 
you can’t buy that locally, the citizens of that community are 
compelled to go greater distances to larger communities. They 

are forced to get on these roads, these roads which now are 
dangerous. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s another reason why the people of these 
communities are so adamant about not allowing their roads to 
go back to gravel. Their very survival, their very future as a 
community is now at stake. And that is the primary motivation 
for the kinds of actions that people in these small communities 
have undertaken, and in other cases are thinking of undertaking. 
 
You can appreciate, I’m sure, the threat that people feel and the 
response, the gut response that evokes in people when their 
survival is at stake. And I think that we need to encourage this 
government to talk to those people, to work with them, to try 
and find some kind of a solution. They’re at a point now where 
they’re volunteering their own time, their own equipment, their 
own manpower, their own energies, to do the work that 
ordinarily would have been done by the Department of 
Highways. 
 
And because the highways are crumbling all over the province, 
the department is stretched far thinner than it can possibly 
accommodate. These problem areas are so numerous and so far 
advanced that even if the Department of Highways budget was 
doubled over the next couple of years, they wouldn’t be able to 
handle all of the needs in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Why is that the case? While I was looking at some notes last 
night . . . and even though the Minister of Highways has 
indicated many, many times in this House, that this year’s 
Department of Highways budget is larger than it’s ever been, 
the sad reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that at the start of this 
government’s mandate the Department of Highways budget was 
gutted. There was so little money left, so many downsizing 
efforts were undertaken, so many reductions in service were 
accomplished because of that gutting, that the whole department 
was overwhelmed. 
 
After five, six, seven years of neglect, without the kind of 
proper attention being paid to them that many of these 
secondary highways have seen, there’s simply no way of 
keeping up with the problems that have developed. 
 
(1445) 
 
And I’m very sympathetic with the problem in terms of being 
overwhelmed, but the fact of the matter remains, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that that issue became so significant as a direct result 
of the neglect of this government over the last many years. 
 
One of the things that has arisen from the decaying roads is 
damage to vehicles. Now we’ve heard reports of pavement 
being thrown through windows. A couple of years ago there 
was a lady south of town that was rather seriously injured 
actually by a piece of pavement that came through her 
windshield. 
 
In case anybody in this House, and particularly on that side of 
the House, thinks that that was a rarity, I can tell you as a matter 
of fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I have had four of those 
instances reported to my office alone where there has been 
serious damage done to the vehicles; where glass shards have 
been blown into the individuals’ faces; where a piece of 



1774 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

pavement went right through the front windshield, through the 
cab, and out the back window of another vehicle, just barely 
missing the driver. 
 
I have those complaints coming to my office; we are 
documenting them. And I’m sure that my office is not the 
exception, that this is the kind of experience that many other 
MLAs are having in their constituency as well. 
 
There is a significant danger factor associated with the 
highways as we know them now and the condition that they are 
in. 
 
Much has been made about the movement of heavy grain over 
these secondary highways and how that has caused the more 
rapid deterioration. 
 
I don’t think anybody would deny that there is a role played by 
heavy hauling trucks driving at fairly high rates of speed, but I 
don’t think that they should shoulder the blame entirely for this 
issue. I think that the hard-working drivers of those trucks are 
providing a service that is not available to farmers in any other 
form now, especially that many of the rail lines have been 
abandoned. 
 
But I think that there is . . . there is a role that this government 
could play in that regard as well and I haven’t seen it happen 
yet. I think that when you have a heavy haul truck going at an 
excessive rate of speed you have damage graphed moving 
upwards exponentially. Those two factors in tandem create an 
exceptionally high damage component to the roads. 
 
If the government was serious about preventing some of that 
damage they may look at allowing weights to continue as they 
are and asking truckers to reduce their speed on secondary 
roads, so that at a minimum when they get to primary roads 
they can regain their speed and still hold their weight to a legal 
limit. 
 
On the other hand you could reduce weights and not do 
anything about the speed, but I do not believe that that would 
have the sufficient impact to hold the problem in check. 
 
We have also been told many times that the government is 
spending a full $250 million on highways and while that is 
maybe technically correct, it in fact misleads the public to talk 
about the amount of money going to the roads. 
 
What we’ve got is a budget of $250 million for the entire 
department of which about $61 million is going to construction. 
And I can’t recall the exact additional amount but in total we 
only have $160 million going to construction and maintenance. 
I’m not very good with mathematics off the top of my head — 
used a calculator for too many years. 
 
But the other amount, the difference between 260 million and 
. . . I’m sorry, 250 million and 160 million is going to such 
things as equipment purchase, administration, salaries, and 
those types of things. 
 
There is a desperate need for more money to be put into the 
Highways’ budget. And when the government brags about 
spending 80 cents of every dollar they collect on fuel tax on 

highways, they’re not quite right. And I think that distinction 
needs to be made. 
 
The other point is though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 20 cents of 
every dollar collected remains to be spent on highways. That 20 
cents is going elsewhere, but it could in fact be going to 
highways. And I would call on the government to reconsider the 
way they apportion the fuel tax money. 
 
Finally, I would like to point out that this government has 
claimed poverty and can’t in fact afford more money for the 
Department of Highways. The reality is this government’s 
priorities are not in highways. 
 
They have money for whatever they wish. They have money to 
do what they want to do. But most importantly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they have a $700 million fund sitting there collecting 
interest. And if it was important to this government to see the 
highways repaired to a driveable standard, they could afford to 
do it. Let’s not pussyfoot around that particular issue. It’s not a 
matter of money — it’s a matter of will. 
 
And this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, does not have the 
will to address the issue. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order. Order. Order, 
order. Order, please. Order. Members of the Assembly, it is 
impossible for me as Speaker . . . as Deputy Speaker to hear the 
hon. member for Cypress Hills. There is simply too much noise 
taking place in the Assembly on both sides of the Assembly. 
 
And I apologize to hon. member for Cypress Hills that I’ve 
needed to interrupt him. But I ask all members of the Assembly 
to give the hon. member for Cypress Hills the opportunity to 
make himself heard without undue interference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Having driven 
many of the rural roads in this province over the last number of 
years, I can speak of first-hand knowledge to the costs that I 
have incurred to my own vehicles. I took my van in after having 
about 280,000 kilometres on it, took it in for some service 
work, and my service manager said, you shouldn’t need these 
repairs yet — this is a vehicle that’s got a lot of kilometres — 
you shouldn’t need these repairs yet. 
 
But these have been incurred by bouncing across these roads. 
It’s premature; it’s unnecessary. And if I’ve experienced that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, every person who’s driving a vehicle in 
rural Saskatchewan is going through the same thing. That’s an 
economic cost to the people living there that this government 
never takes into account. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said a few minutes ago that I was making my 
final point. I will wrap it up. There is much more that I could 
address on this particular topic and I think that it’s a critical 
topic for the people of this province. 
 
Interestingly enough when I was in Saskatoon this morning, 
most of the media people that came to our press conference 
indicated that they are from rural Saskatchewan originally and 
they have experienced the same conditions, the same problems, 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1775 

and the same concerns as we’re trying to draw attention to 
today. They’re living in the city, but they know what the 
problems are in rural Saskatchewan in connection with this 
issue. I wish to goodness that the members of the government 
opposite were equally as aware. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, having said this, I would like to read into 
the record the motion of the day. It reads as follows, moved by 
myself — Wayne Elhard from Cypress Hills — seconded by 
the member from Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly urges the government to set aside any 
plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to gravel, 
commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I think the attention that highways have been 
getting in this legislature and across this province in the last two 
or three weeks is just an example of the deplorable state of the 
highways and the concern that people in urban and rural 
Saskatchewan have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What happens is . . . I think the point is . . . goes out and looks 
at the rural people as once again complaining about their roads. 
But you go downtown in Regina, you go downtown in 
Saskatoon, and the business people and the people that drive out 
of this city to do any kind of business or holiday or take a 
weekend out in the country all have saw the deplorable state of 
our highways and have the same concerns we do — the ones of 
us that live out in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So I think when the government tries to point the urban-rural 
split, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not an urban-rural issue. It’s a 
Saskatchewan issue. Number one, we’re chasing tourism right 
out of this province, as we saw some of the things that came up 
in question period a few days ago where a golf course couldn’t 
get people there. 
 
All things like that are affected — golf course, fishing resorts, 
everywhere, everything we have in this province that rely on 
outside money to come in, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re chasing 
these people out, blocking them from coming in and spending 
their money because we aren’t investing in our future and 
investing in our roads that we need for a number of areas 
including tourism, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m just going to quickly . . . and we have 
58 constituencies and I believe there’s — what? — about 30 are 
outside of the cities in this province so that the highways are 
really in the worst shape in those spots. 
 
I’m going to give you an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the 
highways in my own riding and you can magnify that times 30 
just to tell you how many highways have to be fixed in this 
province, how many roads have been let . . . in a run-down state 
over the last 10 years. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a highway — and this is a really 
amazing situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but I have a highway 
called No. 8 Highway from Wroxton to Kamsack. Two years 
ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the highways contracted it out and 
resurfaced half of this road, and I commend them for that 
because the highway was in terrible, terrible condition. When it 
rained, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you had about four or five inches 
of water within the hollows where the traffic had drove and it 
was very unsafe. So I was happy to see this. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I said two years ago. I thought they 
would come out last year and fix the other half. I knew money 
was short, maybe couldn’t fix the whole highway. 
 
You know what they did, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They’ve left 
that road. They haven’t even come back yet. And it’s not on the 
list. In fact, do you know what list it is on now? It’s on the list 
to turn it back to gravel. 
 
So what we’re going to have is a newly surfaced 13, 14 miles of 
road on that highway. And now we’re going to get the 
cultivator out and we’re going to rip the other 13 or 14 miles 
up. This is going to be really good for agriculture, really good 
for tourism — we have Duck Mountain park up in that area. 
Southerners are really going to want to drive down this road. 
You come off a fairly decent half of it and here we go, bang and 
you’ve got dust and stones flying because somebody has no 
idea how to fix the highways in this province. 
 
The Highways minister last night had made the comment in 
here that it’s too expensive to fix highways properly. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as a past reeve, those same comments I guess 
would be fair if you were talking about RM roads. But what we 
do in the RMs is, if we have a heavy traffic count road, is we 
build it to heavy traffic standards. We spend the extra money, 
and we don’t have to go back for 30 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Not 3 years like the minister talked about these thin-membrane 
highways — we don’t go back for 30 years because we do it 
right the first time. 
 
If this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would just once in a 
while take a look out there and see what local municipal people 
are actually doing and doing right and doing without running up 
a debt and been doing that for a number of years — many, 
many years, Mr. Deputy Speaker — they might not be in this 
situation where they throw up their hands and don’t have any 
idea how to fix health care, education, highways, social 
services. Anything in this province that they’ve ran into the 
ground, they have no idea how to fix. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we look at the numbers and what comes to 
mind is the last election and the comments the Liberal leader 
made about the fuel tax and the licensing tax. Right now we 
take in, between the two, $460 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now actual highway maintenance and construction, we only 
spend $170 million. That’s about 35 per cent. That’s a far cry 
from the 87 per cent that the Minister of Highways, and for that 
matter the Deputy Premier, have been trying to spin the public. 
It’s not even close to that figure. 
 
What has happened is more is spent on administration and less 
on the actual building of roads and maintaining roads when 



1776 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

they’re in the state that they are and need actually more dollars 
spent on that than they do pencil-pushers costing us money and 
no people out there actually fixing the highways. 
 
I believe all highway crews in this province have had their 
numbers cut, their budgets cut to the amount of material they 
can even use to repair these roads, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I was talking about my constituency 
and the highway from No. 8 going from Wroxton to Kamsack 
being in a deplorable state, it doesn’t end there. 
 
(1500) 
 
I’ve got No. 15 Highway from No. 9 over to No. 16 on the 
Melville shortcut, over to 16 that I go home, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker . . . when I go home every weekend. And I along with 
many others, are actually diverting over to the rural roads which 
are in far better condition because they’re looked after by local 
people, than the highway is, because it’s not safe, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Then I’ve got No. 8, Langenburg to Spy Hill. You could take a 
picture of one of these roads, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and you 
could swear that each road was the same picture. It’s the same 
mess everywhere out there. 
 
I’ve got a short road, MacNutt to No. 80. Short road, narrow, 
only a two-lane road, it’s not a wide road, but it’s hard surface 
in some spots because they’ve dumped gravel in places on it. 
But it’s in a deplorable state. 
 
Then I’ve got Churchbridge to Wroxton, No. 80. I’ve got 
Churchbridge to the IMC (International Minerals and Chemical 
Corporation (Canada) Ltd.) mine. Here’s where workers go 
every day, paying very high taxes. These are the people when 
they get their cheque they’re lucky if they get half of it after the 
income tax and all the deductions like EI (employment 
insurance) and everything else come off, and they’re asked to 
drive to work and ruin their cars on these kinds of roads. 
 
The point I’m trying to make, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this is one 
constituency. And I’m sure I’ve missed some in my 
constituency that needs work. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you 
multiply that amount of highways to be fixed times 30 around 
this province, it will take us, when we get in power and have an 
idea of how you may fix these problems, probably 20 years to 
even start to make it look like this province is open for business 
once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve had many comments lately in here 
about the possibility of downloading to the municipalities, and I 
believe the idea of turning these highways to gravel is part and 
parcel of that agenda. 
 
The Minister of Highways said today that there’s no agenda. 
But I remember back in 1991, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I 
was elected and I was just a farmer out in rural Saskatchewan 
doing my thing, and I remember the election came and went, 
and I don’t remember hearing one promise from the NDP that 
they were going to close hospitals if they got elected, to balance 
the budget. 
 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve saw what happened. At that 
point they said they had no agenda and come along and close 
52. Since then they’ve closed two more, one of them being by 
the way, the Plains hospital that serviced eastern and southern 
Saskatchewan, in fact was our lifeline to health care when 
things really got bad and we couldn’t get into our own 
hospitals. 
 
So I guess what I’m saying here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that a 
government that had no agenda to do that and closed hospitals 
to that magnitude, I don’t think would have one bit of a problem 
here saying they had no agenda to turn highways and turn them 
back to gravel, or turn them over to the RM’s responsibility, 
and then turn around and do it when they thought nobody was 
looking, probably after session in this session, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I think they’re waiting for a number of things, hoping for the 
publicity to go away. More hospital closures probably are in 
sight. And then along with this, turning of roads back to gravel, 
are very important issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to talk to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about some of the 
letters, and I think all the MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) on our side get letters now — every day e-mails, 
faxes — from people that have drove these highways that are 
from cities, they’re from rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d just like to quote one of these letters here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And it’s from a Robert Hamilton, and he goes on to 
say: 
 

I am writing to bring the deplorable state of highway 42 to 
your attention. On the May long weekend my family and I 
were travelling to (the) Palliser Regional Park pulling our 
boat. We hit what . . . (could) only be described as a crater 
that was . . . 8 feet long, 4 feet wide and 8 to 12 inches 
deep. 
 

Normal highway in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I go 
back and I quote: 
 

Our trailer bounced off the hitch breaking the security pin 
and snapping the metal safety chains. It was really a 
miracle that our family was spared any serious injury. 
 

He goes on to say: 
 

As we continued our trip we made a game of counting 
(the) potholes. Between the town of Eyebrow and Keeler, 
we counted 313 major potholes . . . 
 

Three hundred and thirteen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

. . . and 13 stretches where thick layers of dangerous gravel 
(had) . . . been spread on the road. I found it very difficult 
to retain control of our vehicle when I hit these patches. 
We passed one sign which read “Broken Pavement 5km” 
but when that 5km stretch ended we were confronted with 
another identical sign followed by a third sign indicating a 
further 10km stretch of broken highway ahead. 
 

And I could go on with this letter. That writer explains their 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1777 

whole trip out there and what a nightmare it was. But he made 
some really good points in here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’ve been on highways into the province here where you may 
travel for 50 or 60 kilometres, even more, where I think it 
would have been simpler to put at the front of where you come 
onto that highway saying: this highway is in a deplorable state, 
you can’t go more than 10 kilometres an hour. And put the sign 
at the other end saying: you are now entering Alberta; you’re 
out of the rough zone of Saskatchewan highways. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this letter here is only one example of the 
many that we’re receiving every day. I also got another letter 
here and I’d like to read it to you, and it’s another highway that 
I talked about here from Langenburg to Spy Hill, and it goes on 
to say: 
 

Dear Sir: This letter is in regards to the state of disrepair of 
Highway # 8 from the Junction of Highway # 22 North to 
Langenburg. For the last few years this highway has 
continuously created havoc with the regular traffic who . . . 
(use) this road. It is not only a hazard to vehicles but also a 
safety issue, not to mention the very poor representation to 
tourists (as I talked about before, Mr. Speaker) who 
frequent our province. There are some signs to mark the 
potholes but if you are not familiar with this stretch of 
highway you can cause serious damage to your vehicle. 
I’m sure SGI appreciates the increased claims as a result of 
this poor excuse for a road. In the end we are all paying 
due to (the) increased premiums. If . . . fuel tax would have 
been applied (to) where it was initially allocated we 
wouldn’t have the . . . (need to this extreme). Please 
consider this letter . . . our plea to repair this road as it 
should be and not another band-aid job. 
 

And this lady happens to be a constituent of mine, a Kim Walz 
from Spy Hill. Her and her husband have to drive this road on 
many occasions. 
 
These letters, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are just examples of what 
we’re getting. And I’m sure the members opposite are getting 
. . . are told to file them in the garbage because the Minister of 
Highways and the Premier don’t want to see it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit for a minute 
about a comment the Deputy Premier talked about the other 
day. And I’d just like to quote, and this is the Deputy Premier 
saying: 
 

I have talked to . . . officials in Highways and they are at 
present time contacting the people in Climax. And if an 
arrangement can be made where the responsibility for this 
road will be taken up by the municipal government . . . 
well this is what (they’ve been) . . . asking for, this is what 
. . . (they’ve been) asking. Within a spirit of co-operation 
that can be worked on. 
 

This is our concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is 
something going on within government departments to try and 
turn many of these roads over to the local RMs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s nothing more than another way 
of downloading onto the local governments out there who at the 

same time are fighting forced amalgamation, which is another 
form of downloading. And I think . . . you know, we have this 
old saying from this government: trust me, I’ll take care of you. 
Well we’ve saw since 1991 how they’ve taken care, especially 
of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Deputy Premier also, in his ramp the 
other day, in his answer to one of questions —or so-called 
answers, because we get very few actual answers out of the 
government — was talking about the 400 pieces of highway 
equipment that the Devine government sold at fire sale. 
 
I found it amazing that about the next day I saw in the paper 
that this Highway department is moving some equipment. It’s 
somewhat hypocritical of the Deputy Premier on one hand to be 
blaming everything on Jean Chrétien, the federal government, 
Grant Devine, and the Grant Devine days, when he’s turning 
around and doing exactly the same thing here. But I guess it 
wasn’t okay then; it’s okay now. 
 
Maybe they have a point, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Maybe when 
you really give up, you might as well sell the equipment off and 
just let the roads go back to grass rather than wasting gravel on 
them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the member from Cypress that talked 
to you before on this, and I’ve talked to you, every member on 
this side of the House I think has talked to you on this issue, and 
to the members opposite, said that just how bad the deplorable 
state of these highways are. 
 
And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we get comments like we did 
from the member for Saskatoon, I believe it’s Southeast, saying 
that her back alley has more traffic than we do out in rural 
Saskatchewan. I think, as the headline says in The StarPhoenix 
today, Murray Mandryk’s column, it says, and I quote: 
“Back-Alley Pat hurts NDP image.” 
 
Well I think her comments have actually offended everybody 
out there in rural Saskatchewan. To think that we have elected 
members on that side of the House that aren’t any more familiar 
with our roads and traffic patterns and traffic numbers out there 
to even compare to her back alley. And I’m not saying . . . She 
may have a very high-traffic back alley, and that may be very 
possible. But realistically it would be nothing compared to the 
roads and the traffic we have out here in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I also notice Tuesday, June 13, The Leader-Post, and I quote 
again, “Archer calls for twinning money,” another problem that 
we have, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m the first to admit that 
the federal government also has a responsibility here. 
 
But can we sit back and wait for the federal government to 
come to the table when for the last . . . well ever since they’ve 
come to power too, they’ve done nothing in Western Canada. 
Can we watch people get killed on these highways? Can we 
watch our highways deteriorate to the point that they have — 
and even worse if we leave them — and sit back again and 
throw up our hands and say, we don’t have a plan, we don’t 
know what to do? 
 
And I mean this is a tired old government with a tired old 
Premier, when you get to that point that you have no ideas, you 



1778 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

have absolutely no way of fixing the problem. In fact you give 
us the same answers across here every day, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. There’s no fresh ideas on that side. 
 
I have a suggestion to the members opposite. Why don’t we do 
the right thing? Let the Premier go on to something better, the 
health care issue for the Prime Minister, and let your new leader 
call a provincial election. Let the public decide what we’ll do 
with these highways, what we will do with health care, what we 
will do with education, and especially what we will do with 
high taxes in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — We have ideas. We’re not tired. We’re not 
old. We’re not out of ideas. We have a plan for Saskatchewan. 
And Saskatchewan people, according to the polls that are 
coming out — even your polls — Saskatchewan people are 
buying into our plan and are very sick of you not having a plan. 
 
I rest my case, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great deal of 
pleasure I rise to enter into the debate on this issue. And at the 
end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving an amendment 
to the motion presented by the members opposite. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that amendment will delete all the words 
after Assembly and replace it with the words, endorses the 
government’s efforts to obtain federal funding and involvement 
in a Highways and Transportation policy that responds to the 
needs of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to enter this debate and talk about the 
seriousness of this issue. Members on this side of the House do 
not take this issue lightly, Mr. Speaker. This is an issue that 
faces all the residents of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It isn’t an 
issue of just those who live in rural Saskatchewan because those 
of us who live in the cities travel on those same highways each 
and every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are our family members, those are our 
friends, those are our relatives that use those roads. And when 
they talk about safety and indicate we’re not concerned, we’re 
every bit as concerned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we’re trying to do is deal with a highway system that was 
built some 30 or 40 years ago, Mr. Speaker, that was not built 
for the demands of today. 
 
And as I heard the member opposite say, and I believe quite, 
quite honestly; that it would take 20 years for them to fix this 
problem. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t disagree with him. It took 
many, many years to build this infrastructure. It was built at a 
time when we used railroads for main, heavy hauling in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. The roads were designed for vehicles to 
travel over, not heavy semi-trucks pulling one or two or three 
B-trains behind them, Mr. Speaker. They were designed for that 
time in which they were built. And many things have changed 
since then, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — To request leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to introduce to you today, sitting in the west gallery, 
two students from the E.A.G.L.E. program in Prince Albert. 
These two students are Miranda Naytowhow and Edwin Bear. 
The E.A.G.L.E. program, Mr. Speaker, E-A-G-L-E, stands for 
education is a good learning experience. 
 
It’s a program co-sponsored by the school board and 
Saskatchewan Social Services and it’s for students who 
particularly want to get their way back to school. And as part of 
their program, they have been accompanied here today by Pat 
Ince and Morley Harrison from Prince Albert. 
 
And I want the Assembly to welcome our guests to the 
Assembly today. And hope that they have a pleasant experience 
here in Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, leave to also welcome 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
is with a great pleasure that I too would like to welcome the 
guests from Prince Albert. And most especially I’d like to 
welcome Mr. Morley Harrison who spent a great deal of years 
helping my children get through high school and I greatly 
appreciate all the work he put into it. 
 
My daughter was significantly involved in provincial athletics 
at the time and without his significant input into her life at that 
time, achieving grade 12 would have been a great difficulty for 
her. 
 
And I just want to thank him at this time and again join the 
member, my colleague from Prince Albert Carlton in 
welcoming Mr. Harrison to the legislature this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I too seek leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to join with other members in welcoming our guests to 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1779 

the gallery. It’s always nice to see young people come and 
witness the work here. 
 
I do in particular want to welcome Mr. Harrison. Mr. Harrison 
was one of my high school teachers. I’d say he taught me 
everything I know but that might reflect badly on him. Mr. 
Harrison was, however, very instrumental in my gaining a real 
interest in public affairs and I think that it has — I’m not sure 
— served me well but it has certainly played a big part in 
getting me here. 
 
So if you will also join with me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 10 — Maintenance of Highways 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Yates: — I’d like to continue my remarks where I left off, 
talking about the changing demographics of our highways 
system from when it was built to today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to help the member from Kindersley 
opposite — who I have a great deal of admiration for in a 
number of ways — to understand that since 1984, as an 
example, we’ve had an 860 per cent increase in the hauling of 
grain on our highways, Mr. Speaker. And that is very, very 
significant. Very, very significant, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk a little bit about what 
we’re doing in regards to highways and what we’ve done over 
the years. Mr. Speaker, this highway system was built some 30, 
40 years ago — the thin membraned surfaces that are 
deteriorating so rapidly today, Mr. Speaker. And they were built 
at a time when vehicles went over them that weighed virtually 
2, 3,000 pounds at most, Mr. Speaker — not near the weights of 
the vehicles that are expected to travel those roads today. 
 
The other thing is, Mr. Speaker, that in order to rebuild these 
roads today is a phenomenal task, particularly burdened with 
over $700 million of debt annually, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now it doesn’t matter to place blame . . . it’s easy to place 
blame on somebody, but the reality is that debt is there. And 
every single day we’re paying $2 million on that debt, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. If we didn’t have to pay that, Mr. Speaker, we 
could very, very easily deal with a number of the challenges 
facing the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the reality is those same challenges would face the 
members opposite if they were government. They would face 
the Government of Alberta if they had the same debt. The 
reality is a debt is a debt and has to be paid, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just want to go through a few statistics from last year, Mr. 
Speaker. These numbers wouldn’t be out for this year yet. But 
on spending per capita on highways, Mr. Speaker, last year, the 
province of Manitoba spent $191 per person in the province . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, we spent 
$229 per person in the province of Saskatchewan. And Alberta 
spent $189 per person last year, Mr. Speaker. Now that is a 

significant difference, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we spent 
more. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I continue to hear the members opposite 
talking about administration costs. Again we don’t have the 
numbers out for 2000 yet, but in the last fiscal year, Mr. 
Speaker, we had the cheapest administration costs in the 
country, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, those are all things 
that indicate that we are trying to work within the available 
funds to do what we can to protect our highways system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk more significantly about the greatest 
challenge we have. And I want to point out that the Canadian 
government collects approximately $5 billion in gas tax. And it 
spends 5.5 per cent of that on highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In comparison the US (United States) federal government 
provides 31 per cent of all highway funding. And Britain, our 
friends across the ocean, Mr. Speaker, spend 100 per cent; they 
provide 100 per cent of the funding for highways. 
 
I’d just like to talk about some of the other G7 nations, the other 
economic powers in the world. France spent 68 per cent; Spain, 
64; Australia, 51; Italy, 44; Germany, 36; and we in Canada 
spend only 5 per cent of our national budget on highways. And, 
Mr. Speaker, they only provide 5 per cent towards the funding 
of highways in this country. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we are doing what we can to deal with a 
very difficult situation in highways. We are working towards 
resolving those issues that face us and those challenges. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in that light, I would like to move the 
following amendment: 
 

That we delete all the words after “Assembly” and replace 
them with the following: 
 
endorse the government’s efforts to obtain federal funding 
and involvement in the highways and transportation policy 
that would respond to the needs of Saskatchewan. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s my 
pleasure to enter into this debate and to second the amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure you know, and I’m sure that all of my 
colleagues in the legislature here know, that Saskatchewan is a 
very wide and extensive province and it enjoys — and I say 
enjoys — it enjoys twice as many miles of highway as the 
provinces of Manitoba and Alberta combined. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is an extensive highway system that we have 
enjoyed in this province and continue to enjoy. But that 
highway system for the most part is . . . two-thirds of it is a thin 
membrane system. It was designed and built in 30 or 40, in 
some cases 50 years ago, and it was constructed to the 
requirements of the day. And it was oil surfaced in many cases 
as a result of the prosperity the Saskatchewan governments 
enjoyed both in the ’60s and ’70s, not to provide heavy-haul 



1780 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

road surface but to provide dust-free access. 
 
For that reason, Mr. Speaker, two-thirds of the highways in this 
province were designed, built, and hard surfaced for light 
passenger traffic. Cars, half-ton trucks, and in some cases, the 
farm trucks of the day, which were in most cases two-ton and 
three-ton trucks, which carried loads that were adequately 
supported by that design of highway. 
 
But as my colleague from Regina Dewdney has so eloquently 
pointed out, the farming economy, the farming situation has 
changed dramatically in Saskatchewan in the last 40 years. We 
have seen larger and larger farms. We have seen rail-line 
abandonment and elevator closures. And it’s sad to see that, Mr. 
Speaker, but I suppose that it’s known as progress or the 
changing times. 
 
It’s also saddened to have opposition politicians in Ottawa 
encouraging that to happen by lobbying the federal government 
of the day to reduce and in fact eliminate farm subsidies that 
would encourage the maintenance of rail lines. And with the 
rail-line abandonment, it forces farmers to move their product 
much, much further. With distances involved, farmers then look 
at the most economic way of moving that product, and that of 
course is in larger loads. 
 
With larger semi-trailer units now replacing the two-ton and 
three-ton farm truck of 20 and 25 years ago, we now have these 
heavy loads going over highways that were built 40 and 50 
years ago — built and designed to support two- and three-ton 
truckloads, now being asked to carry heavy semi-trailer units. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it simply doesn’t work. It simply won’t hold 
up. 
 
So what are we experiencing? We are experiencing all across 
this province, thin membrane highway systems breaking up. 
 
Reality is, Mr. Speaker, that we have to deal with this. We have 
to deal with this if for no other reason, for a safety factor. And 
if you speak to many of those truckers who are driving those 
trucks and hauling those loads . . . But many farmers who are 
doing their own trucking will tell you immediately that they 
would rather haul on a gravel surface than on a thin paved 
surface. It simply . . . the road simply stands up, but it’s simply 
more economically beneficial to them because they’re not first 
of all fighting holes, but they’re also not fighting that soft 
surface where their truck is working much harder, taking more 
fuel. 
 
They would rather haul that load on a good grid road, good 
gravel surface road than on a thin membrane oil surface. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that in the Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix today was a letter to the editor, and I’d just like to 
read part of that letter to you. The headline was “Good roads 
don’t come free.” The letter writer was Bessie Bury from 
Saskatoon, and in there she says: 
 

. . . I sympathize with local residents who have to use the 
roads for their daily needs. 
 
However, as we sympathize, I wonder if these same people 

are the ones who have been pressuring government to cut 
taxes or who supported the Devine government which sold 
off road equipment and ignored many kilometres of road 
which needed ongoing maintenance. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think that is a very insightful point of view by 
that person because that happens to be the reality. We are 
suffering today from the results of mismanagement of the ’80s, 
results of mismanagement by those people over there and their 
forerunners, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, Mr. Mandryk in his article in his column today, I think 
described it quite adequately when he said: 
 

Since the province of Saskatchewan began running deficits 
in 1982 (not before, but in 1982), we have shelled out an 
amazing $9.736 billion just to pay the interest on the 
accumulated annual deficit. 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

What does this figure mean in the context of provincial 
budgeting? 
 
At a cost of $250,000 to pave a kilometre of Saskatchewan 
highway, we could have paved and rebuilt all the paved 
highways in Saskatchewan (20,000 kilometres), all the 
gravel highways (6,000 kilometres), and all gravel and dirt 
rural municipality (RM) roads, (159,000 kilometres) (and 
we could have done all this) twice. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is what this government has dealt with for the 
last nine years. I think this government has done a great job of 
it. I know this government will continue to provide excellent 
and quality transportation services for the people of 
Saskatchewan, urban and rural. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this point I’d like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I would now ask leave of the 
Assembly to move to government business, adjourned debates. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 1 — The 
Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1999 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter the debate on The Farm Financial Stability Act 
and the changes that the government is considering with respect 
to that. 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1781 

I think when you look at the farm community in Saskatchewan 
today, there’s a great deal of concern about stability in 
agriculture. We’ve seen in very graphic form last fall and 
played out through the winter months here in the legislature and 
across this province, the concern that farmers have about the 
viability of the industry and indeed their personal circumstances 
and their farm circumstances that they find themselves in. 
 
(1500) 
 
We have for a number of years on this side of the Assembly, 
have been telling the government opposite that there is 
continued fundamental problems in agriculture that must be 
addressed. We continue to believe that. We also have been 
expecting this government to move in a fashion that would 
address some of those concerns, and we have still not seen the 
government doing those kinds of . . . doing the kind of steps 
that we believe are necessary to provide financial stability for 
the agriculture community. 
 
We believe that this Bill perhaps has some merit in terms of 
addressing some of the short-term concerns that are out there. 
However, there are many, many fundamental concerns in 
agriculture — whether you look at transportation, whether you 
look at crumbling highway network in Saskatchewan, whether 
you look at declining farm commodity prices, or whether you 
look at input costs. All of those kinds of things are on the minds 
of farmers these days in Saskatchewan. 
 
So indeed farm financial stability is a very topical issue for farm 
families all across this province today, Mr. Speaker. Farmers 
that are in contact with us in the last few days feel that the . . . 
and months with us have felt that stability is something that 
they are extremely concerned about, whether it’s the NISA 
program and the changes that have been made in it in recent 
months; whether it’s the AIDA program and a failure to deliver 
adequate resources to the industry that just feels that it’s been 
abandoned by a government opposite, and by the federal 
government for that matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also feel that their needs are being not met in 
marketing as well, simply not being met, providing them with 
the flexibility to make decisions about their farm future. 
 
We feel that there are a number of steps, and we certainly will 
want to take up with the government opposite in committee, the 
concerns that we have been speaking with farm groups, farm 
leaders, and farmers themselves all across the province with 
respect to that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll close my comments by saying that we will 
be making the appropriate and raising the appropriate questions 
with the minister and his officials when we meet in committee 
to discuss this Bill further. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 2 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 2 — The 
Animal Identification Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a 

second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The piece of legislation 
before us dealing with animal identification is something that 
we have had opportunity to talk with livestock people and 
livestock industry folks in the province in the last while, since 
this Bill has been brought forward. Certainly it is something 
that the industry has been looking for for a period of time. 
 
However, we have certainly some concerns with respect to the 
legislation, what kind of impact this will have on people — 
farmers and ranchers, livestock people across this province who 
slaughter their own produce, their own livestock for various 
needs, both for their families and for immediate sale to friends 
and neighbours, things of that nature — what kind of impact, if 
any, this piece of legislation may or may not have on them. 
 
So there are concerns in that area, but generally speaking I think 
that if we can address the sort of the mechanical parts of the 
concern about ear tags and the very nature of ear tags, whether 
they’re able to clearly identify and remain in place, whether or 
not it’s necessary to make something of a different type of 
identification tool, remains to be seen. 
 
But the industry, we understand, is looking at this from a fairly 
favourable standpoint. We have some questions that we’ll be 
asking the minister in committee with respect to the mechanical 
issues surrounding it and the whole larger issues of whether this 
is necessary or not from an industry . . . or for an industry that 
largely likes to operate and operates very well on its own. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be addressing those concerns in 
committee and we’d have no difficulty with the Bill proceeding 
to the committee stage. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 24 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 24 — The 
Department of Agriculture Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again this piece of 
legislation is a piece of legislation that deals with the financial 
stability of farmers in this province, and that’s always of 
interest, certainly to us and to the people in the industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We feel that the stability of the industry certainly is at risk and 
at question given the government’s lack of commitment to 
agriculture, lack of commitment to the promises that they’ve 
made over the last number of years right up to including the 
recent Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve seen a government opposite who back in approximately 
’92 removed the GRIP program from farmers, removed the 
program that was in place that provided at least a bottom-line 
guarantee. I don’t think anyone has ever argued the program 
was perfect but I think it was a big step. And I suspect we 
would not have seen the problems in agriculture today had a 



1782 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

program of that nature, at least a program similar to that, been 
in place. So stability is something that is of concern. 
 
Again we have seen, and I think every year since the removal of 
the GRIP program, this government in throne speeches has 
promised that they would come forward with a program to 
replace it. We’ve seen absolutely nothing. Not a single thing of 
transition from that program to a new program has been put in 
place. And it’s put our producers in Saskatchewan at risk 
compared to other jurisdictions. 
 
And you only have to look to Manitoba or to Alberta on 
opposite sides of us to see the difference in farm stability that 
there has been over the last number of years. Largely there has 
. . . even though there’s been a downturn in commodity prices, 
both Manitoba and Alberta have worked their way through the 
difficulties in a better fashion than producers have been able to 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So we will certainly be holding the government accountable 
with respect to the farm stability Act and the concerns about 
fiscal security for farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
And again today in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, we spoke to the 
Minister of Agriculture in question period about when he was 
intending to bring forward a long-term safety net plan that he 
just simply refuses to put forward. And we were disappointed to 
hear that there is nothing in the works, nothing being discussed 
at the ministerial level that is likely to be put forward in the 
short term. If anything we were looking at years of a wait more 
before we will see the NDP’s plans for agriculture. We 
recognize the difficulties in terms of coming up with a plan, but 
we think that the government, after eight years or nine years in 
office and promises continually to move in that direction, needs 
to do just that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we will be asking the government questions 
about Bill No. 24, An Act to amend the Department of 
Agriculture Act when we reach the committee level and we 
would have . . . at this time offer to move to committee for that 
Bill as well. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 7 — The Student 
Assistance and Student Aid Fund Amendment Act, 1999 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 7, by and large, 
is an amendment to The Student Assistance and Student Aid 
Fund Act of 1985. As the minister said in his introductory 
remarks when he introduced the Bill, it’s basically . . . there’s a 
number of housekeeping items that have to be looked after and 
to update the Bill and so on. 
 
But I think I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I didn’t address 
some concerns in dealing with student assistance and looking at 
the record of this government in the past year. 
 

This government pays lip service to student assistance in saying 
that it’s a high priority on their agenda and all those sorts of 
things, but yet when you look at some of the things that they’ve 
done in recent days and months that doesn’t necessarily bear 
out. Their actions don’t bear out their promises. 
 
We’ve seen cancellation of student employment programs 
which, granted, there weren’t a large number of students, but 
there was a significant number of students and employers did 
take advantage of that program, and it did help those students 
who were able to gain summer employment and thereby were 
able to earn some money during the summer and therefore 
lower their student loan. 
 
Another thing that this government has done in this budget is 
the cancellation of the six-month, interest-free period on student 
loans. Again a further hardship on students. Now when students 
complete their course of study and convocate, as many of them 
have done very recently here, the interest clock starts ticking 
immediately. Prior to this change there was some relief. It gave 
them an opportunity to secure a job because a number of 
students upon convocation did not have full-time employment 
or any employment. And they needed a little bit of a breathing 
space, Mr. Speaker, to find a job or make further plans for 
future studies and those sorts of things. Now they don’t have 
that breathing space. 
 
Tuition fees is another area that we saw some promises from the 
members opposite, and yet in reality very little if anything was 
done. We heard promises during the past election campaign of 
free tuition for one year, free tuition for four years — or at least 
a portion of tuition aid that would be free for a period of four 
years. 
 
What did we come up with? A $350 one-time tax credit which 
many students have told me really isn’t a large . . . won’t play a 
large role in their decisions as to whether they’ll stay in 
Saskatchewan or not, and it doesn’t really help very much. 
 
One other area where the government says one thing, and on the 
other hand, does something else in the totally opposite 
direction, and that is when we look at the millennium 
scholarship. What does this government . . . In some other 
provinces, Manitoba for instance, the students in Manitoba, they 
get full advantage . . . or are able to keep the millennium 
scholarship for themselves. In other words, what happens is that 
their student loans were written down by the size of the 
millennium scholarship in addition to provincial bursaries. 
 
What happens here in Saskatchewan? The provincial 
government reduces their provincial bursary by the exact 
amount of the millennium scholarships so the students gain 
nothing from the millennium scholarship. The provincial 
government gains $9 million a year and that program is set up 
to run for a period of 10 years. So the provincial government 
takes $90 million out of the pockets of students. In other words, 
students have $90 million worth of student loans that they’d 
have to pay down. 
 
And yet they . . . The government talks about working with 
students and helping them and having access to post-secondary 
education and all those sorts of things. And yet in many cases 
their actions don’t support what they’re telling students. 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1783 

I’d like to read a quote, Mr. Speaker. Shortly after the budget 
was brought down, on the editorial page of The Leader-Post 
dated Friday, April 7, the one small sentence I think sums up 
this government’s record on post-secondary education, and I 
quote: 
 

The NDP’s record on post-secondary education over the 
past few months leaves much room for improvement. 

 
And as I indicated, Mr. Speaker, and I gave numerous examples 
of some of those things that that editorial was talking to. 
 
(1545) 
 
We do have a few concerns, Mr. Speaker, with this Bill. Clause 
15 as an example gives immunity . . . is entitled, immunity. It 
gives immunity to the committee that is handling student funds. 
It’s ironic that it seems nowadays many Bills that this 
government brings forward seems to . . . has an immunity 
clause in it and so on. 
 
But I think on the whole, Mr. Speaker, the concerns that we 
have would be best addressed in the Committee of the Whole 
and we have no problems of moving this Bill forward to 
committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 39 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 39 — The 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill as the minister 
said at second reading, what it does is it legitimizes or creates 
the Department of Post-Secondary Education. Up until this 
point in time, the minister’s authority comes from a number of 
other Bills, and what the government is intending to do here is 
to bring all those powers into one Bill. 
 
We on this side of the House, we feel that post-secondary 
education and skills training is a very important issue and 
deserves a high priority on a government’s agenda. 
 
With the addition of a number of responsibilities that the 
province has taken over recently in the area of skills training 
and those sorts of things, and there is a real need for additional 
skills training programs. And I’ve mentioned some of those 
needs in other statements in the House; I might reiterate some 
of them. 
 
We’ve heard recently from employers who either are . . . who 
have in the past set up new businesses or expanded businesses 
in the province or are currently operating businesses in the 
province, and when they are looking for skilled workers to work 
in their businesses, quite often they find that there aren’t enough 
people with the skills out there that are required. 
 
So skills training, in addition to the traditional post-secondary 
education activities, is certainly an important activity that, as I 

said, needs to be taken very seriously and requires for everyone, 
all members of the House, to look very seriously at this matter 
and give it the priority it deserves. 
 
The minister made reference to the partnership program for 
prosperity, Mr. Speaker. And as I understand it, that is part of 
the . . . that strategy deals with those people on social 
assistance. And that’s an area where there are some real 
problems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I attended a number of the public consultation meetings that 
the Minister of Post-Secondary Education and the Minister of 
Education held throughout the province in January, there was a 
number of people I spoke to at these meetings who said there’s 
a real problem with moving people off of social assistance into 
the . . . whether it be skills training or post-secondary education 
area. 
 
Apparently the way the regulations and so on are set up now is 
that it seems that either the people are on social assistance or 
they are involved in skills training or post-secondary education 
through a student loan. And there are a number of people, 
particularly single-parent families, mothers with . . . young girls 
and women with children, who perhaps have been out of the 
education system for a while, aren’t sure whether they can 
handle the study load on a full-time basis, coupled together with 
family responsibilities and so on, who would like to ease their 
way into the education system. And there is no mechanism right 
now that allows that. 
 
So with all those concerns that those people have, quite often 
they opt for the security of staying on social assistance rather 
than going into the education and training areas. 
 
And I think that’s an area that really needs to be looked at very 
seriously and some changes have to be made so that we can 
move those people . . . help them move off the social assistance 
into the education areas. And they themselves will certainly 
improve their future, and it’ll be for the good of all those 
involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will know that since the inception of our 
party, that we have always said that we felt that it would be 
more . . . that it would be a better idea, that more could be 
gained perhaps by having all education activities in one 
department. Not saying that we don’t feel that post-secondary 
education isn’t important; it certainly is. But we see sometimes 
where there’s a failure to communicate between the two 
departments — K to 12 system and post-secondary education 
system and that sort of thing. 
 
We look at administration costs of running two departments. 
We wonder whether those monies may be more wisely spent in 
helping students access the post-secondary education system, 
helping the universities with their budgets. We see them 
struggling to try and keep their tuition costs down so more 
students can enter the system and those sorts of things. 
 
So we have some concerns in that area. But, Mr. Speaker, I 
think most of the concerns that we have can be addressed in the 
Committee of the Whole, and so we would move that Bill 
forward. 
 



1784 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 40 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 40 — The 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to rise 
and speak to Bill 40, An Act respecting the Saskatchewan 
Indian Institute of Technologies. Mr. Speaker, we’ve consulted 
with third parties on the creation of this institute. We’ve talked 
to SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) as an example, who don’t seem to have a problem 
with this creation of this new institute. 
 
We think it’s important that people of Aboriginal ancestry enter 
into the education field and skills training field. And if this is 
something that will facilitate that, that movement of people to 
be more skilled so that they can go on with their life and 
possibly contribute to society, we don’t have a problem with 
that. 
 
I suppose there is a bit of a concern about duplication of 
services, and transfer of credits between various institutions, 
and all those sorts of things. But I think, Mr. Speaker, that most 
of those concerns we can discuss in the Committee of the 
Whole, and we would move this Bill forward also, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that Bill No. 13 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased today to add a few words to those of my colleagues on 
Bill No. 13 dealing with education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that education being one of the . . . 
supposedly the priority for government, or one of the priorities 
for this government, this Bill . . . this is the only education Bill 
that we’ve seen presented in the House this session and it deals 
with a few issues that are not the kind of issues, the pressing 
issues, that the school boards and the teachers and the students 
around this province are talking to me about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the most important issue that has been raised as a 
concern of course is funding. It doesn’t matter if it’s the boards 
or the teachers or the students, they all know that there’s a 
serious lack of funding. And that relates to a lack of 
commitment to this government on education because there 
isn’t the funding there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the teachers’ salaries and the wage increases that 
are being negotiated this time are a cause for concern right 
around the province because of the cost. And we’re not saying 

everyone is waiting with anticipation to see what’s going to be 
happening — I should say not just anticipation but fear on some 
parts. We have a lot of students who are saying are we going to 
have teachers going on strike if the government . . . if the 
commitment for teachers’ salaries isn’t given by this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the issue of capital needs for schools that 
isn’t being addressed by this government and by this budget; 
and this Bill, of course, does nothing to address it as well. In the 
trips that I’ve made around the province and visited a number of 
schools in this province, I’ve seen first-hand the number of 
schools that are really in dire need of repairs or additions to get 
their facilities in shape so we can provide education to our 
students in a way that we can be proud of and that will allow 
our children to go out into a global world and compete with the 
other students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the school boards that I’ve been talking to have 
been very adamant this government has not addressed the needs 
of integrated services. It’s one area that we have heard the 
minister say that he is proud of his pilot schools in a number of 
locations in the province. But the other school boards that 
haven’t had the luxury of being part of the pilot projects are 
experiencing the effects of what happens when we don’t have 
the funding and the desire to work with all the different needs 
that the children have. 
 
I know that the Bill addresses the word institution in Bill No. 
13. They’re saying they’re removing all references to the word 
institution because they want all children to be within the 
school system. And we recognize this as important. It’s the kind 
of step that we have to make to make sure that everyone is 
given the same type of education. 
 
But by doing this, we’re not . . . we’re seeing it and hearing the 
words, but we’re not seeing a commitment because there’s no 
funding to go along with it. We have the Justice system and the 
Social Services system that are trying to work with students 
within the school system, and even health issues, and we’re not 
seeing the funding given to the school boards to actually deal 
with many of the concerns that they have. 
 
So although I do congratulate the government for working . . . 
taking the word institution out and making sure that our 
children are all dealing . . . have been dealt with on the same 
playing field, we can’t say that we’re dealing with the issue if 
we’re not providing the funding that it requires to go along with 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the teachers and the school boards that I talked to 
are worried about class sizes. They’re worried about teachers’ 
aides; they’re worried about even the materials that they need in 
the schoolroom when they have to deal with resource-based 
learning, understanding that many of the teachers have to buy 
their own supplies and bring them into a classroom so that they 
can give the material that students need, to be able to have a . . . 
carry on the class for the day. 
 
I’ve seen, and I’m sure the minister recognizes too that there is 
an increase in the number of people that are home-schooling 
their children because of some of the concerns they have within 
the school system. 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1785 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill, Bill No. 13, it does not address the needs 
that the people of Saskatchewan require if we are going to put 
education as a priority for the province for our children. 
 
I know that the role of the school and the special needs study 
that has been carried on is . . . we’re waiting in anticipation to 
see what the government is going to be doing with those 
studies. But there has to be room for them within our education 
system. And we’re hoping that it isn’t put on a shelf, those 
studies aren’t just neglected, the money spent, and government 
saying we can’t afford to deal with the issues and the 
recommendations they bring forward. 
 
We’re dealing with children, Mr. Speaker. And this issue, if it’s 
going to really be important, we can’t just give it lip service, we 
have to give it money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill itself talks about getting rid of the 
post-secondary education . . . or setting up a post-secondary 
education department as a stand-alone department. And when I 
see the government making sure that we have another education 
system set up or a department set up, I’m wondering, is that a 
good way to spend the few education dollars that we have? 
 
Everyone knows that to just have your K to 12 education is not 
sufficient, and post-secondary education and training is required 
all through one’s life. 
 
But at the same time I’m hoping that the administration that is 
required when you set up a new department isn’t going to be 
spending some of the very much-needed funds that could be 
used on the actual curriculum that the students are looking for. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also concerned about the problem . . . 
concerned with the setting up of the minority faith divisions in 
this Act, not so much the setting up of it as why the divisions 
are being set up. I know in my area there was a school division 
set up, probably one of the few new school divisions in the last 
few years. And they set it up as a last, desperate attempt to try 
and keep a community together. 
 
In rural Saskatchewan we know that the schools are the heart of 
the community and without that central focal point, we feel our 
small centres are taken away from us. And this school and the 
school division that was set up in my area did so as an effort to 
make sure that the community could help raise the child. 
 
I think sometimes when we get into politics, and sitting here in 
this building, we forget that it takes more than a building, it 
takes more than a system to educate a child. It takes a 
community as well. And by setting up their local school 
division, they have input from not just the parents but from the 
community as a whole including the business people. 
 
And at graduation on Friday night I was absolutely amazed to 
see the gymnasium packed with people who were so proud to 
see their students graduate from their small school in 
Saskatchewan knowing that those kids were ready to face the 
world. Because they had not only some book learning but they 
had the education that comes from being part of a community 
and knowing what’s happening in the world. 

Mr. Speaker, the concerns of education are really not addressed 
in this Bill. The concerns of Bill 13 can be addressed in 
Committee of the Whole, so I will be moving this Bill on to 
Committee of the Whole at this time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 

The Chair: — I will invite the hon. minister responsible for 
Sask Water Corporation to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Seated immediately to my left is chief executive officer — or 
president, I should say, Clare Kirkland. Immediately to my 
right, Wayne Dybvig is the vice-president of water resource and 
infrastructure management. 
 
Seated directly behind me is Wayne Phillips, vice-president of 
utility and engineering operations. Seated over to second left is 
Dale Sigurdson, vice-president of irrigation and agricultural 
services, and behind me and to my left is Dave Schiman, 
manager of financial planning. 
 
Subvote (SW01) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
welcome the minister and his officials here today. Hopefully, 
we can get a few answers to some questions. Before I would 
like to go into . . . with the Provincial Auditor’s report coming 
out, which wasn’t very favourable to SPUDCO (Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Corporation), there’s a few 
questions that I would like to ask along that line. 
 
Basically, I won’t go into the preamble of how SPUDCO was 
formed, Sask Water, all that, because I think our time is very 
limited. But there is some questions that I would like to address 
on the buildings there because that is still taxpayers’ buildings, 
and I have been getting quite a few questions and comments 
from constituents in that area that would like a lot of answers to 
them buildings. 
 
Basically I’ll make a few statements and the minister can 
correct me if I’m wrong on some of them. I believe that 
SPUDCO and Sask Water or SPUDCO was formed in 1996 
with the intention of expanding the potato business around the 
Outlook area. That the government then basically went into 
partnership with a group of investors and local potato growers 
and out of that one of the biggest companies was Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato Corporation, I believe. 
 
Now with that, the expansion of that . . . the wing of SPUDCO, 
I believe, was agreed to build potato storage for these groups. 
But I’m asking, at that time, did they form a partnership with 
anybody to build these buildings. I know I’ve come across 
Con-Force Investments. Or did Sask Water basically just build 
them themselves, or were they built with another company, a 
private company, or another government agency? 



1786 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much. First of all, I’ll 
take a chance and say I was telling my officials earlier, I, finally 
I’m in a corporation — responsible for a corporation where 
potholes aren’t all bad unless somebody wants them drained. So 
it’s kind of nice to have that responsibility where they’re not so 
bad for a change. 
 
First of all, with respect to Con-Force in the construction of the 
buildings, they were jointly owned but they were entirely debt 
financed, and Sask Water, the SPUDCO division of Sask 
Water, subsequently bought Con-Force out. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. While we’re still 
talking about that, when you . . . then you took over ownership 
of the potato storage bins, at any time did you exchange or give 
to the financially — at that time — the financially troubled 
Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation a mortgage on some of 
the potato storage facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — At that particular time, if I’m 
understanding the question correctly, at that time, we didn’t. 
There were arrangements later on but not at that particular time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I guess you specified, I 
think it was 1998, in that area. Is that . . . did you through that 
time at any time give a mortgage up on the bins? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, at the end of 1998. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — And I guess, what happened with that mortgage 
with the bins? What would happen . . . Basically do they still 
have the mortgage on them bins? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The Lake Diefenbaker Potato 
Corporation was leasing approximately 70 per cent of the space 
that we had available. And at that particular time — keeping in 
mind potato prices were fairly high — they certainly had a 
problem with cash flow, as they brought to our attention. 
 
We worked with the Royal Bank and the Farm Credit 
Corporation in a . . . what we thought would provide a cash 
flow for Lake Diefenbaker, being one of our major lessees if 
you will. And at that time we provided a mortgage for them on 
one of the buildings that they purchased from us. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Deputy Chairman. Mr. Speaker, 
basically what happened? Do they still have the mortgage on 
them buildings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No. They subsequently went bankrupt, 
as many of the public will know, and we took the building back. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What’s the 
estimated loss on the mortgage on them bins? Do you have that, 
be for, I believe maybe for either in the ’98 statement or ’99 
years, fiscal years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There isn’t a direct loss on the building. 
When we took the building back, we wrote down the value of 
the building though by — if that’s the question you’re asking — 
we wrote down the value of the building by 1.7 million to more 
accurately reflect the value of that particular building. 
 

Mr. Brkich: — So when you wrote it down, does that . . . I’m 
not sure, when you wrote it down, does that mean that you 
overpaid it at the beginning when you built it? Or what was the 
reason for writing it down? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In working with our private sector 
auditor and the Provincial Auditor, taking into account all of the 
buildings we owned, all of the storage facilities, it was deemed 
that that would be more reflective of the value, the writedown 
of 1.7 million. 
 
Even the Provincial Auditor and, as I said, in working with our 
auditor, there wasn’t a writedown of the other assets at all 
because they viewed that the potato industry was starting to 
grow again out in that area and therefore the buildings, the 
building values were accurately reflected. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Mr. Deputy Chair, the buildings 
right now, what would you have them valued at in the Outlook 
area? And do you own any buildings left in the Lucky Lake 
area and what would they be valued at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The total value right now is 18.103 
million. We’re not sure if we have the breakdown per building 
with us, but we certainly would undertake to provide the 
breakdown, the value of each building for you later on if that’s 
okay. Okay. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, getting back to when they were 
originally built with Con-Force Investments, I believe you had 
said that you’d bought them out at the time, that you’d gone in 
partnership. Was it . . . I’m wondering what kind of 
partnership? Was it a 50/50 partnership; a 60/40, kind of? 
 
What were the arrangements on that? What were the initial 
costs — they would have been provided basically at the 
beginning — of what the construction would be? And what 
were the final costs after the buildings were built? Was there an 
overrun on budget, I guess what the question I’m asking, with 
Con-Force? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Now keeping in mind that they were 
completely debt-financed as I said earlier, the ownership was 
Con-Force, 51 per cent, and ourselves, 49 per cent. And when 
we bought them out it was, as I understand, a dollar a share. So 
it cost us $51 on each building to actually take over full 
ownership. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Deputy Chair, on the buildings right now, 
you have a value on them. What . . . I take it you’re still leasing 
them out to producers in the area. How much was brought in 
last year with the lease arrangements, either through potato 
storage or, I don’t know if you’ve used them for any other kind 
of storage for last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, just to be clear, this is to 
December 31, 1999 because we do it based on calendar years. 
The total revenue or rental income was 816,000, but that 
includes buildings and equipment. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. On that when you say 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1787 

buildings and equipment, do you mean you still own 
potato-producing equipment that’s being rented out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We don’t own any farm field equipment 
if that’s what you were asking. But we do own a little bit of 
handling equipment — that would be pilers and conveyors. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — It would be under the equipment then. How 
much of the 800,000 last year was actually used for potato 
storage rent and how much was used for other storage, of that 
money you had gotten? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — About 700,000 of the amount that I 
listed, which was 860,000, was potato storage and the rest was 
almost all was equipment rental then . . . or equipment rental 
income. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The only reason I 
asked, I was there one day and there was hay there stored in the 
one bin. Was that free storage or why were they there if there 
was no money received? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m told that you’re correct. There was a 
very small amount of hay stored there but apparently because of 
client confidentiality we’re not allowed to reveal the exact 
amount, but it was a small amount of rental income. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don’t know why it 
would be . . . or like why it would be so secret at that end. I 
believe that it’s . . . especially it being a public building, being 
open for rent or lease, it should be open to all the producers in 
the area if you can’t fill them. But I’ll leave that for another 
day. 
 
On the buildings itself, are they debt-free right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No, they’re not. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — How much money is owed right now on them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There’s about five and a half million in 
mortgages that are directly associated to the buildings. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Do you have them advertised for sale in this 
upcoming year? And if you do, do you have an idea what you 
would like for the price if they are listed, or the value of them 
right now for resale? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Their strategy from the very beginning 
was to kick-start the potato industry, if you will. The strategy 
from the very beginning was always to exit this to the private 
sector. We’ve done that partly by moving it over to the Crown 
Investments Corporation as a going concern. 
 
So if the question — and I don’t want to assume anything here 
— but if the question is if somebody wants to buy an individual 
building, that’s probably not an option. We would want to sell it 
as a going concern, largely because the producers in that area 
would want it, to buy it . . . largely because the producers in that 
area will want to ensure that there’s a viable industry out in that 
area. 
 
As for value, if you look at the annual audited report, auditor’s 

report as well, they say that the value is exactly what we’ve 
listed it as book value, something in excess of 18 million. We’re 
always, as CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) is now I’m sure — and I’m sure the minister 
would corroborate this — we’d be happy to sell it for that, for 
the value that is now listed as book value. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m glad to hear that 
you plan to get the full value out of them for the taxpayers. 
Many of the people in the area would be very happy to hear 
that, and also that you would be willing to sell them also to 
private investors at any time. 
 
I guess my next question is, when did they go under CIC’s 
direction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The decision to move them over to 
Crown Investments Corporation was actually made in late 
March and they’re just in the process of doing that now. We 
think that will happen probably in the next — so it actually 
hasn’t happened yet — we’re thinking that will happen in the 
next three weeks to a month. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. What’s the main reason moving 
them to CIC? Are you shutting down SPUDCO? Is what you’re 
saying, and basically going to, I would say, dissolve the 
company itself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We are of the view that CIC has a lot of 
expertise in working with the private sector. And we think that 
CIC is a vehicle that would more easily and more readily move 
it to the private sector, and it’s for that reason that we moved it 
over to CIC. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. On the second part of the question, 
without the buildings, does SPUDCO still lease any potato land 
in the Outlook-Lucky Lake area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes we do. These leases will though, 
however, along with the buildings, will be assigned to CIC as 
well. We are of the view — we don’t have the numbers right 
here I guess — but we are of the view that it would be under 
300 acres right now that we’re leasing. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — My next question is, getting back to SPUDCO, 
are you planning to dissolve it entirely? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — If selling it as a going concern means 
dissolving it, then that’s our intention. It’s moved over to the 
Crown Investments Corporation to, as a vehicle, as I’ve said 
earlier, to facilitate movement to the private sector and also to 
maximize returns for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. You say roughly 300 acres leased 
— I don’t know if it would be on a three-year lease or a 
five-year, what you have left. 
 
When that lease expires, obviously then there would probably 
be no indication to have SPUDCO around any more because 
without the buildings under them, without any leased land 
under them or any equipment under them, there obviously 
would be no reason to have SPUDCO. Is that correct? 
 



1788 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes. If I’m understanding your line of 
questioning, if you’re asking if there’s going to be potato 
activity carrying on under SPUDCO in Sask Water, the answer 
to that question is no. 
 
But are we committed to supporting a development of the 
potato industry? Yes, through CIC. And whether the name 
SPUDCO or not continues to exist, I think that’s to be 
determined yet. But there will not be continued potato 
development under Sask Water. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Basically I just wanted to know, yes, if you had 
planned to lease any more lands, if you have any more plans, 
which I take it your answer is no, that basically you’re not 
going to lease any more potato land, grow any potatoes yourself 
under Sask Water or SPUDCO? Okay. Thank you. 
 
There was a plant, I believe, that was sold at Lucky Lake to 
Pak-Wel of Alberta. Can you give me some particulars on that 
— on when it was sold? Did you own the whole plant to begin 
with? Did you build it? And what was the cost when you sold 
it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In the beginning the Farm Credit 
Corporation and the Royal Bank wanted to simply auction off 
Lake Diefenbaker’s buildings. And we were of the view that we 
should . . . that we had a viable industry out there, and many of 
the producers certainly articulated that position as well with us. 
 
So what we determined that we would do in an arrangement 
with Pak-Wel is we actually acted as a flow-through. We 
actually bought the buildings for $1 million from the Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato Corporation, and then sold it right back to 
Pak-Wel for $1 million as a going concern. Otherwise there is 
no doubt in my mind that the industry would have shut down 
entirely out in that area. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. With the auditor’s report on that, 
was there any money lost to the taxpayers on that deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No, there wasn’t. It was just a straight 
flow through. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — You say a straight flow through. Who owned 
. . . you bought the building back from the creditors, I believe? 
Who built the building originally is, I guess, what I’m looking 
for, and the cost of that? 
 
And I take it then there was a mortgage on it which you 
assumed or took over, and then passed that on to Pak-Wel? Am 
I correct in that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well we wouldn’t know the original 
cost of that building. It was constructed, owned, and operated 
by Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation, a private company. 
We bought it from the receiver for a million dollars, and in an 
attempt to keep everything going as a going operation, and sold 
it to Pak-Wel for a million dollars. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. That’s what, basically, what I was 
looking for — who owned it originally. Okay. 

I’ll make just one statement on the auditor’s report — that it 
was quite scathing. Do you plan to do a public inquiry into the 
whole SPUDCO affair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — While I’m very respectful of the 
Provincial Auditor’s report and auditors’ reports, I’ve had some 
considerable experience in auditor’s statements from my history 
in the credit union system, and I wouldn’t describe it as a 
scathing report. I’ve seen scathing reports, auditors’ reports in 
the past. 
 
Oh, the public inquiry? Sorry. No, we don’t. There is . . . if the 
question is with respect to Lake Diefenbaker Potato 
Corporation, they are a privately owned company. I don’t 
believe there’s any jurisdiction for a government to do a public 
inquiry. 
 
We’ve had three provincial audit reports that have essentially 
been clean, of Sask Water and the SPUDCO division. There is 
the Public Accounts, Crown Corporations. The Provincial 
Auditor did a special audit which has been provided to the 
legislature and to the public of Saskatchewan. We think that 
that is a full and complete accounting of what went on within 
Sask Water and SPUDCO for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Is SPUDCO still being . . . going. 
Do you have a . . . Is there a SPUDCO board, a separate 
SPUDCO board? And if there is, who is on it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No there isn’t. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — It’s solely under the direction of Sask Water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It’s a division of Sask Water. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Basically I’m looking . . . Is there a president? 
Or when you say division, is it right under you, or is it a 
division of a few other officers of Sask Water that just look 
after SPUDCO? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It’s a division of Sask Water, as I said, 
and it’s under the direction of the vice-president, Dale 
Sigurdson, right now. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Basically just going back through, 
you know, when things started to fall apart — it looked like it 
was in 1998 I believe — there seemed to be almost a change in 
direction of Sask Water and SPUDCO with the potato industry. 
 
I was wondering at that time was there any correspondence 
between you and the United States, or the United States Trade 
Commission, or any potato producing states indicating that they 
would bring trade sanctions forth against Saskatchewan because 
they believed there was unfair subsidies in place by the 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The US government actually did do 
some preliminary work to determine whether or not there was 
unfair trade practices taking place. And with, I guess, a very 
small amount of preliminary work they ascertained that there 
was no unfair trade at all and dropped it. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Minister, I would like to carry on with 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1789 

maybe Sask Water. And I can always come back to SPUDCO 
after if I have some more questions. 
 
I see the budget being doubled this year. Are you planning any 
major infrastructure projects coming up in the following year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, we’re looking at some significant 
infrastructure capital investments this year. I don’t know if 
you’d like me to read the major ones into the record. It won’t 
take long. 
 
Dam safety investigations — $230,000; Rafferty dam, that’s on 
enhancing the embankment — 1.5 million; Alameda — 
445,000; Buffalo Pound dam — 2.809 million; Lumsden 
channel — 28,000; Blackstrap South dam — 13,000; 
Brightwater Creek dam — 13,000; Broderick West dam — 
23,000; Zelma dam — 80,000; Star City dam — 15,000; 
Summercove dam — 8,000; and Makwa Lake — 20,000. And 
that would be the larger ones. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Deputy Speaker. That 
handles any major dam repairs. Do you have any major 
irrigation projects coming up? I know that you’ve been 
approached from different areas on them. Are you looking at 
any infrastructure in any areas of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No, there’s nothing budgeted for. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Any major drainage projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — As I understand it, the Jordan River 
drainage project up in the Nipawin area at about . . . we 
budgeted for about $60,000 this year. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — On that particular one, are you draining 
farmland from marshland? What’s the kind of . . . what is your 
objective there, I guess is what I’m asking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m told it’s primarily to enhance 
agricultural land. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Also I’ve come across 
when I’ve . . . reading a lot of the information on Sask Water, 
there’s the Assiniboine River basin study you’ve done. I’m not 
sure exactly how long this has been carrying on. Can you tell 
me, are you planning on doing anything with that with the 
future? And how much so far have you spent studying this 
particular problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, I want to be clear that this is 
a joint initiative by the province of Saskatchewan, province of 
Manitoba, and the federal government. The total cost of the 
study is anticipated to be 412,000 so that’s cost shared between 
the three levels of government. 
 
We believe that the study will be complete somewhere towards 
the end of this year, 2000. And it’s a long-term study to 
determine, I guess, a whole range . . . because the study is, as I 
understand, fairly broad, which will include issues around 
drainage; it’ll include issues around water management for that 
whole Assiniboine basin. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I have a concern here with the RM of Marquis. I 

think they’ve written to you several times about damage to 
bridges due to water flow from Diefenbaker Lake to Buffalo 
Pound, going through the Qu’Appelle River. The RM of 
Marquis and the RM of Craik jointly own the bridges referred 
to above. 
 
They believe that you’ve increased the water running through 
that creek in the last number of years, which has caused damage 
to the bridge system. And they feel that since you’re the one 
that is increasing the flow of the water; plus with the increased 
flow of water, basically it flows all year around now. At one 
time it never — it froze. With the constant flowing of water 
underneath it’s causing damage to the bridges. 
 
And they have approached you on different times to look at 
helping to repair these bridges, because the Department of 
Highways has told them that these bridges have to be repaired. 
And they feel that since they didn’t cause the damage, that they 
shouldn’t have to bear the brunt of trying to fix these bridges. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, my officials tell me that we 
have not increased the water flow through that system at all. 
The concern around the bridge from our perspective, is simply a 
factor of the bridge itself getting older, and that’s just going to 
occur. 
 
But from the broader perspective, we are looking at 
infrastructure rejuvenation through that whole area in the next 
five to seven years. So we’re looking at that area very seriously 
in the long term. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, it’s my pleasure 
today to introduce guests that are seated in the east gallery. We 
have with us today a friend of mine, Mr. Bill Thurmeier from 
Saskatoon. And accompanying him is his sister and her 
husband, Denise and Ernest Thebo, and their children, Adrienne 
and Meg. 
 
And we have these wonderful folks visiting with us from Boise, 
Idaho and they are visiting Saskatchewan, visiting their parents, 
and will be going to my hometown of Bruno on Thursday to 
visit with the good folks there. And so I would ask the 
Assembly to welcome these fine people, the member from 
Saskatchewan, as well as the visitors from Boise, Idaho to the 
provincial legislature today and wish them a very good stay in 
our province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 



1790 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

Subvote (SW01) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Chair, I’m 
going to be taking just a few moments to address the minister 
responsible for Saskatchewan Water on an issue that a 
constituent of mine has brought to my attention, and may not be 
able to be resolved, I guess, without the assistance of a lawyer. 
 
However, lawyers do cost a great deal of money and so this 
constituent of mine, whose name is Dean Matkowski — I’m 
sure that the minister might have or the deputy minister might 
have heard from him by now. The story is, Mr. Minister, that 
Mr. Matkowski is being told that some of his land must be 
expropriated in order to accommodate the overflow from the 
waste that’s coming from the pipeline that’s stretches from 
Wakaw to Humboldt. 
 
Initially, there was a lagoon within the limits of Wakaw, 
Saskatchewan that was to accommodate the waste material from 
the treatment plant and as it is, it appears as though there is too 
much waste and the town of Wakaw has notified him that his 
land would be expropriated in order to deal with this waste. 
 
First of all, it may be a bit of a justice question, Mr. Minister, 
but I was wondering what recourse Mr. Matkowski might have 
to deal with the expropriation. He doesn’t want to have his land 
expropriated. He has cattle on his land. 
 
Apparently the area that they would like to dump the waste 
water on, right on top of his land from what I understand, is 
close to his home and he does have cattle on that land. He has 
wells on that land and he’s afraid and concerned about 
contamination of his wells. And he is also concerned about the 
resale value of the land should this expropriation take place. 
 
Now Mr. Matkowski was told that three years ago there was a 
meeting that was, you know, where they determine that if there 
was going to be an extra area for water to be — or waste water 
— to be run off it would be accommodated through a pipeline 
that was going to be basically installed and piped to an alkalized 
slough about seven miles away. 
 
Now it seems that as far as Mr. Matkowski’s concerned, that 
whole idea has been thrown out the window and he is simply 
being told that he has to allow his land to be expropriated. 
 
There are two other farmers who are also involved in this. This 
involves a 200-acre piece of land. When I phoned your office, 
or phoned your officials and talked with them about it, the area 
supervisor out there, I was told that this would be in . . . this 
waste would be basically dumped on the land in . . . but it 
would be in marshland so it wasn’t of any significant value. 
 
Mr. Matkowski’s story to me is a little bit different. It’s going 
to be dumped into a slough that is fairly close, in fact a few 
hundred yards from his yard site. And he has these concerns. 
 
Now I’m wondering: does Sask Water own this pipeline? And 
if that’s the case, would it not be imperative upon you to ensure 
that possibly the plan that was determined three years ago to 
issue the waste material through a pipe seven miles away into 
an alkalized slough not be a higher responsibility of yours than 
to just simply come to property owners and tell them that they 

would have to have their land expropriated, when they clearly 
do not want this to happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all let me say, that while I 
certainly have sympathy for Mr. Matkowski’s concerns, the 
issue is really an issue between Wakaw and the landowner, or 
owners in this particular case as I understand it. 
 
Sask Water’s role is simply that we won’t approve any 
construction until there is an agreement between the town of 
Wakaw, in this particular case, and the landowners. 
 
I want to just speak briefly as well to the issue of the line that 
you referred to. That was a temporary line that was used during 
the Wakaw-Humboldt construction period. We would never as 
a corporation approve that long term. And I think that’s simply, 
that we would not have approved that long term. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, is Sask 
Water not the owner of the pipeline and the treatment plant? 
Why is the town of Wakaw taking the responsibility to 
expropriate that land? 
 
Mr. Minister, Sask Water put $32 million into that line; I would 
assume that they would own it. And I would assume the 
responsibility would be Sask Water’s to take care of any kind of 
inherent problems that have incurred because of that pipeline 
being constructed by Sask Water. 
 
Mr. Minister, while I’m on my feet I want to make one more 
point. It has come to my attention that the town lagoon that is 
servicing that waste from the treatment plant has no liner in it. 
There’s seepage happening there. The ditches are full. 
Apparently snow is melting on top of the ground there because 
the lagoon can no longer accommodate that. There is seepage 
happening because there is no liner there. 
 
So I think these are some issues, Mr. Minister, that you would 
have your officials look into. This is clearly the responsibility of 
Sask Water and I would like you to respond clearly on the 
record — put it on the record — whether or not Sask Water 
owns that line. And if you don’t, I’d like to know why Sask 
Water put $32 million into constructing that line. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The answer to your first question is, 
first of all, because Sask Water . . . the reason is because Sask 
Water doesn’t own the lagoon. The lagoon is owned by the 
community of Wakaw. 
 
Now with respect to the seepage in the lagoon, the lagoon itself 
was actually designed so that seepage would occur. This 
process has been examined by professionals and this is a design 
that they actually use. It’s been determined that in fact there 
isn’t any cause for concern with respect to contamination. 
 
With respect to the slough, where apparently, I understand — 
I’ve been told by my officials — that it actually seeps into, that 
slough was already not safe water for livestock use in the past 
as well. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, that is not what my constituent tells 
me. So I think that that’s certainly a matter for debate, and I’d 
like to know on whose assumption that that statement comes to 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1791 

be justified and true for Sask Water when, in fact, Mr. 
Matkowski indicates that that slough is there and it’s very close 
to his home. He’s concerned that the waste material from the 
treatment plant is maybe unsafe and it’s going to alter the safety 
of the water in his wells on the land also. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to also ask: when this initial pipeline was 
installed and there was an agreement to use the lagoon in the 
town of Wakaw, was it not considered whether that existing 
lagoon could handle all of the flow? Certainly there must have 
been some sort of consideration and testing done to ensure that 
that lagoon would handle all of the flow. 
 
If not, there should have been alternative measures put in that 
would not be an infraction on the rights of property owners as 
far as having to be responsible for expropriation of their land in 
dealing with this flow when, clearly, they may not have 
ascribed to that kind of activity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Let me say, first of all, that I think the 
town is acting responsibly in trying to acquire land control 
because, as I said earlier, the lagoon was actually designed for 
seepage into the slough area. 
 
With respect to the contamination as well, the authority that 
determined whether or not this is the way it should work was a 
private consultant hired by the town of Wakaw. And again I 
think the community or the town of Wakaw is being responsible 
in trying to acquire that land to ensure that there isn’t public or 
people or livestock using that, because they knew that the water 
would be seeping into, and it was designed for seepage into the 
slough area when they originally built the lagoon. 
 
(1700) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to ask, do you 
have a leasing arrangement for the treatment plant in Wakaw? 
And do you have other leasing arrangements with other water 
treatment plants through the province, or do you own any water 
treatment plants through the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I just want to go back to the line of 
questioning that you had as well. If you want to pursue this 
further with us and with the officials, we’d be happy to try and 
address some of those concerns, so please feel free to come to 
my office or to speak with the officials about that as well. 
 
With respect to your question, we own that treatment plant 
outright, Sask Water does. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Is that the only 
water plant you own? And what did you pay for it? And what’s 
its value worth right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We don’t have the absolute . . . we don’t 
have the exact value, but we estimate it to be valued at about $3 
million — something like that. It worked very well for the . . . 
this is the fourth year of operation and it’s worked very well. 
The other two communities that we own treatment plants in are 
Gravelbourg and in Melfort. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, I would take it at the end that 
you plan to sell them back to the people, let’s say in Wakaw, 

that particular plant. Or do you plan to just keep owning it? And 
how basically do you recover the cost that you have of that $3 
million, either through resale or rental to the town? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We’re very flexible within the 
corporation. If the communities want to, they can either rent or 
buy at any time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — And basically the question I asked was: how 
were you planning on recovering that $3 million? Do you rent 
to them right now at Wakaw or are you just building and 
planning to sell it to them at some particular time to recover 
your 3 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — With the Wakaw as an example, which 
is a fairly large project, we would rent. It’s amortized largely 
over roughly, on this particular project, about 30 years, with the 
intent of recovering our costs. 
 
But if at any time along the way, it would be my understanding, 
if the community wanted to purchase the plant, we would 
ensure that the public of Saskatchewan recovered the value. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, just one comment I would like 
to make, and that I’ve had numerous calls from different firms 
that feel that they’d maybe approach you to put in irrigation or 
pipelines to towns, and then shortly after you come along and 
want to build them a treatment plant. 
 
Do you believe that’s in kind of competition with local 
businesses or engineering firms in that area? That you have one 
side saying that, of Sask Water, saying we will go out and we 
will build . . . we will help you build this pipeline, and then 
before this town can even tender out a water treatment plant, 
your people are in from another division, coming in offering to 
build them one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think you want to be absolutely clear 
here. We just simply respond to community requests. We 
wouldn’t be proactive on this at all. If the community wanted us 
to be constructing a treatment plant, we would do that. But we 
wouldn’t go out ahead of the community and try and do it ahead 
of a private contractor. If they want to use a private contractor, 
they can absolutely do that. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Do you charge rent 
for water? Is that how you recover some of the costs of your 
water treatment plants that’s administered to the towns through 
water meters? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, we don’t charge for the 
water, we charge for the delivery of the water to the residents. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — The only reason I just would mention that is 
because, like you said, you have 3 million tied up in this 
particular water treatment plant — I’m not sure what you have 
tied in others — which is taxpayers’ money. So there’s always a 
concern out there of how you would recover that money back if 
something happened — that the town couldn’t buy it back. 
 
Or if you’re just picking and choosing towns — this one can 
have a water treatment plant; no, this one can’t — is more the 
concern I get from constituents worried about their investment. 



1792 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

And basically it’s an investment that you’re making in some 
communities, some you’re not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, I just want to be clear. We’re not 
proactive — we’ve been reactive all the time. If a community 
wants assistance where we can help them, we will. But we’ve 
not, we’ve not gone out ahead of the communities to try and 
develop something for them that they’re not interested in having 
developed in their community. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I’m good that you’re going out and helping 
these communities with their water problems. But only I want 
to bring up is just as long as you don’t get into too much 
investment out there and lose some money on some water 
treatment plants, on that end of it, because obviously you keep 
saying over there money is tight. So I’m hoping that you look 
after our taxpayer money very good. 
 
Another question I’d like to talk about is Lake Diefenbaker. 
Have you did any studies into — I think you’ve been contacted 
about erosion on the lake shore there — have you did any 
studies over the past few years of your effect of the dam there, 
if there is going to be any future erosion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — When the construction originally took 
place, the studies were undertaken at that time fairly extensive 
as well, there was anticipated erosion at that time. That erosion 
has occurred, not at any accelerated at all . . . accelerated rate at 
all. It’s been eroding at about the rate that we would have 
believed it to erode at. 
 
It will continue to erode for a number of years into the future. 
And that’s largely why the province acquired ownership of land 
immediately around the lake. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Minister, I’ll forward that information on. 
Do you — just getting back to that again — do you have how 
far the erosion will go in the next 5 or 10 years, a study on that 
plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes we do have that information but, to 
the member, we don’t have it here, so we’ll gladly provide it for 
you if you’d like. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — How much irrigation pipe miles does Sask 
Water own or operate for irrigation throughout the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Just in the interests of time, if you have 
more questions just go to those and we’re looking it up here for 
you, okay? 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you supply me a 
list of consultants used by Sask Water over the past fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, we can. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Minister, looking at your department 
salaries through the global reports, which I appreciate you’ve 
got . . . you got them to me this morning. I requested them I 
think if I could have them before. Looking at department 
salaries and severances, I see one person with a severance 
package of $115,000. Another with a severance of $86,000. 
Another with a package totalling $102,000. There’s another 

with a severance of $94,000. Another is $45,000. 
 
I’m wondering if the minister can explain why these packages 
seem so high? These severances total almost a half a million 
dollars. I wonder how the tax . . . you know, I wonder how the 
taxpayers really feel about that. 
 
And could you please explain to our taxpayers how you can 
shell out half a million dollars in severance packages to just five 
people after the problems in SPUDCO? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — These severance packages are just 
government policy which are now established by law. There 
wouldn’t be anything exceptional about those severance 
packages from any other department or corporation. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Some people might 
disagree with that, but we’ll have to leave it at that. 
 
On your channel clearing program, how much money is slated 
for that for this upcoming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, the channel clearing, to the 
member, is cost shared so . . . I believe 50/50. And the amount 
is 191,000. Some of that would obviously be staff costs and I 
think a few other associated costs, but our share is 191,000. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know dealing with 
Sask Water I’ve had hundreds if not thousands of complaints of 
drainage problems in the South, all through the province, 
channel problems, obviously . . . as also with the markers with 
the highways and that. And I know a lot of these problems I 
will address with you. And some of them I have addressed with 
you. 
 
But one other question I’d like to ask is, you have a pumping 
rent . . . equipment rental program. Is that still in effect this 
year? 
 
(1715) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes. Yes, that still is in effect. I guess I 
just want to say just as a . . . very parenthetically with respect to 
the issue of complaints, there is absolutely no doubt that the 
public of Saskatchewan and you and I as individuals, we have a 
very emotional attachment to water. And whether you have too 
much or not enough, it obviously gives rise to concerns and 
complaints legitimately. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’m 
glad to hear that you have an attachment to water. I can 
understand why roads would be not at the top of your list, and 
probably potatoes would fall in that category, so water probably 
is an easier way to go. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Minister, I have a couple of questions. It 
affects my area and it has to do with the RM of Churchbridge 
being in court, and I believe being in court because the reason 
being that Sask Water has got them there. 
 
I have a problem with this, Mr. Minister, when I see local 
officials out there in rural Saskatchewan trying to do something 
to help survive in that the agriculture situation is as bad as it is. 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1793 

And the area I’m talking about, Mr. Minister, and I’m sure 
you’re aware of this and probably heard of this, but for an 
example, once last summer they called me down to the 
Langenburg area — Churchbridge, Langenburg. And they’d 
had seven inches of rain in one short span. Now as you know 
there’s the Langenburg C&D (Conservation and Development) 
out there that was organized and being held up by the 
Assiniboia valley study. Now we have the Churchbridge RM 
council being taken into court because of clearing drainage 
ditches and that. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’d want to comment on that? 
And then I have a couple more questions for you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There might be some misunderstanding. 
The issue is actually — with respect to Churchbridge — is 
actually between the Department of Environment and 
Churchbridge, not Sask Water. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister, because 
that was my next question. I was trying to find exactly who has 
these people in court — whether it’s Sask Water or SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management). And 
to start with I’d heard it was Sask Water, and then the last 
indication I had that it’s actually SERM. So I’ll actually have 
questions for one of your other ministers to do with this. 
 
I believe my counterpart from . . . friend from Arm River had 
asked you this question a minute ago. Did I understand you 
right that the Assiniboia valley study will be done in the year 
2000 or 2001? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I guess in answering the question, just 
understand that we at Sask Water don’t determine exactly when 
this ends but we are fairly confident that it will be completed by 
the end of this year, 2000. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m glad to hear 
that because I think there’s a lot of farmland being wasted out 
there especially in these wet years. There’s a lot of farmers out 
there that need every inch of their farm to make ends meet. And 
I think sometimes by us — and by us I mean government and 
the things that we do out there to interfere with everyday life — 
are costing many of my farmers money out there and I think in 
many other areas. 
 
At this time to let Education take over in estimates, Mr. 
Minister, I want to, on behalf of the Sask Party, thank your 
officials today, and we’d like to report progress at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I just want to take the opportunity to 
thank the members opposite for their very thoughtful questions 
and also thank the officials here today as well who provided the 
information for us. 
 
And I think we have one outstanding question for the member 
from Arm River that I undertook to get to you, and we’ll get 
that answer for you, unless we have that here . . . No, we don’t. 
We’ll get that answer to that other question for you as well. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — We will then just wait for the officials 
from Education to come into the Assembly. 

General Revenue Fund 
Education 

Vote 5 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Members of the committee, the 
estimates before us are for the Department of Education. The 
estimates are found on page 39, starting at 39 in the Estimates 
book. And I’d like to invite the Minister of Education to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. With 
me today I have Craig Dotson, deputy minister; Ken Horsman, 
associate deputy minister; Michael Littlewood, executive 
director; Larry Allan, executive director; Cal Kirby, director 
facilities planning; Sheila Engele with finance and operations; 
and John McLaughlin, executive director, Teachers’ 
Superannuation Commission, at the back of the row. 
 
Subvote (ED01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to the 
officials, Mr. Minister. It’s been a while since we’ve had an 
opportunity to talk about education. I know that when we spoke 
last time we talked about the priority for this government for 
funding education. And I expressed my concerns at that time 
that the government has not put enough money into education 
to address the concerns that so many of the teachers and the 
boards of trustees have around this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think . . . Mr. Minister, I believe that the top 
concern right now for everybody, whether it’s teachers or board 
members, is the talks, the union talks for the teachers right now, 
the wage negotiations that are going on. I know that in the last 
. . . yesterday, and I believe it was today as well, there was 
negotiations being undertaken. 
 
And I’m wondering if there’s any level of commitment that you 
can give to the people of this province to let us know what’s 
happening at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Certainly negotiations have been ongoing for some time. We’re 
looking at teachers and the government trustee negotiating team 
actually starting negotiations last October. A lot of the 
negotiations that did occur culminated in a tentative agreement 
which was not ratified by the teachers by a narrow amount. 
 
Negotiations . . . After the non-ratifications, the government 
trustee committee indicated that they were willing to go back to 
the negotiating table and they did have a bargaining meeting 
yesterday which I understand went very well, was frank, was 
dealing with the important issues before teachers and students 
in the province of Saskatchewan and I’m hopeful that we can 
have a negotiated agreement. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, but I understand that tomorrow 
and the next day the teachers are still going to be taking the vote 
which would give them the mandate to strike. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Yes, it is true. The teachers have 
indicated the negotiating team for the teachers’ federation has 
asked for a sanctions mandate from its membership which is not 
unusual in collective bargaining circumstances where you have 



1794 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

had rejection of a tentative agreement. 
 
It’s often important for that negotiating team to renew its mandate 
with its membership and by asking for a sanctions vote, which will 
occur tomorrow and the following day, really what they are asking 
for is a mandate to continue on with negotiations and as we’ve 
indicated, negotiations are ongoing and future dates have been set. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then I take it from that 
that you weren’t surprised that the vote still was taking place. If 
negotiations are taking place at this time, are you still hopeful that 
we will be able to have a negotiated settlement? And if not, are 
you expecting if the teachers do go on . . . decide to go on a strike, 
would you be expecting it yet this year in the month of June? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly the . . . 
it’s part of, I think, a process where we recognize that there will be 
a sanctions vote by the entire membership that will go forward. 
We don’t know what the outcome of that sanctions vote what will 
be. That needs to be determined. 
 
If there is an outcome that provides for a sanctions vote, that will 
in no way defray from the commitment of the government trustee 
negotiating team to continue on with negotiations. 
 
And for me to speculate on any other outcomes at this time, of 
course, is premature and I remain confident that we can have a 
negotiated agreement. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the settlement that was 
negotiated but not ratified was 7.2 per cent, and I believe that 
1.2 per cent of that was health or it was a health plan. Maybe 
you can break down the actual settlement that was discussed at 
one time. And can you tell me the total number of dollars that 
would be effective this year for this budget year as well as next 
budget year? 
 
(1730) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Certainly we are continuing on with negotiations, and as a 
practice, an agreement at the negotiating table, recognizing that 
the tentative agreement may very well be part of the overall 
package for a future agreement. 
 
I can relate some of the numbers that were made public. For 
example there was amounts that would have been put onto the 
grid in the range of 2 to 2.5 per cent for year one and year two. 
There was also a 1.6 per cent health plan which would have 
become effective on January 1 of 2001, and there was also 
smaller amounts allocated for allowances for principals and 
vice-principals. 
 
So the overall package, as indicated by the member opposite, 
would have been 7.2 per cent. But I must reiterate that that 
particular package — because negotiations are ongoing — we 
really don’t know anything in terms of global amounts or how 
that would apply really would be speculative on my part 
because we don’t have an actual firmed up, signed ratified 
agreement. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Let’s just take this 
7.2 per cent there as suggesting that this is the amount that 

we’re working with right now. Can you give us . . . can you tell 
me how much that would have cost the government or how 
much money that does mean for the province at this time if we 
would be accepting 7.2 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you again for the question, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. The 7.2 per cent was a tentative agreement which 
wasn’t ratified. It would have applied to two years. It would 
have been retroactive to January 1 of 2000 when the contract 
would have began. 
 
The 1.6 per cent health plan would have been entirely funded 
by the provincial government — 100 per cent. The remainder, 
roughly 5.6 per cent, would have been a direct transfer to school 
divisions through the foundation operating grant. 
 
If you look at the total package of 7.2 per cent, it would have 
amounted to around a $35 million increase over the life of the 
two years of the contract. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then taking roughly 
a third of it I guess, we’re looking at somewhere around $20 
million for the cost of the health plan this year plus the increase 
that was rejected in the settlement. Can you confirm that 20 
million would have been the approximate number for this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — No, actually the way the tentative 
agreement was broken down, there was an amount applied to 
the grid this year, and some of it also applied to vice-principals’ 
and principals’ allowance. But the amount for this calendar year 
would not have been $20 million; it would have been less than 
that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I don’t know if this is a question 
I’m not supposed to be asking you or if you just don’t want to 
answer it. But again I’m asking you, then how much money 
would it have amounted to for this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — To answer the member’s question, 
I’m advised that the costs to school divisions this calendar year, 
for the first year of the tentative agreement, would have been 
approximately $14.5 million. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So then in the budget 
when we’ve talked about $18.5 million was put into the budget 
this year for increase in operating expenditures, out of that, 
$14.5 million would have been — if that contract would have 
been accepted, that settlement would have been accepted — we 
would have had . . . there would only have been $4 million to 
work on some of the other programs and initiatives that we’ve 
been talking about in the last . . . since the budget was brought 
down. 
 
And that is when we divide it between the special education 
needs and that type of thing, then there wouldn’t have been the 
funding that we’ve heard the minister talking about for the last 
four months or three months since the budget came down. 
 
Mr. Minister, then can you give me an idea, the number of 
school divisions that actually will get the amount of money that 
they would have to pay the teachers, how many of them will get 
that amount of money from the government this year with the 
funding split that is in place at this time? 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1795 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Some 
of what the member opposite said is correct. Certainly the 
tentative agreement would have allowed for roughly 14.5 
million of the 18.5 million in the foundation operating grant that 
would have covered teachers’ salaries. But we also recognize 
that the foundation operating grant is an equalization formula. 
 
The way of putting money into the foundation operating grant 
has been approved by all stakeholders within the education 
system and as recently as March of this past year, where the 
external reference committee agreed that any increases that 
were brought about because of a negotiated settlement with 
teachers should be applied to the foundation operating grant. 
 
So we have all the stakeholders in the province who basically 
say this is the way it should be dispensed. But we also 
recognize that there is some diversity within school divisions on 
their ability to raise money for K to 12 education. And they 
have the right, the authority, and the autonomy to apply the mill 
rate to the assessment within their jurisdiction. 
 
Now recognizing that all of the school divisions knew that a 
negotiated settlement was ongoing, that it would be reached at 
some point in time and there would be cost implications for 
divisions, a lot of divisions went into a best guess for this fiscal 
year in terms of what the implications for their division would 
be. And as we know, some divisions receive little or no 
operating grant so they had to anticipate the possible impact of 
a settlement with teachers and I understand that most divisions 
did do that. 
 
But again it’s speculation on our part to know where the final 
package is going to be, what will happen with the first year. I 
know, and the member opposite has commented as well as 
myself, with regard to some of the difficulties that school 
divisions who have already set their mill rates would find if 
they found that the first year of an agreement exceeded what 
they had allotted for, putting them in a position where they 
might have to draw down reserves. 
 
So it is a difficult situation that we’re aware of, and everyone I 
think at the negotiating table is also aware of that situation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. 
Minister. Mr. Minister, I know that you’re aware, as well as I 
am aware, that there’s a number of school divisions who don’t 
have the luxury of having reserves to draw down on at this time. 
 
We also know that whatever the teachers’ settlement comes up 
with, there’s support staff that will also be requiring an increase 
so that would again be funding requirements for the school 
divisions. We also know that with the fuel increase this year, we 
also have school boards that are very concerned about those 
kind of costs. 
 
So once again, Mr. Minister, I’m just going to ask the simple 
question again. I know that you’ve indicated that the 
government is going to cover the cost of the teachers’ salary 
increase. How many schools are actually going to receive 
enough money to cover the cost of the teachers’ salary increase 
if the settlement of 7.2 per cent had been accepted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

Certainly the member opposite has indicated some points, but 
just to read from a letter from the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association, from March 5 of 1998. This was provided 
to indicate their ongoing and continuing support for the funding 
arrangement of the province of Saskatchewan and I quote: 
 

Any increase in funding therefore should be applied to the 
basic rates. This results in maintenance of the integrity of 
the foundation grant program, and for most school 
divisions the amount of grant received that might be 
attributable to the aforementioned salary cost increases 
would be similar to an amount that would be received if a 
specific line item were added after calculation of the 
operating grant. 
 

And with reference to the reference committee, “the department 
should continue . . .” —this is a quote: 
 

The department should continue the practice of the past 
several years of providing any increased grant funding to 
cover the cost of any teacher salary increase through the 
equalizing operating grant formula. 
 

Now with regard to comments with regard to increased fuel 
costs, I’m sure that divisions recognize that fuel does increase 
the cost of transportation and, of course, it has an impact on 
rural school divisions specifically that have higher 
transportation costs. 
 
But these transportation costs are recognized within the 
foundation operating grant formula, and it’s my understanding 
that that amount of allowance is roughly equivalent to the actual 
costs of providing that service. So it’s not like there’s . . . the 
foundation operating grant specifically penalizes rural school 
divisions or provides any advantage based on transportation 
issues. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, I guess I 
mustn’t be making myself very clear. I don’t have any problem 
with the foundation grant. I wasn’t talking about it. I just asked 
the question: how many school divisions will not receive the 
amount of money it will cost to cover the school . . . the 
teachers’ salary negotiations even at the settlement that wasn’t 
reached? 
 
Could you please indicate the number of school divisions who 
will not receive that amount of money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the foundation 
operating grant really is the crux of the question that she’s 
asking us, because what we find is that there is no specific line 
item for teachers’ salary increases. 
 
So there are many, many factors involved with the foundation 
operating grant, and one of the factors, of course, is enrolment. 
The other factor, of course, is the actual expenditures within 
that school division and also the assessment base that they have 
to draw on. 
 
So if we have a school division who saw a decrease in 
enrolment, their foundation operating grant would go down. But 
we also recognized that they have the opportunity, because 
there really . . . there are two pots to look at. There is the 



1796 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

original budget that comes from the provincial government, 
equalization formula; all stakeholders agree to that. And then of 
course they’re allowed to set their mill rates. 
 
Now if they had a decrease in enrolment, then the foundation 
operating grant would subsequently also be decreased. If they 
had an increase in enrolment, then they would have got an 
increase on the recognition from the foundation operating grant. 
The per student allotment in the foundation operating grant was 
increased $262 per student. We also . . . And the member 
opposite is aware of the increased funding for special education. 
 
And the other point to remember is that it’s not quite as simple 
as saying 14.5 million for teachers’ salaries, 18.5 million for the 
foundation operating grant. Because you have to look at the 
entire pot of $426 million for the foundation operating grant 
because there are reallocation within that pool of money, there 
are priorities that have come to the end of their lifespan which 
are then reapplied to other priority areas. 
 
So it is possible to put an emphasis on distance education, on 
learning technology, on special education, and still have an 
increase with regard to the global amount of money that went 
into the foundation operating grant. 
 
But the main principle to remember here is that school divisions 
retain the autonomy and the authority for raising funds and 
delivering services to the K to 12 system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, I’m sure that 
you are well aware, just as I am aware, that as of May 5 the 
school divisions had to have their tax levy into the RMs. They 
had no opportunity after that date to put any more . . . ask for 
any more money from taxpayers. 
 
You also are aware, just as I am, there’s been a large number of 
tax revolt meetings around this province so the school divisions 
were very careful that they didn’t try and tax their ratepayers 
any more than they could. 
 
So as of May 5, the school divisions had a set amount of money 
in their mind that they were going to be paying for teachers’ 
salaries. And it doesn’t matter what kind of factors you take in 
effect, at the end of the day there’s still a number that they’re 
going to have to spend for teachers’ salaries. 
 
And I know that we don’t know what that number is, but I’m 
just asking you to use your best guess and tell me how many 
school divisions will not have the amount of money in their 
budgets as of May 5 or whenever to actually pay for the 
increase in teachers’ salaries? Could you give me that number, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
(1745) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — No. Again the question from the 
member opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, doesn’t recognize the 
fact that all of the school divisions are aware that a negotiation 
was going on. And most of these school divisions from what I 
understand are also aware — because of the high-quality work 
that is done by secretary treasurers throughout the school 
divisions within Saskatchewan — that the amount of money 
that would have come on a teachers’ salary increase was 

factored in to the amount of money they received from the 
foundation operating grant and also in assessing their mill rates. 
 
So there really are no school divisions who would be penalized 
in any way, recognizing that the foundation operating grant is 
completely transparent and that the provincial government has 
made a commitment that, whatever the amount of the teachers’ 
negotiated settlement would be, that that would be provided on 
the global pool through the foundation operating grant. 
 
So there are no school divisions disadvantaged. They are all 
aware of the situation, and they all had made certain, obviously 
best guesses in terms of what they thought would be under 
previous public sector guidelines, and what might be in the 
future in terms of what per cent might be appropriate for them 
to look at. And it is my understanding that school divisions 
have made those calculations and have adjusted their mill rates 
and their budgets accordingly. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Minister, they made 
their budgets and negotiations as well as they could; as well as 
you and your bargaining team felt that 7.2 per cent was going to 
be enough. And obviously it wasn’t. And that came long after 
May 5 that this decision came forward. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, what I’m trying to let people know, because 
the idea of equalization, foundation grant formula; the fact that 
taxes, assessment, and mill rates — most individuals out there, 
their eyes just glaze over. They don’t know what we’re talking 
about. They just want a simple answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m well aware of how the foundation grant 
operates. I’ve been given lessons by many people telling me 
how it works, and I know that it’s not as simple as just saying, 
this is a bottom line. It’s a factor of enrolment and assessment 
and all the rest of it. But at the end of the day, somebody still 
has to pay the teachers’ wages and have to pay the wages of the 
support staff. 
 
And there’s been this amount of . . . this is a figure that is not 
written in stone at this time, but we do have to have some kind 
of idea of where it’s going to come from. So I know that your 
department has all the figures, just as the SSTA (Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association) does. 
 
Do you have any kind of idea at this time how many school 
divisions are going to be short of what they had considered was 
the number at the end of . . . or when they put the budgets in at 
the end of May? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the simple answer is no 
because we don’t have an agreement. So we know what the 
school divisions have had the opportunity to allow for. We 
know what the foundation operating grant is providing this year 
— $18.5 million. We know that the capital allotment for this 
year was over $30 million from the Department of Education 
plus an additional $5 million from the capital centenary fund. 
We also know that there’s $25 million of tax relief provided to 
rural ratepayers. 
 
So if you look at the overall mix provided for education, K to 
12 education in this particular budget, and you make 
comparisons to neighbouring provincial jurisdictions, you will 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1797 

find that Saskatchewan’s increase overall of 7.2 per cent is one 
of the highest across the nation. 
 
And I’d like to point to the commitment of the Saskatchewan 
Party in the last election for rate of inflation for the Education 
budget. And the member opposite asks about how we would 
arrange or how we would allow or how we would calculate 
teachers’ salaries increase which we have done within the 
foundation operating grant. But they make no provision for that 
in their budget. And certainly their cousins in Ontario and Nova 
Scotia and Alberta have not made provision as well. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, go on a rant about what the Saskatchewan Party 
would do when they’re government. You will find that out. We 
will be here. You may not be sitting in this legislature but you 
will know what’s going to happen. At this time I’m asking what 
you’re going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — I’ve been sitting here for 20 minutes trying to 
get a simple answer out of you, Mr. Minister, and I know with 
285 people in your employment like I see in this book, 
somebody must be working with those numbers. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you just please give me the simple answer 
about how school boards and some of them — and I think it’s 
about 45 school divisions — are not going to be getting the 
funding to cover the teachers’ contract. 
 
Mr. Minister, on one hand you’re talking about $14.5 million as 
the basis, minimum teacher salary increase and then bragging 
about $18.5 million being put into the operating grant then $4 
million is what the extra is going to be for all the extra needs 
that these schools have. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m going to ask . . . I guess I’ll just continue to 
ask you if you can give me that number. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, she asks the 
question and she gets the answer repeatedly, but she doesn’t 
seem to understand the answer. And I’ll quote again from the 
reference committee of all stakeholders. The quote: 
 

The department should continue the practice of the past 
several years of providing any increased grant funding to 
cover the cost of any teacher salary increase through the 
equalizing operating grant formula. 

 
So what that means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that we have 
school divisions who have high assessments. And to give you 
an example, Weyburn Central has an assessment of well over 
$700,000 per student. 
 
We have Ile-a-La-Crosse, which has an assessment of only 
$18,000 per student. Ile-a-La-Crosse gets a large sum of money 
on an equalizing basis to provide for student services in their 
community. And almost 100 per cent of that comes from the 
foundation operating grant. 
 
Whereas the high assessment school divisions would receive no 

dollars from the foundation operating grant. But should all . . . 
should the poor school divisions be penalized because we have 
some school divisions with high assessment? And the answer is 
no. And all stakeholders have agreed that the foundation 
operating grant should function on an equalizing basis. 
 
So when she talks about school divisions who may have had 
decreases in the amount on the foundation operating grant, it 
could be related to increasing assessment, new businesses, an 
inland terminal opening up, or it could be related to decreased 
enrolment, and that shifts every year. 
 
So some school divisions will have got more money this year 
and some of them had significant increases. Some school 
divisions would have got less money this year, based on 
enrolment and recognized school expenditures. And that’s the 
way it’s been. That’s the way it’s been agreed to. 
 
And what we have said, and I’ll reiterate again, is that if there 
was a global amount of money to cover the teachers’ increases 
this year, that the provincial government would provide that on 
the foundation operating grant, as agreed to by all the 
stakeholders. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the foundation operating grant is 
the mechanism for dividing money out across the province that 
all the stakeholders believe in. And I guess because I can’t get 
the number from you, I’m just going to indicate to make sure 
that people are aware that even though the government is saying 
that they’re going to cover the exact cost of the teachers’ salary 
increase, not all school boards will get it. We know that. 
 
We know that they can cover the cost in another way. If they 
have high assessment, they can raise their taxes. I was making 
the point that as of May 5, they had no opportunity to again 
raise the taxes; that number was already in. If they don’t have 
surpluses, they’re going to have to find ways to cut costs, cut 
teachers, cut something, because of negotiations that are out of 
their control. 
 
Mr. Minister, let’s go to a black and white answer that you can 
probably get for me. How many portable schools are owned by 
the school system and how much money was spent relocating 
them last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Just a clarification. Are you asking 
for the number of relocatable classrooms located within school 
divisions in the province? Okay. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the number of relocatable classrooms is 
not something that we have that information before us at this 
very point in time. We can certainly poll the school divisions 
and get that information for the member in the very near future. 
 
But the numbers of portable classrooms attached to any 
particular school will shift on a yearly basis because that is the 
design of relocatable classrooms, to be able to provide that 
environment for changing enrolments. And I’m not even too 
sure at this point in time to even give a best guess. So we’ll 
have to get that information by polling school divisions. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, have you had any school 
divisions concerned about the cost, the initial cost of purchasing 



1798 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

the relocatable schools? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly I can provide 
some information in general terms. Last year there were 13 . . . 
13 in total relocatable classrooms that were moved. 
 
And the general sort of policy is that within the larger urban 
school divisions, relocatable classrooms are moved within 
schools that are actually within the boundaries of that division. 
But in rural Saskatchewan it’s not uncommon for changes in 
enrolment, where relocatables in one school division are moved 
to neighbouring school divisions within the province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I believe that the cost of 
relocating the schools are actually considered part of the capital 
budget. So if the cost is $60,000 to move it, then it actually 
comes out of the capital costs. Am I correct in that belief? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — That is absolutely correct, yes. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I thank you for the list you’ve 
been providing for me of the capital expenditures to date. I’m 
not sure if all the funding has been authorized to different 
projects so far this year for capital funding but I don’t believe 
that the centenary fund has been allocated. Has there been 
conditions set on that at this time? Has there been any money 
spent out of that fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The member opposite asks a question 
with regard to the application of the Centenary Capital Fund 
into the allocation with regard to capital expenditures within the 
Department of Education. 
 
The Centenary Capital Fund was created over a four-year 
period. It will be providing $5 million this year, and $5 million 
in the next three subsequent years to cover capital projects. 
 
The allocation and prioritization of those capital projects 
remains within the department. And the department’s process 
for allocation is based on a very transparent and agreed-to 
formula that identifies health and welfare needs of students as 
the top priority; critical shortage needs as the second priority. 
 
(1800) 
 
So all of the projects allocated in a given year are prioritized on 
that basis. And with the Centenary Capital Fund being applied, 
this allowed for a number of projects that would not have been 
approved this year to be approved. 
 
And I know that in some of the announcements that we’ve 
made recently with regard to sod-turning of new schools . . . In 
fact, we were in Kennedy the other day, announcing a new 
school for Kennedy. One of the . . . a village that will be 
combining from a K to 6 school and a 7 to 12 school from 
Langbank and Kennedy into a K to 12 facility. And this of 
course, all of these announcements — with regard to the new 
school in Silverspring for example in Saskatoon — were 
because of the Centenary Capital Fund and the increase in 
capital allocation of over 20 per cent to the capital budget this 
year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I think that I must not express 

my questions in a way that’s clear to you. I know that we have 
$24.1 million in capital funding available through the Education 
department. I’m also aware that there’s another $5 million 
through your fund. 
 
My question was, have you also spent that $5 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And again the answer that I just went 
into previously here — we talked about the global amounts. If 
specifically . . . With regard to the allocation for this current 
budget year, $3 million of the Centenary Capital Fund has been 
allocated. There is still $2 million yet to be allocated from that 
fund. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I’m wondering with the amalgamation of school 
divisions that was initiated a few years ago, I know that there 
was some school divisions did work towards and did 
amalgamate. Are there any more school divisions working on 
that at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The process of voluntary 
amalgamations of school divisions have seen a decrease of 
roughly 120 school divisions several years ago to 100 school 
divisions today. And currently school divisions in several areas 
are undergoing negotiations about amalgamation. 
 
There haven't been any recent announcements with regard to 
amalgamations. But we have had feedback from several 
divisions that have amalgamated, and they have reinforced the 
positive nature of these amalgamations. And so we can . . . the 
policy of course is to continue with the voluntary process, and 
let the school divisions sort out what is best for them in 
providing services to the students of Saskatchewan in the K to 
12 system. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, has there been a written 
cost-benefit analysis done when the amalgamation has 
proceeded in districts so that the information is available to 
other school districts that are considering this move? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly the department 
has not engaged in a cost-benefit analysis, but the school 
divisions who have amalgamated have done this undertaking. 
And that information is available to any other school divisions 
who might be anticipating. 
 
But certainly, depending on which school divisions are 
amalgamating, the efficiencies and the cost savings associated 
with that amalgamation would be unique for that particular 
amalgamated unit. 
 
And what we’ve seen is that some of the amalgamations did 
provide for greater efficiencies and cost savings, which of 
course were redirected to front-line services for students within 
the amalgamated division. And some other divisions may not 
have experienced the same extent of savings. But I know of no 
amalgamations that actually resulted in increased costs. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, how many of the new 
amalgamated school divisions have negotiated a new local 
agreement? 
 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1799 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the department 
doesn’t keep track of local agreements negotiated, and we have 
no record of that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Has your department been contacted, and have 
concerns been expressed by any of these amalgamated school 
divisions that they’re having difficulty reaching a new local 
agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The simple answer is yes. But it’s not 
specific to amalgamated divisions; it tends to be more 
widespread than that. And certainly this is something that we 
see on an ongoing basis with school divisions who do have 
some difficulty in actually having their local agreement. 
 
So the way the question was framed, it’s not that it’s because of 
amalgamation; I think it’s more the reality of some of the 
situations in Saskatchewan today. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the formula for recognizing 
expenditures compared to actual expenditures — can you give 
me an idea of what that formula is this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question 
with regard to the formula and recognized expenditures and the 
actual expenditures of school divisions: first of all, we do not 
know the actual expenditures for this year because we don’t 
have the audited financial statements. 
 
There was changes to the recognized expenditures within the 
foundation operating grant. These were increased to provide 
greater equity to the foundation operating grant. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, one of the concerns that I’ve 
heard around the province is the issue of schools, native schools 
on reserves. And when I was in Saskatoon I was advised that 
there is consideration for an urban reserve school in the city. 
Can you tell me how negotiations are going? 
 
Are you in on these kind of discussions and how is the province 
working with the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations) and the federal government on this concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the department is not part 
of any negotiations with regard to an urban reserve in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, I would assume 
from your words that you are aware that it is happening and I 
imagine this is going to be a . . . it’s going to impact education 
in the urban centres greatly as it does in the rural centres. 
 
Have you been talking to FSIN at all? Have you been talking to 
any of the Native leaders to decide how this would take place 
and what impact it’s going to have on the other schools that are 
being built in the cities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly the department 
and government are in constant ongoing dialogue with the FSIN 
on a range of issues. But I can tell the member opposite that we 
are unaware of the situation that she refers to in Saskatoon 
where there may be a school situated on an urban reserve. 
We’re  . . . we’re completely unaware of that particular topic. 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I guess we’ll go . . . 
I’m sure that there is discussions taking place and it’s too bad 
that you weren’t part of them, because I imagine it would be 
very interesting for you and your department seeing that it’s 
going to have an impact on the whole province. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, maybe then we could move on to the special 
needs assessment that you are . . . that your department 
undertook. And I know that the report was something that was 
long awaited, and the idea of special needs children in this 
province requiring attention has been brought to the forefront 
not only by the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) but 
also by the school boards. 
 
The recommendations that they suggested were many, and I’m 
wondering how your department is considering or how you are 
going to be working these recommendations into the 
department’s plans for the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, I thank the member 
opposite for the question and the interest in this area. 
 
Certainly we are very pleased with the report of the Special 
Education Review Committee. They made a number of 
recommendations. We have organized meetings which have 
allowed for stakeholders to respond to the report itself. We are 
compiling feedback from the stakeholders now, and we will be 
in a position to provide a formal response to this issue by the 
end of August. 
 
And for the information of the member opposite, I just recently 
met with the group representing disabilities within the province 
of Saskatchewan to . . . for them to provide an oral feedback to 
me directly with regard to their response to the Special 
Education Review Committee report. They were quite pleased 
with the report. 
 
They were concerned that this report would be shelved; that 
implementation would not occur. And my response to them in 
that, it is the government’s intention to take very seriously the 
report and the stakeholder’s feedback and to provide timelines 
with regard to implementation with regard to this report. 
 
(1815) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Good evening, Mr. 
Minister, and I too would like to welcome your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was wondering about the allotment of funding 
that is provided for home-schooling in school divisions. I would 
like to know basically what consideration, I guess, and what 
right is given to parents that home-school, as far as the 
allotment of money that goes to a school division for this 
purpose? What are they entitled to when it comes to that 
allotment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly the question with 
regard to home-schooling. The department, through the 
foundation operating grant, provides a recognized expenditure 
of 50 per cent for a home-based student. The division of course 
has the authority and the opportunity within that recognized 
budget, because it is provided to them in an unconditional 
manner, to either add to or however to direct that funding. 



1800 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2000 

Some home-based educators I’m told find that they don’t need 
to access the resources of the school division to any large 
extent, whereas other home educators do access these resources 
on an increased amount. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, is there a 
legal entitlement that parents can assume or do have in regards 
to accessing that money that is allotted for home-schooling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly parents have the 
right to home-school. The allocation of financial resources 
though is to the school division; it is not to the parent. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, is there any provision in The 
Education Act, 1995 or any other Act that would state clearly 
that parents do have an entitlement if they home-school — an 
entitlement to a portion or all of the funding as it pertains to the 
number of children that are being home-schooled? And would 
they get an equal portion of that or do they have a legal 
entitlement to that amount of money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — No they don’t have a legal 
entitlement. The foundation operating grant funds school 
divisions; it doesn’t fund individuals. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, can you give me an idea of the 
unfunded liability of teachers’ pensions. Is it continuing to 
grow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The member opposite asked 
specifically with regard to teachers’ pension liability. Currently 
the teachers’ pension liability sits at $2 billion, roughly $2 
billion; and yes, it is continuing to grow. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I’m aware that as the teachers 
continue to retire . . . or the baby boomers like us continue to 
retire, the amount required each year then is going to increase 
so where that funding that goes into education is going to 
require more money just to take care of the liability, the pension 
requirements. 
 
In the next few years, has your department indicated or have 
you come up with some kind of a plan as to how you’re going 
to deal with this concern as well as the very many needs that the 
province has for education priorities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you for the question. Certainly 
the Department of Finance and the provincial government takes 
very seriously the unfunded pension liability within teachers 
and within the public sector. I have had meetings with the 
teachers’ federation, myself, where the Department of Finance 
was represented by the Minister of Finance. We have reviewed 
their concerns. 
 
We’ve also reviewed the Mercer report and certainly it is our 
intention to try and deal systematically with the unfunded 
pension liability, and this is a concern that we’ll try and address 
in the very near future. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, is this pension liability type of a 
formula that you can determine in the next say three years how 

much it’s going to increase when you’re looking at the 
retirements of the teachers? In other words can you tell us . . . 
are you aware of how much this liability is going to be in each 
of the next four years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly. There needs to be some 
separation between the current teachers’ retirement plan which 
is a funded plan, and the old plan which is the superannuation 
plan. We know . . . we have estimates that can be determined in 
terms of the number of teachers who will be retiring. We also 
can calculate the costs with regard to these retiring teachers. 
And what the formula in the curve shows is that there would be 
quite a significant increase in the requirement of the provincial 
treasury to deal with teacher retirements as we move into the 
years 2010, 2015. 
 
There is a process recognizing that . . . you know, recognizing 
the rate of inflation that we can actually determine in terms of, 
you know, year 2000 dollars what the costs would be to the 
treasury if everything was left alone. And we also know what 
the cost would be if we decided to put . . . to deal with some of 
that unfunded pension liability now to help even out that hump 
that we’ll see in outgoing years. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the previous minister discussed 
this last year in estimates and he talked about the fact that by I 
think it was the year 2015 there was going to be an additional 
$200 million required in the Department of Education to fund 
the pensions. 
 
Now that is a considerable amount of money when you look at 
the total budget for Education being less than 500 million right 
now. It isn’t that long a time frame and I’m sure that the $200 
million . . . we’re going to work our way up to that quite 
quickly. 
 
Mr. Minister, again I ask, in the next four years can you indicate 
to us how much money — keeping everything at the status quo 
— how much money it’s going to cost each year for the pension 
liability? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly the actual requirements 
have gone down in the past few years and they will continue to 
go down to roughly the next four or five years. But at that point 
they will start to increase reaching a peak after that — 2015, 
2019. 
 
So there is an opportunity, recognizing that the need in the next 
four or five years is less, to provide those extra funds and also 
have that impact, because any of the money put in at this point 
would grow. And the fund managers have been doing a 
commendable job. And certainly that’s one of the factors you 
need to look at is that the funds within the plan at this point in 
time are invested and are growing. 
 
If we add to that pool of funds that have been invested and are 
growing, then the demands on the provincial treasury in the 
outgoing years will decrease as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, then you had indicated that the 
fund is increasing, and now you’re saying that the government 
is putting some funding towards this. 
 



June 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1801 

So right now is your government adding extra money into this 
fund so that it can actually grow and help offset the liability in 
the future years? If so, how much are you putting in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Oh, that decision hasn’t been made, 
and I wasn’t trying to confuse the member opposite. But the 
thing is that when we’re talking about the unfunded pension 
liability and the requirements — the statutory requirements of 
government to meet its pension liability on an annual basis — 
that that number, which is roughly 100 million, $100 million 
this year, would actually decrease over the next four or five 
years into that 70, $80 million range. 
 
But what we’re saying is that if we were to keep that amount 
constant . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, it is. If we were to 
keep that amount constant at $100 million, then that money that 
is provided would then go into the pool and could be invested. 
And so what . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, we’re talking 
about the overall . . . the actual expenditures and the actuarial 
valuation. 
 
So what we’re talking about here is that that demand, that 
statutory demand, will decrease over the next 4 or 5 years, and 
then it will increase steadily over the next 10 to 15 years. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So, Mr. Minister, you’re saying that although 
you haven’t put any money in right now, you’re going to put 
money in to meet these statutory obligations. Right now you’re 
just meeting those obligations. 
 
But trust me . . . I’m to trust you because you’re going to put 
money in in the next three or four years when those obligations 
have actually gone from 100 down to 80. Is that what you’re 
saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — What the government has been doing 
is it has been meeting its statutory requirements. It hasn’t been 
providing any extra amounts. But discussions between the 
Department of Finance and the teachers’ federation are 
ongoing. We’ve reviewed the Mercer report. 
 
And what we would like to do is provide that additional funding 
now and over the next subsequent years so that we don’t end up 
with that huge peak in 2010, 2015. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I think most of us would like to 
make an extra payment on our mortgage as well, because we 
know that’s going to save us money in the long run, but often 
this can’t be done. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I know that with the requirements that we 
have for education, when it comes to operating grants and the 
capital and all the rest of it, is enormous. And yet at the same 
time we’re facing a $200 million pension liability there in the 
not-too-distant future. So education priority in this province has 
got to move around so that we put education at the top of the 
list somewhere and not just giving it lip service like we’ve been 
listening to in the last hour. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ll just add one other issue that we’ll . . . I have a 
number, but I guess for now maybe one other issue that we’ll be 
discussing, and that’s the historical schools in this province. 
 

I understand that there is eight historical schools and I’m 
wondering if they are . . . I believe that they are funded at a 
different level, each one of them. Can you give me an idea of 
what level they’re funded at. 
 
(1830) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member 
opposite is correct. There are eight historical schools, seven of 
which basically receive a grant per pupil that is variable. The 
maximum amount is roughly the $4,000 range. And some of the 
historical schools receive a per pupil grant of a little over 
$2,000. 
 
Gravelbourg, which is a historic school, receives significant 
funding with regards to the federal government’s obligations. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee 
rise, report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 6:32 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


