





























































Hansard: April 12, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 667 
 April 12, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan from the 
southwest part of the province. The petition calls on the 
government to reject proposals of any forced amalgamations of 
municipalities, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the government to 
reject proposals of any forced amalgamation of 
municipalities. 
 

And the signatories come from Gull Lake, Maple Creek, 
Ponteix, Saskatchewan, as well as Shaunavon, Tompkins, and 
other communities in the southwest. 
 
Thank you. 
 
I so do present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present petitions that deals with the attempt by this 
government to confiscate reserve accounts in municipal 
offices. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 

And these are signed by good people from the communities 
of Watrous, Guernsey, Drake, and all over Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to stop 
the municipal reserve account confiscation. 
 

Whereby your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from 
Annaheim and Muenster. 
 
And I do so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I as well have a petition with 
regard to municipal amalgamation. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 

I’m pleased to present on their behalf from the residents of 
Lanigan and Guernsey. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about enforced municipal amalgamation. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of St. Brieux and Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition to the Assembly, and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals 
from the good community of St. Brieux. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also stand today to 
present petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
confiscation of municipal reserve accounts, and the prayer reads 
as follows. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by folks from Lanigan and Guernsey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
the people in Swift Current and area concerned about the Swift 
Current hospital. The prayer of the petition can be summarized 
by saying that the prayer calls on “the provincial government to 
assist in the regeneration plan for the Swift Current Regional 
Hospital . . .” It’s signed by people from Swift Current as well 
as from Jansen, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present to do with the reserve account, the 
confiscation. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 



668 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2000 

abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Lanigan, Guernsey, and Drake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition with citizens concerned that the government may be 
planning to freeze or confiscate municipal assets. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 

 
The petitioners are from Guernsey, Lanigan, and Drake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
opposed to enforced municipal amalgamations. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
This petition is signed by the good folks of Birch Hills and 
Kinistino. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
bring forth a petition regarding forced amalgamation. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

And I have petitioners from Spiritwood and Rabbit Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned about forced municipal 
amalgamation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from Regina, Pense, 
and Stony Beach. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present a petition. The prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Carrot River. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed. Pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 
To cause the government to abandon plans to confiscate 
municipal reserve accounts; 
 
To halt any plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To provide funding for the Swift Current Regional 
Hospital; 
 
To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes; and 
 
To continue Court of Queen’s Bench services in Weyburn. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, it has been our privilege the 
last few days to have a number of distinguished visitors to this 
Assembly. Earlier this week it was the ambassador from 
Germany, and today it is his next-door neighbour in Ottawa, the 
ambassador from Japan. 
 
And I’d ask that our distinguished guests rise to be 
acknowledged. His Excellency, Mr. Katsuhisa Uchida, 
Ambassador of Japan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — His Excellency is accompanied by Mr. 
Kazuhiro Nakai, the first secretary of the embassy. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — He is also accompanied by Mr. Kiyoshi 
Shidara, the consul general of Japan in Edmonton, which has 
responsibility for this province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — And two other individuals who are no 
strangers to this Assembly, a long-time friend of many of you, 
Mr. Arthur Wakabayashi, honorary consul of Japan in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 669 

Hon. Mr. Hillson: — And our own Debbie Saum. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, His Excellency is in Regina 
on his first visit to Saskatchewan. He has met with the 
Lieutenant Governor, the Premier, the Deputy Premier, a 
number of ministers including myself, and I understand he was 
the honoured guest at a luncheon hosted by yourself. 
 
So I’d like to thank all members for welcoming His Excellency 
to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I too would like to extend a sincere 
welcome to the ambassador from Japan — Mr. Uchida. Mr. 
Uchida, I apologize for stumbling on your name. 
 
In my earlier life with the Canadian Grain Commission, I had 
the honour of meeting you in your country and we surely wish 
to welcome you here and hope that your stay in Saskatchewan 
is most pleasant. 
 
I would also like to welcome Mrs. Uchida accompanying you. I 
would like to welcome Nakai, the first secretary, the embassy of 
Japan. Thank you very much for coming to see us. 
 
I would like to also welcome Mr. Shidara and Mrs. Shidara 
from the consul general of Japan in the Edmonton, and also of 
course Mr. Wakabayashi. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in 
the Legislative Assembly the Children’s Advocate for the 
province of Saskatchewan, Dr. Deborah Parker-Loewen, will be 
tabling the Children and Youth in Care Review: LISTEN to 
Their Voices. 
 
Dr. Parker-Loewen is present in your gallery today, Mr. 
Speaker. And with her are the Children and Youth in Care 
Review team that conducted the review; members of the 
multi-sectoral review panel, which includes young people, 
natural parents, foster parents, First Nations and Metis Nation 
representatives, social workers, and other professionals. Also in 
attendance today are representatives of the Saskatchewan 
Council on Children and the provincial youth delegation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask Dr. Parker-Loewen and all those with 
her to stand, be recognized, and I would ask all members to 
extend our visitors a very warm welcome. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the minister and, on behalf of my colleagues, extend a 
special welcome to Ms. Parker-Loewen. 
 
And certainly, as we had indicated in the past, we have been 

looking forward to a report that Ms. Loewen has been working 
on and we look forward to reviewing it this afternoon. And we 
want to thank her even personally — before we get to look at it 
very carefully — for the work that’s been done by her and the 
committee and each and every one who’s had a special interest 
in the children of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another warm welcome for Deborah 
Parker-Loewen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
very happy today to welcome to our legislature the students 
from Centennial grade 8 class. Centennial School is within the 
constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. My two children 
attended there. 
 
And I would like to also welcome their teachers, Jean Flett and 
Jim Harrop. And a special welcome to Jim who was a classmate 
with me in high school at Thom Collegiate. 
 
I would like to invite all who are gathered here to show warm 
welcome to this class and to their teachers. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, of course from the audience 
I would like to recognize Don Bird who is originally from La 
Ronge who is working with the advocate. 
 
And I would like to say this, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all the 
people in the North and for Aboriginal people. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree). 
 
In translation, Mr. Speaker, as we work with children . . . you 
know, to work with children is indeed a tremendous aspect of 
our lives, and for those people who work with them it is a 
tremendous honour. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Hon. members, and colleagues, if I may, 
there are special people in our lives that from time to time we 
have an opportunity to introduce publicly. And I would beg 
your indulgence in allowing me to introduce to you my wife 
Barbara who is seated in the Speaker’s gallery, and my daughter 
Rhondalee who is here for a very brief visit with us. I’d like you 
to welcome them please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Also, hon. colleagues, one of our pages, 
Rachel Birns, has the privilege of her mother being here in the 
gallery this afternoon with a friend, Linda Longfellow, just to 
ensure that Rachel is in fact carrying out her responsibilities as 
her mother would expect her. So please welcome them as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 



670 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2000 

Expansion of Natural Gas Production 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy 
today to talk about some of the good news which is happening 
in our province’s economy. As you likely know, Saskatchewan 
is Canada’s third largest producer of natural gas. 
 
The newspapers this morning are talking about the great 
expansion we are seeing in our natural gas fields. In fact most 
of the producers are talking about expansion in the 
neighbourhood of 5 per cent over last year. 
 
1999 was an excellent year for natural gas production. We saw 
approximately 229 trillion cubic feet produced out of a 
thousand new wells. Mr. Speaker, it is even more important that 
700 people in this province earn their living from working in 
these natural gas fields. 
 
This is excellent growth that we are looking at; this is an 
excellent sector of our economy. And I’m sure that the member 
from Swift Current would join me in appreciating the good 
work which is happening in his area and throughout our 
province in natural gas expansion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn Court House  
 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the House 
today to respond to the government’s announcement earlier 
today that their decision to close three Queen’s Bench court 
houses, including the one in Weyburn, has been reversed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this is good news for Weyburn, 
and we all know rural areas are in need of good news right now. 
While I am delighted by this reversal, it appears that the 
original decision was simply not well thought out. After more 
facts were presented, it became increasingly clear that there was 
not a valid reason to proceed with these closures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the legal community, the 
members of the city police, and the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police), and the mayor of Weyburn for their help. Mr. 
Speaker, I would also like to especially thank the citizens in and 
around Weyburn for making their voices heard. Thanks to those 
people who signed petitions and to those who ripped the covers 
off their phone books in protest. If they would like their covers 
back, they can just stop by my office. 
 
This reversal shows that when you are right, it is important to 
stand up and fight for what is right. And, Mr. Speaker, finally I 
would like to thank the government and especially the Minister 
of Justice for reversing this decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Environmental Initiatives 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I want to draw your attention to 
some of the positive environmental initiatives contained in the 
provincial budget. First, as part of the new centenary fund, there 

is a $5 million per year fund specifically earmarked for 
environmental cleanup, transportation, and rural roads. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — This will provide important resources for work 
such as cleaning up problematic landfill sites that threaten 
aquifers in our province. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, the Environment and Resource 
Management department receives a 15 per cent increase in this 
budget, including two and a half million dollars to meet our tree 
planting commitments in northern Saskatchewan; $350,000 for 
a forest regeneration survey in the eastern forest; and $250,00 
dedicated to cleaning up abandoned radioactive tailings at the 
Gunnar and Lorado uranium mine sites. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw attention to the resources 
the budget allocates for fighting Dutch elm disease. Dutch elm 
disease has now struck in more than 20 Saskatchewan 
communities and will pose a major economic, ecological, and 
aesthetic to our province unless it’s contained. This budget 
increases spending to fight Dutch elm disease from $300,000 a 
year to $500,000 a year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, these budget 
initiatives are a clear sign our government’s actively working to 
make progress . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 

Humboldt Court House  
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with my colleague from Weyburn in congratulating the 
people of Humboldt for pressuring this government to reverse 
its decision on the closure of the Queen’s Bench Court in 
Humboldt. And incidentally, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to add 
congratulations to the people of Assiniboia since the member 
from Wood River has not raised the issue in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if it weren’t for the hard work of the legal 
community and citizens throughout the Humboldt area, I’m sure 
this decision would not have been made. But interestingly 
enough, Mr. Speaker, one civic leader who refused to sign the 
petition against this closure was the mayor of Humboldt who 
was incidentally the NDP candidate in the last election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very elated with this decision and I would 
ask the government to think through their future decisions a 
little bit more thoroughly — because, Mr. Speaker, decisions of 
this type have a real impact on real people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When the government goes ahead and makes decisions to 
remove services from rural areas they would be well advised to 
have evidence to justify it beforehand. In this case they did not, 
and therefore could not proceed with the closure of Queen’s 
Bench court in Humboldt. 
 
But I thank the Minister for recognizing his mistake that his 
department has made, and for reversing his decision. Thank 



April 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 671 

you. 
 

Community Volunteers in Regina Sherwood 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to rise today and, this being volunteer week in 
Saskatchewan, to also recognize and ask my colleagues to join 
me in recognizing community volunteers in the constituency of 
Regina Sherwood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every year the Normanview Shopping Centre in 
my area has an unveiling ceremony for its community volunteer 
wall of fame. And, Mr. Speaker, the . . . three citizens in my 
area were recognized very recently.  
 
They are: for the outstanding community leader in the area is 
Mr. Norm Chadwick, who lives in the Dieppe area of my 
constituency. Norm has been active in his local community 
association, community sporting, and recreation efforts, and is 
an active canvasser for the Heart and Stroke Foundation and the 
Canadian Cancer Society. 
 
The outstanding community volunteer, Mr. Speaker, was 
Louise Yaremchuk who is a founder of the Dieppe Community 
Association, and also Louise was very instrumental in the 
original establishment of A.E. Wilson park in my area. Louise 
has spent many years as a volunteer and with very many 
charities and other good works. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to congratulate as well Rick 
Heidt as the outstanding youth volunteer in our area. Rick is a 
grade 12 student at Riffel High School. He is very involved 
with his school and community, and also on his SRC (student 
representative council). 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all . . . you and all of us to 
congratulate these fine, outstanding volunteers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Comments from Estevan This Week 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to read an article that appeared in the Estevan This Week 
newspaper written by Gerry Fichtemann, and I quote: 
 

Well, here we go again. It’s budget time in Saskatchewan. 
It looks like the provincial NDP government is running out 
of things to tax as they have taxed nearly everything on the 
face of the earth to fill their coffers which are already 
overflowing by many millions of dollars. They have now 
taxed trees, shrubs, perennial plants, and annuals. Also on 
the hit-list are seeds and bulbs. They’ve even taxed the sod 
you put in your yard. They’ve even taken the joy out of 
Christmas by taxing you on Christmas Trees. 
 
On the bulletin mailed to us from the provincial 
government, the only item left that is not taxable is manure 
. . . an (article) that . . . this government is full to the brim 
of this stuff! 
 
I thought we’d get a good tax break on the income tax but 
these guys just took our tax break away from us and stole 

more money than ever! Say good-bye to your income-tax 
break! 
 
If they ever come up with a scheme to tax the vegetables 
that you grow yourself, they’ll be doing that too! Nothing 
surprises me anymore when it comes to this provincial 
government. 
 
I must change the subject to lighten my mind and start 
putting some thoughts into my brain that are a lot more 
pleasant than taxes. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Z99 13th Annual Radiothon 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, C.C. and 
Lorie Lindsay with a supporting cast of Z99 listeners have 
really done it this time. 
 
In their 13th annual radiothon — the third of a very successful 
partnership with the Hospitals of Regina Foundation — that has 
focused everyone’s attentions on Regina’s neonatal unit, they 
raised $171,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — This year, Mr. Speaker, a three-probe ultrasound 
unit is the latest technology that will provide accurate 
diagnostic information. The more accurate information will 
help doctors treat and prevent life-threatening problems even 
before birth. 
 
C.C. and Lorie gave 30 hours of themselves . . . Z99 listening 
public gave of themselves. The $171,000 raised this year brings 
the three-year total to more than $320,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Z99 listeners, C.C. and Lorie Lindsay are all truly 
beautiful people who care about our community and who do 
their share to make it better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Svoboda Ukrainian Dance Festival 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I rise again today to talk about all the wonderful things 
going on in the Battlefords. And I know that with all the great 
things going on in North Battleford, the members of this 
Assembly just can’t get enough of hearing me talk about my 
constituency. 
 
Well this weekend, Mr. Speaker, is the 10th annual Svoboda 
Ukrainian Dance Festival at the Don Ross Center in North 
Battleford. This is one of the largest and most widely respected 
dance festivals of its kind. 
 
The Svoboda Dance Festival is a grand celebration of Ukrainian 
culture and a brilliant display of both costume and talent. 
 
Spectators of the festival will have the pleasure of watching 300 
entrants and 800 competitors. The Saturday session will feature 
large group dances from six different regions of Ukraine with 



672 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2000 

performances from novice to adult. 
 
I want to extend congratulations to the organizers and 
competitors who have worked tirelessly to ensure the success of 
this spectacular festival on its 10th anniversary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join with me in the 
Battlefords this weekend to enjoy the festival. And may I close 
with these words: go North Stars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Municipal Amalgamation 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 
again my questions are for the Minister of Municipal 
Government. Mr. Minister, yesterday in this House you said 
there’s no plan to force amalgamation. Then you went out and 
told reporters you plan to introduce legislation that will set the 
number of municipalities in this province. That sounds a lot like 
forced amalgamation to me. You obviously take flip-flop 
lessons from the Liberal leader. 
 
So now, Mr. Minister, the next question is what is the number? 
Are there going to be 125 municipalities like Mr. Garcea’s 
recommending? Are there going to be 17 municipalities like 
Mr. Stabler is recommending? Which one is it, Mr. Minister? 
How many towns, villages, and RMs (rural municipalities) do 
you plan to wipe out? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to the 
member opposite by saying to him that I listened very carefully 
yesterday when he was making his speech in the 75-minute 
debate, and he went on to say a number of things, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’ve listened to what he said around the province when 
he’s been talking about what’s going to happen to 
municipalities, and this is what he said. 
 
If we proceed, this is what will happen. We will double the 
number of RMs and we’ll double the number of office staff. 
People will . . . there will be less volunteers in the RMs, and 
councillors will take on a larger amount of responsibility. Your 
councillors are not going to know their neighbour. They will 
have to make long-distance phone calls to local councillors, and 
amalgamations means higher taxes. 
 
And I ask the member, how does he know all of this 
information? Have you decided what this is going to be in this 
province? Have you decided what the amalgamation process is 
going to be in this province? Because nobody has talked about 
this at all except you, Mr. Member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, if 
you’d quit sending your staff to these meetings and attend them 
yourself, you might know exactly what’s being said out there. 
It’s time to go. Tonight’s a good opportunity — Regina’s on 
right now. 

Mr. Minister, you’re not even listening to your own task force. 
If you were, you would scrap forced amalgamation plans 
altogether because that’s what everyone at these meetings are 
telling them. Of course you wouldn’t know that, again because 
you aren’t attending — not even the one today in Regina, I 
understand. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s clear you’ve made your mind up. This is not 
the kind of legislation you can draft in just a few days. It’s 
probably already written. So why don’t you tell us how many 
municipalities will be left under your forced amalgamation 
plan. And again, how many towns, villages, hamlets, RMs, do 
you plan to do away with? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say to the 
member opposite and to the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone, who asked me a question yesterday too about 
what’s happening with amalgamation, and I would say to the 
member opposite . . . and they’re offering me rides to the 
various different meetings across the province. And I say to the 
member from Saltcoats, today you should get in your car and 
you should take with you Mr. Reg Downs, and you should take 
him to the front of the committee and you should have Mr. Reg 
Downs read to the committee. You should have Mr. Reg Downs 
tell the task force exactly this: he should say that there should 
be a call to action of municipalities in this province. You should 
have him read this. 
 
And you should say that this process should begin immediately. 
And you should say that it will never be a perfect time. And you 
should . . . he should then go on to say that if all of these . . . 
that all of those conditions will never, ever exist. You should 
take him to that meeting and have him make that presentation of 
the report that he’s got. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I took time to read that report. Not once did I find 
forced amalgamation in that report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, urban people are also very concerned about your 
forced amalgamation plan. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Urban people are 
also very concerned about forced amalgamation. Yesterday the 
member for Indian Head-Milestone read out letter after letter 
from Regina-based area businesses opposed to forced 
amalgamation. 
 
Since then, we received a number of faxes and letters. Botkin 
Construction — the list goes on — Sherwood Multitech Estates; 
Village RV; Premay Equipment; Maxwell’s Amusements and 
water park; Insulation Applicators; Okamoto Canada Limited; 
N I S Contractors; Sakundiak Equipment. It goes on and on — 
Remai Construction. 
 
Mr. Minister, at this minute and this hour many of these 
business owners and their employees are at your task force 



April 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 673 

meeting speaking out against forced amalgamation. Mr. 
Minister, are you listening? Will you cancel your plans for 
forced amalgamation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the member and 
many of the members on the other side of the House are 
familiar with a lot of those businesses because from what I’m 
hearing, when I’m speaking with a lot of those businesses, is in 
fact they’re picking up their phone and they’re phoning them 
themselves. 
 
And what the Saskatchewan Party is saying to many of those 
businesses, if in fact you don’t oppose amalgamation, this is 
what’s going to happen to your business — tax rates are going 
to go up, there’s not going to be an opportunity for you . . . 
(inaudible) . . . community, you’re going to have to move out of 
the province because there isn’t enough opportunity for you 
there. 
 
Every one of those members . . . Just recently the member from 
Humboldt phoned a couple of the businesses and said exactly 
that. The Saskatchewan Party is busy phoning businesses across 
the province, fearmongering, and that member from Saltcoats is 
leading the parade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, you have an opportunity this afternoon, you have an 
opportunity tonight, to go tell these businesses that taxes aren’t 
going up. Tell them exactly what you just told us. 
 
Mr. Minister, Premay Equipment says, this could mean 
relocation of our company back to Alberta. Village RV says, 
our small business provides jobs for 25 people which could be 
jeopardized by amalgamation. Bodkin Construction says, your 
plan will result in increased taxation and business closure. 
 
Not my words — their words, Mr. Minister. They are the words 
of Regina area businesses that employ Regina people with 
Regina families. 
 
You might not want to listen to me or SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) or SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association), but will you for once listen 
to the thousands of Saskatchewan people telling you that they 
don’t want forced amalgamation. Will you listen to 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite he’s right when he stands up and says I don’t have to 
listen to him, because that’s absolutely true. 
 
The member opposite, Mr. Speaker, has been going around the 
province and he’s been holding his own little group of 
meetings, and he’s been telling business people and individual 
community leaders that there’s going to be a disaster across this 
province if in fact there’s going to be amalgamation. 
 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, of course, Mr. Speaker, if they’re 
advocating amalgamation, which I hear them talking about all 
of the time — and the only people in this House who are talking 
about amalgamation, forced amalgamation, are right over there 
— of course people in Saskatchewan are going to be concerned 
about it. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, why don’t you tell us what 
your plan is about amalgamation. Because on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t put forward anything that talks 
about amalgamation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Health Information Network 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, on last 
Friday we asked the Associate Minister of Health to update us 
on the Saskatchewan Health Information Network. 
Unfortunately, we really didn’t get very far so I’m going to try 
again. 
 
Madam Minister, the Government of Manitoba has pulled the 
pin on their automated health information network in their 
province. An independent review concluded the system was too 
expensive and wasn’t going to work. Unfortunately, Manitoba 
taxpayers spent $35 million before the project was scrapped. 
 
Madam Minister, does the Government of Saskatchewan share 
the same concerns about SHIN (Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network)? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said last 
week when I was answering the question about SHIN, we do 
have a commitment to information technology in this province. 
We understand that we need to have good information to make 
evidence-based decisions. 
 
We have committed $40 million and we are meeting that 
commitment this year. We will have an infrastructure that we 
will be building on and continue to build on as we can afford to 
do it. We are looking across the western provinces for 
partnerships to share our expertise, and other provinces are 
interested in how we’ve done this because we’ve done a very 
good job very responsibly and we do have an information 
service that we’ll be able to sustain and build on. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
I heard you indicating your commitment by this government to 
this project. I heard you indicating that you have already spent 
some $40 million on the project. 
 
My question is this then, Madam Minister: if you indeed spent 
40 million, how much more is needed to be spent before this 
project is completed and when will the network be operational? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Actually what we’ve spent to date is about 
$34 million, and the money that’s in this year’s budget will 
meet the $40 million commitment. 
 
As I said last week, when we first assumed this portfolio we 
offered debriefing about SHIN to the opposition Health critic 



674 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2000 

and the deputy Health critic that answers all those questions in 
detail — what we have, where we have it, how we’re building 
it, and where we’re going. I still offer that to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
what we really need is for the public to understand what’s going 
on here, particularly in light of a very similar network in 
Manitoba is being bailed out from at a cost of $35 million. At 
the end of this fiscal year I understand you’re spending $40 
million. 
 
Madam Minister, are you completely sure that this project is 
going to be sufficient? And will you undertake a review of this 
project so the people of this province aren’t going to be facing a 
pull-out like Manitoba taxpayers have done? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Actually, Mr. Speaker, what happened in 
Manitoba was under a Tory government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — This government has a commitment to 
information technology. What we want to make sure we do is 
that we build it where we need it and put into it what we need 
from it. And that is what we were doing. And that’s why we’re 
building it slowly, and that’s what we’ll continue to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Battlefords Health District Review 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Health. Mr. Speaker, Dickson Robin was the North Battleford 
man who died Christmas Eve. The ICU (intensive care unit) at 
the North Battleford hospital was closed and he could not be 
stabilized for transfer to another centre. 
 
The health district has conducted a review of the circumstances 
surrounding Mr. Robin’s death. His son Dickson Robin Jr. has 
been told, and I have been told, that this review is now 
complete. Dickson Robin Jr. has asked for a copy of this report 
but so far has been denied access to it unless he meets with the 
health district first. 
 
Madam Minister, have you seen this report and will you release 
it to Mr. Robin’s family? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. I want to thank the member 
for the question. As you know, the North Battleford Health 
District requested of the provincial government a process that 
would put together an external review to address community 
issues. The Department of Health, along with the college of 
physicians and surgeons, and the Saskatchewan Registered 
Nurses’ Association, conducted the review and that review was 
shared with the health district board in the beginning of April. 
 
I understand that the family, the immediate family, is away until 
April 15. The review will be shared with the family. And I 
understand that the health district will release the results of the 
review to the public once the family has the results of the 
review. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the Robin family has been put 
through enough. They lost a husband, father, and grandfather on 
Christmas Eve and the circumstances are questionable. 
 
This is not a game. This family has a right to know what the 
review says. They do not want to meet with health district 
officials. Mr. Robin’s family wants to have the time to review 
this in privacy and to look at the report on their own. All they 
want is the report. They want to decide what to do with it. 
 
Madam Minister, what is in this report that the health district 
and your department refuses to openly release it to the family. 
And when will you give this to the Robin family? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that 
the health district is quite willing to share the report with the 
family. They’re waiting for the spouse to return. I understand 
the spouse will return by April 15. 
 
But I do want to say to the member, and I know that she has 
been busy contacting the health district and contacting the 
world, I would say to the member that we know that there was a 
very difficult circumstance for the family. 
 
The family asked for a review. They contacted me, Mr. 
Speaker. The review has been conducted. The results will be 
shared with the family, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t know what 
else to say, other than that member is strictly playing politics 
with this very sad death, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a member that 
believes in private health care and quite frankly it’s time . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Budget Implications 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Finance. Today, interestingly 
enough, the Premier was in Saskatoon and he was giving his 
annual apology for the state of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we understand that this year’s apology was 
especially lengthy. It was rather lacklustre and it was not even 
interrupted once by even weak applause. His apology dumped 
most of the blame on the Finance minister, on his doorstep. 
 
Well for once, Mr. Speaker, we agree with the Premier. Mr. 
Minister, you budget is in fact a disaster. It’s a disaster 
according to school boards who say your budget has forgotten 
children. It’s a disaster according to SARM because of your 
government’s forced amalgamation plan, the hill on which they 
have chosen to die. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a failure because according to the CFIB 



April 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

(Canadian Federation of Independent Business) your budget is 
going . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, please. I’ll ask the 
Hon. Leader of the Opposition to go directly to his question 
please. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the minister. Will you admit the state of the province is a 
disaster thanks to nine miserable long years of NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the only disaster in this 
province is the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I want to say that the disaster here, Mr. 
Speaker, is that this opposition has no vision for the future and 
cannot keep its eye on the big picture. And the big picture is 
this, Mr. Speaker. We are going to deliver as a result of this 
budget to the people of Saskatchewan, a $440 million cut in 
personal income tax. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? They 
voted against that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re going to deliver a $260 million net tax cut taking 
PST (provincial sales tax) into account. And you know what, 
Mr. Speaker? They voted against that too. And this year, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to deliver $44 million in tax relief. And 
guess what, Mr. Speaker, they voted against that too. 
 
Well the people of Saskatchewan know, Mr. Speaker, that we 
have a vision and we have a plan and we’re going to stick with 
that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance in 
that answer has just admitted that he’s in a fantasy world. He 
has no idea what is happening in the province of Saskatchewan. 
It’s not hard to understand listening to that answer why the 
Premier was compelled to apologize for the state the province is 
in, in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister doesn’t know that educators are 
saying that your budget is terrible and they’re reaching for the 
panic button. Municipalities, Mr. Minister, are holding 
emergency meetings. SARM is holding an emergency meeting. 
Mr. Speaker, our population is shrinking — is shrinking — 
people are going to Alberta for opportunity. And the Health 
minister says, the Health minister says that our health care 
situation is on the ropes. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s time to admit that whatever you’re doing is 
not working other than to drive people from this province. Will 
you admit that your mismanagement is driving businesses, 
people, and — most importantly — hope from the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I have such 
difficulty figuring out what is the position of the Leader of the 
Opposition. Because some days, Mr. Speaker, he’s opposed to 
the PST (provincial sales tax) expansion. Then he leaves the 
House and they ask him, are you opposed to it; would you 
change it? He said no, he wouldn’t change it. 
 
Some days he wants less tax on used cars. The other day he 
wants more tax on used cars. Some days he says he wants to 
help the consumer. Other days he wants to help the car dealer. 
Some days, Mr. Speaker, he’s complaining about a $700 
million surplus. Other days his party is talking about a $396 
million deficit. 
 
But I say, Mr. Speaker, each and every day the position of this 
government is the same, and that is we’re going to cut taxes for 
ordinary people in this province. And that’s what this budget 
does, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the minister 
made an interesting comment — he said he couldn’t figure 
things out. I think the people of Saskatchewan know that he 
can’t figure things out. And they’re very worried about a 
Finance minister who cannot figure. And I believe that the 
Premier shouldn’t be taking all the blame for the mess that the 
province is in, as he was in Saskatoon today. 
 
And I also know, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberal leader deserves 
at least half of the credit for hidden taxes, higher taxes, fee 
increases, crumbling highways, a failing health system — you’d 
think he’d be concerned about a failing health system — 
businesses closing, people leaving, municipalities on the verge 
of revolt. 
 
Nine years, Mr. Speaker, of NDP mismanagement, and six 
months of help from the Liberals in the coalition. That’s the 
NDP record. 
 
My question to the Minister of Finance: will you follow the 
Premier’s lead? Will you apologize to the people of 
Saskatchewan for nine years of gross NDP mismanagement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the 
Opposition wants to talk about what people are saying about the 
budget, I’ll tell him what people are saying. The Biggar 
Independent says the government listened. The Melfort Journal 
says the budget delivers what people wanted. The Moosomin 
World Spectator says sound fiscal policy is paying off for 
taxpayers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In the rural municipality of Buckland, the 
reeve says property tax rebate will help. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



676 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — . . . says farmers happy with some of the 
measures in the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Saskatchewan Wheat Pool — agrees with 
budget. Gary Thompson, economist, says it addresses major 
issues for farmers. 
 
Farmers say they’re happy. The Saskatchewan SEACAP (South 
East Area Concerned Agricultural Producers) spokesman says 
farmers feeling good, tax on farm fuel is gone. Dwight Percy 
says Cline’s budget is right on the money. The only person 
confused about the budget is the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

No-fault Insurance 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well today’s the 
day that we’re going to have delivered, hopefully, a list of all 
those fee increases that this particular government has given 
across the province. And that’s why the population, as of today, 
is dropping in this particular province as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister responsible for 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). Mr. Minister, this 
last weekend over 200 victims of your no-fault insurance 
scheme gathered in Regina for their own review of the system. 
They’re convinced the government’s review is nothing more 
than a mere whitewash. 
 
Mr. Minister, no-fault victims had the opportunity to hear from 
Dr. Michel Freeman, a renowned expert on injuries and on 
no-fault insurance schemes. You’d know this had your 
government bothered to attend that particular meeting. 
 
Mr. Freeman, Mr. Speaker, reported that the research that SGI 
used in 1995 could justify no-fault insurance, which was based 
on the task force in Quebec . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I would ask the hon. 
member to go directly to his question please. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — To the minister responsible for SGI, Dr. 
Freeman said that research was nothing but junk science. Mr. 
Minister, why do you continue to defend a system which this 
expert says is based on nothing but junk science? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I very much 
appreciate that question because one of the reasons that this 
legislation has a review built right into the legislation is to deal 
with all of the comments that people will have about how it’s 
working. 
 
But I think it’s very important that we listen to all the people 
and I encourage all people to be part of our review, because that 
review is going to assist all of us in this legislature to make our 
system even better. 
 

I think it’s very difficult to sit here and listen to the 
Alberta-envy party, because I think that they do not envy the 
car insurance rates that are in that province. We have a good 
system here and we need to continue to make it better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Tabling of Documents 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
the Bill No. 26, The Tabling of Documents Amendment Act, 
2000 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Hon. colleagues, before orders of the day I 
would like to table the report entitled Children and Youth in 
Care Review, submitted by the Children’s Advocate. 
 
I so table. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, over the past few days the 
members have submitted 57 questions to the government. Mr. 
Speaker, you know what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I’m fairly close to the 
whip and I was having a difficult time hearing what he had to 
say. Kindly allow him to make his presentation. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
opposition members have asked over the last few years, 57 
questions. And today I’m asking the Assembly to give leave to 
submit 57 responses to these questions. 
 
I want to bring to your attention, Mr. Speaker, that there are no 
conversions in these questions. These questions are about fees 
and charges to the public. And when the members look through 
the answers to the questions, they will find that the majority 
show that there are no increases in the majority of the 
departments. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these answers are complete and clear 
showing that the government is open, accountable, responsible, 
and I want . . . And, Mr. Speaker, I’d have to say that I’m very 
happy — happy — to submit these answers. And I know that 
the government members . . . the opposition members will be 
happy to receive the answers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Government Whip has asked 
leave to supply the answers to the 57 questions. 
 



April 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask 
you to rule on a point of order whether the presentation of 
questions is a debatable motion. 
 
The Speaker: — The whip has asked for leave of the Assembly 
which, my understanding out of the rulings, is not a debatable 
matter; it’s a matter of the House to either allow the whip to 
respond to all the answers. 
 
Is leave granted to allow presentation . . . responses to all the 
questions? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Have the answers then been provided? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Answers are provided for questions 69 to 
126. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 69 to 126 have been 
tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 15  The Department of Justice 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Department of Justice Amendment 
Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan has over the 
past several years developed an efficient and effective working 
partnership with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 
and the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan regarding the delivery of 
the Saskatchewan Aboriginal courtworker program. 
 
This program is a 50/50 cost-shared program with the federal 
government, Mr. Speaker, that is managed by the Saskatchewan 
Aboriginal courtworker program advisory board. The board 
includes one member from the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Indian Nations, one member from the Metis Nation of 
Saskatchewan, two members from Saskatchewan Justice, and 
an independent chairperson. The decision making of the board 
is consensus-based and the services are delivered through 
Aboriginal agencies called carriers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this vital program is to help ensure 
that First Nation and Metis youth and adults charged with an 
offence or before the criminal courts receive fair, equitable, and 
culturally sensitive treatment. Court records provide 
information and assistance to clients in an effort to ensure that 
the process is both understood and respected by all. 
 
The Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, the Metis 
Nation of Saskatchewan, and the Government of Saskatchewan 
have identified the need to ensure that the courtworker program 

staff are protected from liability in the ordinary performance of 
their duties pursuant to their contract. 
 
They’ve also identified the need to ensure that clients accessing 
Aboriginal courtworker program services enjoy confidentiality 
with respect to those services. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill provides for amendments to implement protection from 
liability for Aboriginal courtworker program staff for actions 
taken in good faith in the execution of their duties pursuant to 
their courtworker service contract. 
 
And the Bill also creates a confidential solicitor-client type 
relationship between a client and his or her courtworker with 
respect to courtworker services. This will ensure that 
information provided to a courtworker is considered to be 
privileged, confidential, and cannot be subject of subsequent 
court proceedings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in making these amendments at the request of the 
Aboriginal courtworker program advisory board, we’re making 
some fine-tuning adjustments to a program that is working 
extremely well. 
 
Communication and understanding is central to building respect 
for the justice system in the Aboriginal community. Aboriginal 
people are a significant stakeholder in the development of this 
province and must be included in both the development and 
delivery of justice programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join with the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, the Metis Nation of 
Saskatchewan, and the government in supporting this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Department of Justice Act. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise today to address Bill No. 15, The Department of Justice 
Act. This Act brings into place, as the minister was saying, a 
new type of venture within the justice system. I think it’s a type 
of venture, Mr. Speaker, that is well worthy of some 
consideration, and hopefully, will provide the necessary 
benefits that people in this society can use, particularly those 
that are facing court actions in an area where they’re not 
necessarily familiar, Mr. Speaker, with the whole procedures. 
 
It certainly is intimidating when a person who is unfamiliar 
goes into a new setting and everything is happening so quickly. 
They need to have an opportunity to gain understanding and to 
feel confident that the system is working for their benefit as 
well as for the benefit of upholding the laws of this land. 
Hopefully, the courtworker provisions can provide that to the 
people that can utilize its services. 
 
But I do have also some concerns, Mr. Speaker, about some of 
the things in this Bill. And it is only one page, but nevertheless, 
there is a couple of points in here that I think the minister needs 
to clarify before the Bill is passed. And there will be 
opportunities for the minister to do that later when we reach 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
In particular, I have two points that I think need to be clarified. 
Part of the Act under confidentiality talks about an individual 



678 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2000 

who has been charged with an offence, and it talks about an 
individual under the age of 18 who was alleged to have 
committed an offence. And I wonder why the differentiation for 
a person who is of adult status being charged and a person who 
is not of adult status simply being alleged. 
 
Shouldn’t a courtworker also be available to explain to someone 
who is an adult and has been alleged to have committed a 
crime? In dealing with a confidentiality circumstances, I’m 
wondering why the minister has differentiated in the . . . 
between alleged for people under the age 18 and charged for 
people over the age of 18. 
 
No place in here does it state under confidentiality though that 
the information that they may be holding confidential — in a 
solicitor-client type of privileged condition — was acquired in 
the performance of their duties. Earlier it talks about 
performance of their duties but in the confidentiality section it 
does not refer to in the performance of their duties. Perhaps it’s 
in some other part of the Act in reference back to this particular 
clause; perhaps it’s been missed. 
 
So I would ask that the minister take a look at that and ensure 
that the information that these people are to keep confidential is 
acquired in the performance of their duties. And I would hate to 
think that they gained access to some information through some 
other method and then weren’t allowed to utilize that 
information simply because this Act gives them confidentiality 
privileges; that if they overhear something that they should be 
able to deal with it in the proper manner; that the only 
confidentiality should be the information that they acquire in 
the pursuit of their duties as a courtworker. 
 
I think that there is a need though, Mr. Speaker, that before this 
Bill proceeds onward that the third party people involved 
should have an opportunity to review and contact both the 
opposition and the government to explain and outline those 
areas that they feel are strong and need to be supported, and 
whether or not they have any concerns in any particular area. So 
I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Justice Statutes (Consumer Protection) 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Justice Statutes (Consumer 
Protection) Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will clarify the legal framework for the 
long established practice whereby the registrar of the consumer 
protection branch under each of the amended Bills may arrange 
for the distribution of the proceeds of a bond to a claimant. The 
practice of forfeiting the bond for such a payout would only 
occur after conducting a full investigation to establish that the 
complaint is valid and the financial loss to the purchaser 
remains unsatisfied or outstanding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our concern is that without these amendments the 
result of a court decision would be that consumers would be 
required to initiate court proceedings and become judgment 
creditors of the person or corporation named in the bond before 

becoming eligible to receive payments. 
 
Our consumer protection branch advises us, Mr. Speaker, that 
their clients often find such proceedings, court proceedings 
inconvenient or intimidating, and that the cost, time, and effort 
required are disproportionately high. This Bill therefore would 
ensure that consumers under these Acts, and I’ll name them in a 
moment, are able to receive the intended protection of the bond 
without undertaking full court proceedings in order to establish 
technical entitlement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to achieve this purpose each of The Motor Dealers 
Act, The Direct Sellers Act, The Collection Agents Act, The 
Sale of Training Courses Act, and The Credit Reporting 
Agencies Act are being amended. The changes will set out that 
the registrar may direct that any money recovered under a 
forfeited bond, or realized for the sale of collateral security, 
may be paid to such persons as deemed by the registrar to be 
entitled to these moneys. 
 
This would typically include, Mr. Speaker, victims in a criminal 
fraud conviction, claimants in the same position as someone 
who’s already received a judgment, or former clients claiming 
under a bankruptcy situation. It should be noted, Mr. Speaker, 
that the decision of the registrar, with respect to the bonds, is 
subject to appeal which will ensure that it must be reasonable 
and resulted from a fair investigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government remains committed to the 
consumer protection goals that each of these Acts promote. And 
I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in supporting 
these amendments to ensure that consumer protection clients 
receive the financial protections that the bond provisions were 
intended to provide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 
Justice Statutes (Consumer Protection) Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is, I’m sure, a very important piece of legislation. But it 
deals with also a very complex area of the law, and a very 
complex area in dealing with consumer affairs — and that is of 
bond, bondholders, and who is entitled to recover compensation 
from bonds. 
 
It’s clear in this Act that there are some significant changes 
taking place that people across the province need to be given an 
opportunity to understand, to learn about, and deal with before 
this legislation passes — before it becomes into law and affects 
their lives and they way that they as individuals and as 
companies deal within our business society. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, because this particular Bill is so 
important, I think it needs to be given more time and held off 
before we actually do pass it. 
 
There’s also a number of other pieces of legislation on the 
books, Mr. Speaker, that we need to be dealt with, need to be 
debated, need to be heard. 
 
Therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we 
move to Bill No. 231, The Fire-fighter Protection Liability Act. 
 



April 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 679 

The Speaker: — Order. It is the intention of the member to 
adjourn debate on the . . . It has been moved by the member 
from Cannington and seconded by the member from Swift 
Current that we move to Bill No. 231, The Fire-fighter 
Protection from Liability Act. 
 
The division bells rang from 2:42 p.m. until 2:52 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 21 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Draude Boyd 
Gantefoer Toth Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont Weekes Brkich 
Harpauer Wakefield Wiberg 
Allchurch Stewart Kwiatkowski 
 

Nays — 28 
 

Trew Hagel Van Mulligen 
Lingenfelter Melenchuk Cline 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Hamilton 
Prebble McPherson Jones 
Yates Harper Axworthy 
Junor Kasperski Wartman 
Addley   
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well consumer 
protection is a thing of great interest to us all and particularly to 
the consumers. And I think when we look at this particular Bill 
we’re not particularly sure exactly where it’s going and how 
large it’s involvement is. 
 
When you get a Bill from this particular government, Mr. 
Speaker, that purports to sort of stand between the consumer 
and business, you’re pretty scary where they’re at and they’re 
probably aren’t anywheres. We’ll have to take a much closer 
look at this particular Bill than we’ve been granted so far. 
 
The issue of things such as bonds and some of the items that 
were listed in the Bill are things we have to look at a whole lot 
closer. And I think, as we well know, there’s various consumer 
organizations throughout the province representing different 
particular aspects. Each one of those needs to be looked at 
carefully. We need to talk to them and see exactly where they 
stand on these particular issues. 
 
And because of that need for a lot more information before we 
can deal adequately with this particular Bill, I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 5 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No. 5 — The Parks 
Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit 
on Bill No. 5, The Parks Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
As everybody knows, the parks are very important to everybody 
in Saskatchewan. And all Bills that pertain to them, no matter 
how small, they may appear uncontroversial. There’s a lot of 
things cannot be said about some of the issues surrounding the 
parks. 
 
We have very beautiful parks in Saskatchewan. We’ve very 
blessed to have the parks here. And I think they should be 
looked after by all members here. And that’s why we should 
take time to examine each Bill, to look through it. 
 
I believe that is our job in opposition, to examine each Bill, 
each item that’s with it, to slow the process down just a little 
bit. Because this government, what I’ve seen of it, has a 
tendency to ram things through. Yes, tries to ram things 
through. Maybe it doesn’t tell the whole picture, doesn’t tell the 
whole picture. And I believe it’s been pointed out, the Minister 
of Finance has said it was our job to point out a lot of fees, to 
look at stuff. 
 
The opposition member . . . the Minister for SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) said 
when he was asked about fees, well that wasn’t asked. Well 
today with this, let me ask him some questions about different 
things and maybe I will get some answers about this Bill. 
 
One of these things I would like to talk to begin with is the 
licensing fees. Now this can pertain a little bit to this Bill 
because according to this there will be some more money 
possibly spent on some land being purchased, and I would like 
to know if the fees increases are being used to maybe . . . for 
that part of the budget. 
 
I see that the daily park fees are going up 40 per cent; three-day 
fees are going up 42 per cent; weekly fees 39 per cent; annual 
transferable, 40 per cent; motorcoach daily, 33 per cent; 
motorcoach annual, 43 per cent; full service site per night, 9 per 
cent. Electrical site per night, 11 per cent. Non-electrical site 
per night, 15 per cent. Non-electrical spring-fall discount, 22 
per cent. Electrical group per site, 11 per cent. Full service site, 
seasonal, 20 per cent. Non-electrical site, seasonal, 20 per cent. 
Electrical monthly, level 1 park, 16 per cent. Non-electrical 
monthly, level 1 park, 17 per cent. Electrical monthly, level 2 
park, 17 per cent. Non-electrical monthly, level 2 parks, 15 per 
cent. Electrical site per night going up 13 per cent. 
Non-electrical site per night going up 18 per cent. Economy 22 
per cent. Electrical spring-fall discount is going up 17 per cent. 
Electrical group, 13 per cent. Electrical site, seasonal, going up 
20 per cent. Non-electrical site, seasonal, going up 20 per cent. 
Equipment capping fee per night is a new fee. 
 
And there’s others. The fishing licence have gone up, other 
things. But one of the things I want to mention, a lot of 
constituents over on that other side . . . or a lot of the members 



680 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2000 

or their constituents live in the cities. The only time — the only 
time — they get to see nature is when they go to parks. 
 
A lot of them, I believe, the Minister of Finance has pinpointed 
roughly 55 to 60,000 people as low-income wage earners. They 
may not be able to go, to afford it, may not be able to enjoy 
these parks as much. I find that a concern, and I think some of 
the members should find that a concern because it does deal 
with a lot of their constituents. And I believe that they would 
be, you know, very interested, and they should be looking at the 
park fees — maybe cutting back some of the increases. Because 
it’s for the children out there, for some of them, that’s the only 
time they ever get to see nature, in the cities. 
 
(1500) 
 
I grew up with nature, and there’s an odd member over there 
that did grow up in the rural. But most of the members over 
there grew up in the cities, and their children are growing up in 
the cities. And I think our parks need to be looked after, and 
they should be made accessible, made accessible for all people, 
made affordable so all people can enjoy them. That’s what 
we’re here for. 
 
I see the Bill deals with acquiring some land. I believe it’s 97 
hectares — which I don’t know if a lot of the members over 
there know what that means — but to convert it, it converts into 
230 to 240 acres. And I see some of them, and I see some of 
them — the members over there maybe don’t even know what 
an acre is. So maybe I’ll tell them. 
 
A quarter section is a quarter-mile long, wide; a mile long. This 
takes almost a half section. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many city lots would that be? 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I’m not sure exactly how many city lots, but it 
would take quite a few. 
 
The members over there are . . . they seem to take this a . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, they seem to be taking this a 
little lightly, but when . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, well 
like my member said, and I believe . . . what is that? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Eight and a quarter feet wide and a mile 
long. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Eight and a quarter feet and a mile long. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many beer in a dozen? 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Not sure. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Only the members opposite would know 
the answer to that. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Yes. But getting back to that piece of parcel 
land that deals with this Bill, it is adding quite a bit of chunk of 
land. And this Bill does not quite go into how, if there was an 
environmental impact done, assessment done on this, how will 
it affect the people that may be residing on the land? How it 
affects the neighbours. 
 

How was this land taken? Was it voluntarily given? Was it 
government land? Or was it just . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes. Or did the government just amalgamate it? 
 
What kind of land was it? Was it marshland? Was it forest 
land? Was it grassland? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. 
Maybe there were coyotes on it — we don’t know — that need 
protection . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, yes. 
 
But the government over there, they might not be protecting. 
The government has put another licence fee — $45 licence fee 
— to shoot coyotes. Maybe this is a protected area for them. 
I’m not sure on this. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re trying to tax our coyotes. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Yes. But getting back to that, that part of the 
end. I believe it pertains to Christopher Lake. And we’re not 
sure how that is going to affect the people at Christopher Lake. 
Is there cottages on there? And, like I say, maybe it is grassland. 
 
There’s also the issue of fire protection. Has that been 
adequately looked at? Any time you add . . . Maybe it’s a 
prairie wool area. When you take a piece of property, it affects 
the system around there. 
 
But there’s some . . . there’s a few other issues I have with this 
Bill. And I will read the part that . . . the part of the land is taken 
. . . maybe some of the members will recognize it. Maybe 
they’ve studied this Bill and they can inform me exactly where 
this is, how big this is. 
 
At Christopher Lake, the portion of land they’re going to take is 
a: 
 

. . . portion of the south-west quarter and south half of the 
north-west quarter of Section 6, Township 53, Range 26 
west of the Second Meridian, lying north and east of the 
northerly and easterly limits of Highway No. 263 as shown 
on Plan No. 87PA02701 in the Land Titles Office for the 
Prince Albert Land Registration District and west of the 
westerly limits of Turner Street, Ward Street and Ambrose 
Avenue as shown on Plan No. 87PA07588 in that same 
office . . . 

 
Now has the minister looked at this? Does he know this piece of 
land personally? Does he know . . . has . . . does he know how 
that’s going to affect the people in that area? 
 
Also there’s going to be . . . there’s other areas, some areas that 
are affected at Buffalo Pound: 
 

those lands taken for road widening as shown on Plan No. 
71PA13814 . . . the Land Titles Office for the Prince 
Albert Land Registration District. 

 
Also: 
 

. . . lands taken for public improvement as shown on Plan 
No. 73PA00893 in the Land Titles Office for the Prince 
Albert Land Registration District; and 

 
all that portion of the south-west quarter of Section 6 



April 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 681 

bounded on the west by the lands taken for public 
improvement as shown on Plan No. 73PA00893 in the 
Land Titles Office for the Prince Albert Land Registration 
District, on the east by Turner Street . . . on the north-east 
by Ward Street as shown on Plan No. 63PA07588 in that 
same office. 

 
Looks like they’re amalgamating parks possibly; I’m not sure 
here. At Buffalo Pound they’re going to be: 
 

. . . striking out “Plan No. BR 4578” and substituting “Plan 
No. 87 MJ 12524-2”. 

 
Subclause . . . of the description of Buffalo Pound 
Provincial Park in Part B of Schedule I is amended by 
striking out “Plan No. BR 4578” and substituting “Plan 
No. 87 MJ 12524-2”. 
 

Part C of this Bill: 
 

Subclause . . . of the description of Good Spirit Lake 
Provincial Park in Part C of Schedule 1 is amended by 
striking out “, as shown on Plan 74 Y 10855 in the Land 
Titles Office for the Yorkton Land Registration District,”. 

 
Talking about Good Spirit, I’ve been there once and it is a very 
nice park. And there is no . . . we want more description, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, of what this entails. How this will affect the 
local landowners? Is there quite a bit of land being taken or is it 
just some boundaries that are being changed? 
 
Are the local landowners being notified of this . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . have they have stuff on that land that could be 
appropriated? Anytime you adjust a boundary anywhere, there 
is always impact on it. There is always a neighbour that your 
neighbouring . . . neighbour or joint landowner that should be 
consulted. And I’m hoping that they have been, but you never 
know with this government if they have been. And we will be 
asking more questions about this further on and doing some 
checking. 
 
And another thing, as you say, is getting back to the fees, there 
are also businesses in there. Will this hurt businesses in there 
with the fees and also with the changing of property there? 
 
I’ve read that there is a few people saying with the increased 
fees the business will be down. That they figure they’re not 
going to open their ice cream stands. Which also means fewer 
jobs and less student employment. 
 
But I believe the explanation on some of this Bill would . . . 
(inaudible) . . . some of this with some legal errors. In the legal 
land description of the Clearwater River Provincial Park. Now 
when them legal errors, when they were made, were they just 
typo’s? It doesn’t say in here — that’s another question I have 
— or when they were surveyed, were they surveyed wrong. 
Because if they were surveyed wrong, that means that that 
whole area should be resurveyed. If it has to be resurveyed it’s 
going to affect every owner in that area, plus all the 
neighbouring people that border on there. 
 
And why were these errors made in the first place is another 
question. How much is these errors going to cost? That’s 

another question with this Bill. 
 
As I say, there’s many concerns with this Bill that maybe at the 
surface it seems uncontroversial, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But as 
you look into it, I think you can see that it could affect a lot of 
people, a lot of cottage owners. 
 
It doesn’t say the land that they’re taking, if it’s right along the 
lake or if it’s further back. If it’s right along the lake, is it 
protected area? Is it area that’s going to be used for public use 
or is it protected, where let’s say there’s an endangered species 
on it, which possibly could be coyotes, as the members over 
there are hollering. They seem quite worried about coyotes, 
which I’m glad that they’re willing to protect them. 
 
Excuse me for taking a little bit of time, but I’m kind of 
listening to the banter back and forth of the members. It’s 
interesting. They keep hollering about coyotes. But one of the 
other problems in a lot of parks I believe is gophers. They’ve I 
believe caused a lot of trouble. So maybe they’ll start taxing 
them, or issue a licence to kill them in parks; I’m not sure. 
 
Another thing is, getting back to the fees and the people that are 
going to use these parks, are they going to be able to enjoy 
them, is the main thing. Will there be improvements to these 
parks? We don’t know. 
 
I know the licensing fees, the Saskatchewan for residential 
annual fishing licence has gone up 56 per cent. Saskatchewan 
resident three-day fishing licence has gone up 50 per cent. 
Canadian resident annual fishing has gone up 150 per cent. 
 
That’s another question that a member just raised over there, 
burrowing owls. Is there any . . . has this land, 97 hectares, 230, 
240 acres, has it been assessed by environmental assessment? Is 
there any endangered species nesting on it? Burrowing owls are 
an endangered species and are protected under the Canadian 
Wildlife Act I believe. And I don’t know if they were 
approached, if there was assessment done on that. And that 
should be taken . . . it should not be taken lightly, any wildlife 
on the endangered species list, or is this land being used 
because there is endangered species on it? 
 
Another one is the swift fox, whooping crane, and coyotes . . . 
No, I . . . (inaudible) . . . keep joking about that but we won’t 
mention that any more. But there are many, many different 
sandpipers . . . there are many different. There’s shorebirds, 
there’s nesting birds. 
 
And I think this Bill has to be looked at a little more closely. 
People that deal with the parks out there should be consulted, 
environmentalists, to make sure that this Bill is to do what it 
says it’s to do. Because any time a Bill is passed, all the people 
that it affects — and this when parks affects everybody in this 
country and in this province affects everybody — should be 
looked at and examined very carefully. 
 
(1515) 
 
So that is why I’m up talking about this Bill. And if I get time I 
would even like to go and take a look at this area someday. But 
I can’t . . . but unfortunately I can’t today, or in the next few 
days . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Possibly tonight. But I think 



682 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2000 

we’re going to be tied up tonight, maybe here. 
 
But no, it’s one of these issues . . . this is an issue that needs to 
be looked at, these Bills. It comes with the parks and recs and 
natural resources, which are very important, like I’ve stated 
before. And I don’t think we can state this enough — that our 
parks and natural resources are very important to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and they should be protected in the right way. 
 
There shouldn’t be any controversial or even the people that 
live around them — they’re the ones that really look after these 
parks. These are the people that ensure the wildlife thrives 
around them. And as long as any Act that goes through, any 
Bill, they should be consulted with that Bill to make sure that it 
fits into, also, into their needs. Because without the people that 
living beside these lakes, in these cottages, in these parks, or 
even landowners in the surrounding areas, they should all be 
consulted because without them the wildlife in the parks would 
find it a very hard time to survive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right now I would like to move that we adjourn 
debate on this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 9 — The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 1999 (No. 2) be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just 
wanted to add to some of the comments I made the other day in 
regards to The Child and Family Services Act (No. 2), Bill No. 
9, that we have before us this afternoon. 
 
As I indicated to the minister the other day, I was appreciative 
of the fact that the minister has begun to realize that there are 
some areas that were really lacking in the area of the 
Department of Social Services and how we look after children 
and look after — in this case — we’re talking about young 
adults. Young adults who would, by the age of 18 would not be 
considered a ward of the state in many cases, be left on their 
own to find their way in life. 
 
In view of the fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’ve just had a 
release from the child advocate in regards to the department and 
how young people are treated in this department, I think there 
are some issues in regards to this specific piece of legislation 
that certainly are appropriate. 
 
Considering the fact that on page 56 of the most recently 
released report we do have suggestions coming from that report, 
suggesting that the department has to do more to assist the 
needs of young men and women as they reach adulthood and as 
they look forward to a future; as they look forward to what they 
are going to make of themselves and the job opportunities that 
may be available. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you and I know that if anyone is 

going to find a quality job it doesn’t necessarily mean that 
having your grade 12 matric is all that’s needed anymore. I 
believe what we’re finding is people need more and additional 
education — whether it’s through a technical institute or 
whether it’s through a university. 
 
And I think and I believe that over the past number of years we 
have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have found that many young 
people, especially in foster care, have found themselves in a 
very difficult situation. And what do I mean by that? 
 
I mean a situation where they are now off of the rolls of the 
department and they are expected to continue — if you will, if 
they are seeking further education — they are expected to on 
their own try to find the assistance or gain the assistance that 
would be needed to help them and assist them in finding and 
pursuing further educational services in order to enhance their 
job capabilities. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the concern I have with that is the 
fact that an individual by themselves at 18 may be physically 
able of doing a number of things but in some cases may not be 
mentally capable of being able to really provide for themselves, 
and may not have all of the abilities, the wherewithal, or the 
mental capability, to make some of the choices or to understand 
exactly where they should be going. And so it certainly appears 
that this piece of legislation intends to assist in that regard. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a parent who now 
has two young lads who are currently pursuing further 
education, I have for the longest time felt that parents need to 
offer some assistance and need to be there, not only with 
financial assistance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but to offer words of 
encouragement as well and to help meet the emotional, the 
mental needs, of their children, of their teenagers, as they now 
kind of leave the security of the home environment and pursue 
their goals, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
As I say that, I suggest as well that many times . . . and I’m 
concerned about the fact that we seem to have many parents 
who feel once a child reaches 18, as the Department of Social 
Services seemed to indicate prior to this legislation or up until 
this legislation is actually enacted, many parents seem to feel 
that once your child has reached 18, it’s their responsibility as 
to how they pursue their goals and their work, the work or the 
lifestyle they would like to achieve as they become a young 
adult. 
 
My view has always been as parents — and I guess I take it 
personally — my personal view is that as a parent I still have 
some responsibility. And I view the fact that if our children 
choose to pursue further education, I don’t want to leave them 
saddled with a major debt load at the end of their . . . when they 
receive their educational degree, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we 
find so many young people today. 
 
They receive a university education and they find themselves 
sitting with 25, 30, or $50,000 loans before they really have an 
opportunity to find a full-time job, a job that would really pay 
the types of dollars that are needed to now build a home if they 
plan on doing that, or provide for themselves, provide for their 
material needs, even the purchasing of a home. They’re already 
finding themselves having to pay off loans, loans from their 



April 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 683 

schooling, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So what we have in this piece of legislation today is a 
recognition by the department that it has a responsibility as well 
to the needs of young men and women that have been entrusted 
into their care. And I would suggest to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that this piece of legislation was certainly needed, and 
it’s long overdue. And it’s certainly welcome to see. 
 
And I’m pleased to see that the department is beginning to 
recognize some of the responsibilities that it has to individuals 
in this province. That they can’t just look to people and say, 
well if you have a problem, come see us; we’ll provide you with 
care, we’ll look after you. And then once you reached a certain 
age, well sorry, we don’t have the resources any more to 
provide for that care. 
 
What this Bill, as I understand it, is doing is indicating and 
telling us that the department is beginning to understand that 
responsibility it carries. 
 
And I’m certain, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after the minister and his 
officials go through the report that was just tabled in this 
Assembly this afternoon, they will begin to recognize even 
more that they do have more of a responsibility than they have 
had on how they look after young children. 
 
It’s not just looking after children and their little babies, or 
under six years old or under 10 years old, but it’s looking after 
individuals, if they’re entrusted into the care of the department, 
up until the age when they really have the ability and they have 
the life skills to move forward and to find the employment and 
to put into practice the training that they have received in order 
to find the job that they would really like to . . . or find the 
vocation that they would really like to move forward in, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think those are just a few of the comments I 
would like to leave before this Assembly in regards to the piece 
of legislation that’s before us. I know some of my other 
colleagues would like to make some remarks as well, would 
like to make some comments, but I will look . . . I look forward 
to further debate and actually in-depth review of the piece of 
legislation when we get to Committee of the Whole. 
 
At this time, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’m pleased to take my seat and 
allow other members an opportunity to enter into the debate. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it is my pleasure to be able to comment on the 
proposed amendment to The Child and Family Services Act. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, as the member from Moosomin has 
pointed out, and the minister has pointed out, and the child 
advocate has pointed out, an extension of care and services to 
youth who are in care of the ministers is extremely important at 
this time, and I am really pleased that the child advocate has 
pointed out some necessary provisions, extended provisions for 
youth in care. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, just for the benefit of the public and the 
viewing people out in Saskatchewan that are viewing today, I 
would just like to read an explanation that the minister has for 

wanting this amendment and putting it forward. 
 
According to the minister’s explanation, this amendment will 
allow the minister to continue to provide support for permanent 
or long-term wards whose plans and needs for transition to 
adulthood are legitimate but do not fall within a typical 
definition of education. 
 
Such plans would include youth who require preparation for 
employment or youth with disabilities who require support for 
their mental or physical development. 
 
The amendment also clarifies that support may be in the form of 
payment and/or services and must be provided through an 
agreement between the minister and the youth. 
 
And further, in the minister’s second reading of the Bill, he 
points out a further clarification and expansion on this 
explanation, and the minister — I’m quoting from Hansard, 
December 17 — indicates that: 
 

The amendments would extend support to those who are 
continuing their education; do not plan to continue their 
education immediately but who require interim support to 
help them prepare for further education; (who) are 
intellectually challenged and require constant care or day 
programming such as sheltered workshops, that does not 
fall within the usual definition of education; or, plan to 
enter the workforce but require additional support to find 
and keep a job. 
 
As is currently the case, the minister may provide shelter, 
care, counselling, treatment, family services, or any 
combination of these, based on the individual need. For 
example, a young person may want to go back to complete 
high school but first needs to get counselling and treatment 
for his substance-abuse problem. 
 

And I end my quote there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have certainly some thoughts about some 
of the statements that the minister has made. It is always very 
important, in my interpretation, that when a Bill comes to the 
Table that there are certainly the means whereby the benefits of 
this Bill can be carried out for the benefit, in this case, of youth 
and children. 
 
I am not convinced that everything is in place in this province 
in order to have this amendment come into full effect for the 
youth of our province for those over 18 or over 16, Because, 
Mr. Deputy Chair, the minister points out that some youth may 
require addiction counselling, that some youth may need drug 
and alcohol counselling services and rehab. 
 
And I think that all members of the Assembly, and many people 
throughout the province, would recognize that there is right 
now inadequate services for youth who are in need of drug and 
alcohol counselling and rehab. And many people believe that 
the place, for instance in Saskatoon through the Calder Centre, 
is an inappropriate place for youth to be treated. So that is one 
of my concerns, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Another one is that if this Bill takes effect, it is necessary to 



684 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2000 

ensure that we have social workers in place that can assist in the 
monitoring of the plans that are in place for any individual 
youth. And we all know, as has been brought to the attention of 
the minister in the House a number of times, that there are such 
heavy caseloads for social workers. And that has already 
resulted in a lack of their ability to follow up on their cases. 
And it has resulted in them not being able to give the support 
that they so do want to give to children who are receiving 
protection or who are in foster homes. 
 
So the monitoring of any program or any initiative is very, very 
important. And I recognize that the social workers of the 
province would certainly be in agreement with extra assistance 
for our youth over 18. But I know that they would be equally 
concerned that their staffing, their numbers, are certainly 
adequate enough to address the need here. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Chair, I would like to adjourn because I do 
think that this Bill is very, very important and I think that it’s 
important that there is some further review of the contents of 
the amendment. And I also am hoping that there will be 
forthcoming information from stakeholders that would probably 
be helpful for us in leading us to give our consent to this Bill or 
not. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Deputy Chair, I do adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1530) 

Bill No. 13 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that Bill No. 13 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. First of all, please 
let me say that we are questioning the decision of this Act to 
amend The Department of Education Act. We are questioning 
the decision to move all sections dealing with post-secondary 
education into a separate Act. 
 
We’re not all that optimistic on this side of the House that this 
will make education more accessible or that it will save money 
or that it will provide more benefits for students. However, we 
do know that it will provide the opportunity for more ministers 
and their NDP and/or Liberal hacks to be hired. You can be sure 
of that. 
 
The amendments as laid out in this Bill cover off a number of 
areas and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those areas should be addressed 
on an individual basis. More specifically, the section that deals 
with setting up a separate school division based on minority 
faith and the rules and regulations surrounding this, require 
added input. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is also a section that deals with providing 
education for students with disabilities, as well as a section that 
deals with the tendering process for school divisions. It is our 
understanding, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a number of 
consultations were held in the drafting of this Bill. Among them 
were the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association; the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation; the League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents; and the 
Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials. 
 
It’s our hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the recommendations 
and suggestions as set out by these organizations would be 
taken into consideration and, where possible, included in the 
proposed legislation. After all, Mr. Speaker, it is those very 
organizations who represent and work very closely with 
teachers, administrators, and school boards. These organizations 
would know first hand how well current legislation is or is not 
working, and how the process might be changed that would see 
a positive effect on all those involved. 
 
Before I get into these areas, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
express our concerns about the status of education in the 
province today. Whether it be a separate or a public school, 
there can be no doubt that many issues must be addressed, Mr. 
Speaker, and these issues would certainly reflect on any 
proposed legislation dealing with education in the province. 
 
We would like to point out that the amount of money available 
for K to 12 education this year is just slightly better than half of 
what the Minister of Education says it is. He contends that 
funding was $29 million. In fact, actual fact, education funding 
for this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was a paltry 18.5 million. 
That will hardly cover off any negotiated raise in teachers’ 
salaries, should there be one. 
 
This amount also severely restricts the funding available for 
special programs and services. 
 
We must question: is increased funding for special programs 
and services addressed in this Bill? Well no, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it is not. Capital funding has been essentially frozen. 
And we’re wondering just how far that $5 million coming from 
the Centenary Capital Fund will go, given the number of school 
divisions waiting for capital approval. 
 
There are many schools across the province who are waiting, 
and some of them have been waiting for a number of years. 
They are waiting to hear that their requests to have 
improvements done, repairs made, or additions built have been 
approved. 
 
School boards have seen their government grant money drop 
substantially in the past number of years. In fact, more than 
$380 million in funding has been cut by the NDP government 
since 1992. 
 
So what does that mean for the taxpayers of this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? In short, they are the ones — the taxpayers are 
the ones — that the school divisions have turned to for help in 
topping up their education money. Taxpayers have seen their 
property taxes increase to the point that tax revolt meetings are 
not now so much a rarity as a general occurrence. 
 
The general operating grant formula, Mr. Speaker, is widely 
accepted to be a 60/40 split where the government should be 
providing 60 per cent of the money and the local tax base is to 
provide the rest. Well that formula is hardly the norm any 
longer. 
 



April 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 685 

In numerous school divisions, the local tax base provides for 
over 70 per cent of the funding. In some school divisions, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, operating funding for education has been 
completely eliminated. This means, Mr. Speaker, that the 
taxpayers in those districts are completely funding the 
education in those areas. 
 
Does this Bill address the current lack of operation grant 
funding from the government? No, it doesn’t. It does not, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Also, as a result of lack of funding we’ve seen program cuts. 
We’ve seen some schools closed and teachers have either left 
their profession or left this province altogether. 
 
Who would want to work in the conditions that the teachers 
have to work in? The teacher-student ratio has increased 
dramatically. Many teachers now find their classrooms so large 
that they are concerned about providing quality education to all 
students. 
 
And I ask the Minister of Education, I ask him to bear in mind 
that the ratio in his office might be 1:10. In many classrooms, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the ration is 1:25 or 30, or sometimes even 
higher. With cuts in funding many teachers have begun to buy 
their own materials for use in the classroom. We’re not talking 
about a special kind of paper or a felt marker, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’re talking about books, and videos, and those 
things that a teacher thinks are important learning aids. 
 
We would also like to point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in 
February of this year the Minister of Education sent a letter to 
school divisions across the province urging them not to sign on 
with the Youth News Network. The Youth News Network, or 
YNN, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a highly controversial network 
based out of eastern Canada that provides monitors, computers, 
lab equipment, and other necessary items to those schools that 
agree to broadcast their commercially sponsored, 
youth-oriented news programs. 
 
Well the issue for us, Mr. Speaker, is not so much the issue of 
exposing students to commercial content during school time, a 
total of two and a half minutes, Mr. Speaker, which when you 
compare that to what the average student might watch at home 
seems not all that high a number. No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
issue for us is if there is no money for capital purchases, and if 
there is no money for special programs, and if there is no 
indication that any money will be available in the future, what 
choices do schools have? 
 
It should come as no surprise that seven schools in the province 
have already signed up with YNN, and we can only imagine 
that there will be more to come. It concerns us to hear the 
Minister of Education say that if school boards aren’t happy 
with their current fiscal situation, that they should just simply 
raise the mill rate. 
 
That’s very easy for him to say, Mr. Speaker. He should 
remember that he too is being funded by taxpayers’ dollars. In 
fact there are two ministers of Education being funded by 
taxpayers’ dollars. One of them is K to 12, and the other of 
course is post-secondary. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in addressing the section dealing with setting up 
separate school divisions based on minority faith, I would like 
to point out that we recognize and respect that many religions 
are practised within the province. Those residents practising in 
the Catholic or Protestant religion are recognized as being a 
minority faith. Current legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, allows 
residents of a minority faith to set up a separate school division. 
However, this is based on old boundaries as set out a number of 
decades ago. 
 
The proposed amendments will change the boundaries that 
currently exist to reflect a more modern approach. Although 
given the hon. members opposite latest project — and I use that 
term very loosely, Mr. Speaker — regarding setting boundaries 
in rural areas; we are obviously less than optimistic about what 
might happen to school division boundaries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would ask that any changes to boundaries 
should be voluntary and should have the complete agreement of 
the communities affected. Again, not something that the 
members opposite would know much about. 
 
In keeping with the fact that school divisions are allowed to set 
their own assessment rates, we find it necessary to raise the 
issue again — that assessment rates, as set by current board 
officials, hardly go far enough to cover off funding in those 
districts. 
 
School boards have been left with no choice but to keep raising 
the rates to maintain the education status quo. Again this Bill 
does not address the issue of the lack of funding for education, 
Mr. Speaker. Whether it be a separate school or a public school, 
and to meet education demands, the assessment rate will no 
doubt be ever increasing. 
 
There is also a section that deals with providing education for 
students with disabilities. It is widely recognized that today’s 
practices see individualized programs and integration into 
regular classroom settings for students with disabilities. Mr. 
Speaker, our major concern here is that the teacher-student ratio 
is very high, no matter how the student numbers break down. 
 
While student aides are available for those teachers with special 
needs students, the fact remains that teachers today are very 
worried about providing a solid, quality level of education for 
all students in their classroom. 
 
Again, this Bill does not address the high teacher-student ratio, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The final section that I’d like to discuss is the section dealing 
with school division tendering. The old amounts have been 
replaced with new figures. And that should reflect a more 
modern and workable set of numbers. In the past, the amounts 
allowed before tendering was to be done was so low that 
schools found themselves tendering on everything no matter 
how small the transaction. 
 
We’re concerned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that tendering in rural 
areas may not necessarily be the best way to do things. Mr. 
Speaker, in order for the rural communities to survive, local 
labour markets must be utilized. 
 



686 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2000 

We are told that school divisions would have preferred that the 
tendering numbers be even higher than what is set out in this 
Bill. This would allow for greater flexibility. In fact, the school 
divisions would have preferred that the same numbers used in 
interprovincial trade agreement be the same numbers used in 
the local tendering process. 
 
This would simplify things greatly for the school divisions, Mr. 
Speaker. School divisions would only have one process to work 
within, and as I just mentioned it would allow for greater 
flexibility when it came to capital purchases and the tendering 
process. 
 
As everyone knows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the tendering process 
does not allow for a lot of leeway. School divisions know best 
how to handle their own local decisions, especially when that 
comes to major purchases or capital projects. They have their 
own local base of suppliers, and they have their own local base 
of contractors. And I say again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, rural areas 
need to access and utilize their own labour market to survive. 
 
With all this being said, school divisions are still held 
accountable for all their expenditures. They must answer to 
their taxpayers, the local people who fund the education in that 
area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are concerned that there remain some issues in 
this Bill that need to be addressed further, and to that end we 
ask that we be allowed to adjourn debate. And I do that very 
thing — I adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1545) 
 

Bill No. 6 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 6 — The 
Mentally Disordered Persons Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am pleased 
to stand today to speak to the Act to amend The Mentally 
Disordered Persons Act. I have . . . we have had a number of 
calls to the office regarding this Act, and actually a number of 
people who are asking what the changes will actually mean. So 
I’m going to run through the changes in the Act before we give 
our ideas on it to date. 
 
This Act is talking about the most vulnerable people in our 
society, and the proposed changes upon amending the Act state 
that upon appeal the Court of Queen’s Bench can ask the 
individual in question to submit to a medical or psychiatric 
exam. The court will then make a decision as to the person’s 
competency, and the certificate will remain in effect or can be 
revoked. 
 
The Court of Queen’s Bench decision can be appealed to the 
Court of Appeal but only if they have permission from a judge 
to do so. The appeal can be made by the individual in question, 

his or her nearest relative, a public trustee, a chief psychiatrist 
involved, or any other person the court directs. The Court of 
Appeal must be convinced of the merit in proceeding with the 
appeal, and the amendment also gives immunity from liability 
to the review panel, and this was previously not provided for. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we’re talking about people with 
mental disorders, it is definitely the most vulnerable people in 
society we’re talking about. And when we approach and amend 
the Act dealing with them, we have to be very careful that all 
aspects are covered. 
 
Certainly it is important we take care of those who cannot take 
care of themselves, and at the same time we must recognize and 
respect the rights of all individuals. 
 
If someone has been declared competent by either a psychiatrist 
or a judge, we have to question: why wouldn’t that decision be 
binding? How many times do we have to go back to find out if 
this is actually the right decision or not? 
 
Instead, with proposed legislation to amend the Act, that 
decision can be appealed to the Court of Queen’s Bench, either 
by a psychiatrist, a family member, or another individual who 
may be involved. It seems like almost anyone could appeal that 
decision. Then a medical or psychiatric exam, or both, can be 
ordered. The individual must submit to those exams as ordered 
and it would seem that the individual in question doesn’t really 
have any choice in the matter. 
 
Again we have to ask: are their rights being recognized and 
respected? Based on the decision of the Court of Queen’s 
Bench, competency or incompetency will then be declared. 
 
And if someone doesn’t agree with that decision it can be 
appealed to the Court of Appeal. And we have to ask how far 
these cases will be taken? And who really loses in these 
situations? The individual, the family and more importantly, 
society as a whole. 
 
We acknowledge that there may be cases of financial abuse 
going on at all times. But we’re wondering about the true extent 
of this type of abuse and how wide-spread it is and how much 
evidence there is that this is prevalent? 
 
Expediency seems to be the major concern with everything 
these days. With the ability to appeal a decision on an 
individual’s competency more than once, how long will the 
cases go on. Can it take months? Can it take years? If a case is 
before the courts and if there really is financial abuse occurring, 
does this really address the problem of stopping the abuse from 
happening further. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we saw the government change their mind 
on the closure of the three court houses in Saskatchewan. They 
did recognize that there was definitely not going to be a . . . it 
was definitely not going to be to the benefit of the people of this 
province to have these court houses closed. They would . . . We 
knew that the court lists in this province are larger, the waiting 
lists are extremely long, and when we have court houses closed 
it’s definitely not going to help the caseloads and the court 
houses. 
 



April 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 687 

And we have to worry about the individuals too. They already 
have to do a tremendous amount of travelling to get to the court 
houses, especially in rural Saskatchewan. We look at added 
expenses, we look at the travel, the lodging, and the food it 
takes before they can get to the court houses. And we have to 
remember that the needs of the people are the most important. 
We have to keep their needs in mind at all times. They are the 
ones that are most affected. 
 
And given the current state of our health care system, we have 
to ask how easy it will be to get a medical or psychiatric 
examination. The waiting lists for all examinations and 
surgeries and health care needs is extremely long. And when we 
have people waiting to have an examination done before they 
can go ahead to the court, it’s definitely going to create a 
problem. People will have to wait weeks or even months. 
 
And again what if these individuals, and his or her family, has 
to travel and stay somewhere else and eat out at restaurants? 
Who’s going to cover those expenses? And again we are afraid 
that this is going to do nothing more than drag out the whole 
process. 
 
We have to remember, Mr. Speaker, that these cases use 
taxpayers’ dollars. And every day in this House we talk about 
taxpayers’ dollars and wonder if we’re spending them wisely. 
And we have to be prudent as to how these dollars are being 
spent. And this legislation will add some more burden to our 
already overburdened court system. 
 
The people that were consulted in this Bill were the chief 
psychiatrists, the official representatives and chairs of the 
review panels from all eight mental health regions. The regional 
directors for mental health were also consulted. 
 
And I know that anyone that works within the health system 
recognizes that the money spent on mental health in this 
province is not very much. We forget to remember that mental 
health has a lot to do with people’s physical health as well, and 
we have to recognize that these dollars have to be spent wisely. 
 
This Bill also takes care of the liability and immunity clause in 
all cases. But we have to ask what about the law society. We 
have to ask if their input was sought for this Bill. It’s quite 
possible that they would have some interesting facts and ideas 
and suggestions as to how efficient this Bill is going to be. They 
are the ones who actually know the court system and they 
would know how best to handle these types of cases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that any one of them would be able to 
speak at length about the amount of time these cases will take 
and how long they’re going to hold up the court system. They’d 
be able to speak about the cost to the individuals and to their 
families. And they would be able to speak about the toll on the 
court case it takes on . . . the toll it takes on everyone’s mental, 
physical, and financial health. 
 
Were people who’ve gone through this type of situation actually 
consulted? Have they been talked to? And was their input 
considered? Perhaps the family of the individuals who have 
gone through this might have some interesting facts to point 
out. And I believe that we should be looking at their 
suggestions and ideas and be ready to look at their ideas and the 

input when we address this legislation. After all, it is the people 
that these Bills will be affecting the most and it is the people we 
represent. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at all the questions that we have 
regarding this Bill and the impact it’s going to have on the 
people that it’s supposed to be protecting, we ask that this Bill 
be adjourned and the debate be adjourned on this Bill. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to ask the minister if she’d . . . 
wishes to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. With the associate minister 
and myself today are the deputy minister, Glenda Yeates; the 
associate deputy minister, Steven Pillar; the assistant deputy 
minister, Carol Klassen; assistant deputy minister, Marlene 
Smadu; executive director of finance and management services, 
Rod Wiley; and the executive director of corporate information 
and technology, Neil Gardner. 
 
As well we have other officials at the back. So we’re prepared 
for you. 
 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees, 
Deputy Chair of Committees, and certainly minister and 
associate minister and all your officials. Welcome this 
afternoon. 
 
As you are all collectively and individually aware, the whole 
area of health care and the delivery of health care in the 
province is a very massive undertaking. And I can appreciate 
where you need a good number of officials to be here for these 
estimates and to be able to be knowledgeable on the various 
components of the health care program and budget. 
 
I intend today to focus on one item and, for the record, I intend 
to in the course of these estimates focus on one item rather than 
bouncing all over the place. And I will endeavour, if possible, 
to give the ministers and your department as much lead time as 
is available in terms of what that direction is. 
 
I think you can appreciate though, today I only knew that 
Health was coming up at the last minute, and there were other 
programs. So as much as possible I certainly will endeavour to 
give you some lead time in terms of the focus at least that I 
endeavour to be on. 
 
Madam Minister and Assembly, of course the whole challenge 
that we all face as politicians and as officials and professionals 
working in the health care system is to try on an ongoing basis 
to improve the system and make the delivery of health care both 
effective and efficient as possible, but also timely and of a 



688 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2000 

nature that the people of this province can indeed rely on it in a 
timely way. 
 
And I think that certainly as a general rule since we’re starting 
this — and as the minister would know, I’m the new critic in 
the health area, as and compared to the tasks that I had in the 
past — but I would endeavour to take some of the general 
direction that I had in the past. And certainly in my past life as 
critic of Finance and Economic Development particularly, I did 
ask questions that were not only for my edification, but also for 
the people that are interested in the process and interested in 
what the responses are. So I think there’s an importance in not 
only informing this Assembly and this House, but also people 
that are watching it. 
 
And so for the record I do appreciate the fact that the associate 
minister offered the opportunity for me to be briefed about 
SHIN. But I really do believe that this is a more appropriate 
forum, if you like, to have that information shared not only with 
myself and the official opposition but also other members of the 
Assembly and the people that are watching or are interested in 
information that they might pick up through the Internet or 
other sources of information. 
 
So with that general comment, Mr. Chair, and, Madam 
Minister, I would ask you to, if you would, is to give an 
overview of the SHIN project in a general sense as to what its 
background was, what progress has been made to date in a very 
general sense — we’ll work on some specifics as the hour 
progresses — and also what your vision is and direction and 
commitment that you see your government’s direction for the 
SHIN project. 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. SHIN was 
established in 1997 and the objective at that point was to 
develop an information system for the province’s health system. 
And SHIN to this date has developed a basic infrastructure. We 
started off — and like I said before to the member opposite that 
I was on the original board of SHIN — and what we started off 
with was a very intense round of stakeholder consultations 
because we had to . . . we were starting to build something that 
people were not familiar with. 
 
The health sector is the last major sector to move into the 
information age and it’s . . . there’s varying levels of 
competency and skill in using computers and technology. So 
what we had to do was start to talk to the stakeholders, and we 
spent a great deal of time as a SHIN entity talking to 
stakeholders in that first year in ’97-98. 
 
And from there one of the key things that people told us was, 
their interest was in confidentiality and privacy protection. So 
from that The Health Information Protection Act developed and 
was passed in this House last session. 
 
The SHIN entity itself has developed a basic infrastructure very 
slowly as we looked at what we could do for $40 million. We 
wanted to make sure that we built what we could actually use 
and that would stay here no matter what we did in the future — 
that we’d still be able to use this and we would get good value 
for our money. 

To date we have the infrastructure in place; we have a help desk 
for all the districts can use. We assisted the districts in Y2K 
preparation so that what they bought was compatible with the 
whole provincial infrastructure of information technology, and 
have since then added to the basic infrastructure, added projects 
as they came. 
 
The interest was there as the ability to do it was there, and those 
projects have been added on as bricks to a house. We have the 
basement, we have the infrastructure which will always be in 
place; and we have then built the projects on top of the 
infrastructure, which is why we have been successful in 
comparison to our neighbouring province and why other 
provinces and ourselves are working in a collaborative way to 
share our resources and the things we’ve learned. Because we 
have been successful in getting good value for our money. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I’d like to focus on some of the comments that you 
have made in your answer. 
 
You said initially there was a great deal of consultative work 
that was done with stakeholders across the province. Was that 
done in light of reviewing what the existing manual or paper 
system, if you like — I don’t know what the right technological 
word is — I mean a non-electronic system, if you like. 
 
For example, I understand that the college of physicians and 
surgeons has a program in place where there’s checks and 
balances for duplicate prescriptions on narcotics or things of 
that nature, so it’s a double or triplicate system that is in force 
to try to, you know, make sure there isn’t double prescribing 
and double utilization. 
 
So was that consultation process first of all then to identify what 
was happening right now, and then to identify what 
opportunities there were for the electronic system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The original consultation was with a 
broad, broad group of stakeholders. And basically there was a 
great deal of concern among the stakeholder groups that, what 
were we going to do, like what were we going to do with the 
money, how we were going to bring it into place in their 
workplaces. 
 
The biggest concern that came out of the workshop, the two-day 
workshop that was held, was the privacy issue and how we 
were going to . . . So people weren’t actually concerned about 
so much what was in place — although that came out loud and 
clear, that what we had now was not secure, our paper system, 
that what we had now was not efficient for an integrated system 
— but people wanted to be reassured that what we were going 
to do would be cost-effective, that would benefit the system as 
well as them as stakeholders and workers, and that we would 
actually be able to see results that would put the system in a 
better situation. 
 
The consultations about different projects as they come up now, 
that consultation is almost continuous; groups know about 
SHIN and they know the ability to add on to the project . . . or 
add projects on to the infrastructure. So the doctors with the 
triplicate prescription thing have come forward and said, we 
could use something, can we get in, can you help us. 



April 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 689 

The CAT (computerized axial tomography) scanner, 
transferring images on that technology now — the districts, 
they want that. So wherever we’ve got a CAT scanner that we 
need to have that technology, we can hook that up for them. 
 
So people are constantly being consulted and are constantly 
coming forward and saying, could we do this, can you send 
somebody out and we’ll talk to them about this. Prince Albert, 
with their maternal child program and other districts that have 
come forward with different things that they want to see piloted, 
it’s starting to now . . . you can now see the building that’s 
going to happen. It’s quite exciting now. 
 
In the beginning it was very complex. It was very difficult to 
see what you were doing, like to actually hold the project in 
your hand, to go out and see a site. But that infrastructure is 
now in place and now you can start to see actually the projects 
that can be demonstrated to be of extreme value. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You 
mentioned that one of the issues that were raised as a great 
concern at the initial time was the issue of confidentiality and 
privacy. And I believe it was in the last session there was the 
legislation passed, the confidential and protection Act or 
patients’ protection Act. Has that Bill been proclaimed? 
 
I understand that there had been some issues raised around it in 
regard to law enforcement and some of those issues, about a 
need in some instances for certain agencies to actually have 
access to files other than a strictly medical communities’ 
requirement. Can you update us on where that whole process is? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The Health Information Protection Act 
which was passed last year has not been proclaimed as yet. 
We’re still developing the regulations. The issue about the 
media and access of police is not the biggest issue that we’re 
dealing with; but there are some regulations that are still being 
developed and we’ll be bringing that forward as soon as 
possible — the proclamation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Can you share with us what the issues are? I 
mean I think there were concerns about, you know, who has 
access to the system; you know, what is the security system that 
would be in place on the electronic system. I know there are 
great advances in encryption technology and things of that 
nature that are occurring. In terms of the actual electronic 
transfer, I don’t think is much of an issue. It really has to do 
probably with levels of passwording, who has access to those 
passwords, what level of protection and access does each level 
of passwording occur? 
 
Would you brief us on what are the other issues and the access 
of media and the legal community that you’re dealing with and 
trying to cope with under these regulations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. Some of the issues . . . there’s 
some issues around prescription drug, access to . . . it’s 
basically access to the information. The Act was put in place 
with some pretty clear indication of who collects the 
information and then who has access to it. But the details of 
how that works through a whole health system are pretty 
complex. So that is what’s being dealt with now. 
 

But the encryption is very important, so that is what we’re 
focusing on — the security of the information, including 
encrypted and secure e-mail, as well as audit trails. So people 
who are on . . . who access the system — we have a check to 
see who’s been in there and you can follow back and find out if 
that person was actually authorized to do so. And then there are 
penalties to follow. 
 
But the basic, the answer to your question about what’s taking 
the time with the regulations is the complexity of the system 
and how to apply the Act through all of the system. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, I appreciate that and it 
undoubtedly is fairly complex. Do you have a timeline when 
you believe you will have the regulations in place and 
consequently will be able to proclaim the legislation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We anticipate having the regulations 
ready, the draft regulations ready by the summer of this year, 
and then the draft regulations will go out to the stakeholders for 
consultation, so we could come back next spring with the 
proclamation from the regulations. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Going back to a bit of 
the network itself and its current status you said that — I 
believe you said and I was trying to take notes — but you 
indicated that the districts were at some level of . . . on the 
network or is there just local notes set up or are you building the 
basic technological framework for the districts? 
 
Could you go into a little more detail as to where the districts 
are now in regard to the whole project? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. There’s approximately . . . 
there’s 22 districts that are connected now to the system, and as 
the districts come forward with different programs that they 
want to have, we will build those connections for them. For 
example, Prince Albert within their maternal child one. They 
came forward with that so they now come into the system. 
 
So it’s basically building blocks of programs, but the 
infrastructure is there so that we have the capacity to put every 
district on that has something that they want to add to the 
system or be connected to the system in any way. 
 
And so we’ve got the college of physicians and surgeons on, 
we’ve got pharmacies on, and those basic connections in the 
districts. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, and I’m not a computer 
whiz, but I have a little bit of understanding how they work. 
Does each of the local districts then have a local network that 
would then have a number stations, etc., that would then, you 
know, sort of connect as a hub to the major network. And at the 
district level then, have you provided the direction and guidance 
and the criteria, like, so there’s complete compatibility with the 
hardware and software that they’re buying. I would like to 
understand what’s in the system a little clearer. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Basically what we do have in place is 
standards so that each district is able to connect into the 



690 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2000 

network, and then we assist them to do that when they’re ready, 
when they have a program ready. 
 
I don’t know if that answers your question exactly. But they 
don’t all, like, they don’t all have the same capacity. They don’t 
all have the same technology yet, but as they get it we supply 
the expertise and the help. 
 
We have a provincial help desk so that they can come and test 
programs out in an area where they don’t have to put it into 
their system first. They can bring it into the help desk, try it out, 
see if there’s any problems, run it, and then take it back and put 
it in place and get it going up in their district. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So the SHIN’s budget doesn’t include the 
capital cost of providing hardware at the local district level, as 
an example, that allows the district then to access the network. 
Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Basically what we’re doing, the districts 
purchase their own computers but we supply the infrastructure 
and we help them connect. But they actually buy their own 
stations and computers; we don’t buy those usually. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — By the infrastructure, Madam Minister, do 
you mean the software, the cable connections, or those sorts of 
things — is that what you mean? So that there is the ability to 
dial into the network? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Basically we’re getting into computer 
language now. So what we’ve got are the big computers, the big 
databases, the servers, what they call the integration engines. 
This is something that we supply centrally and then they are 
able to connect in so that they can actually . . . everything can 
flow through. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Are the districts then . . . well at this stage I 
understand they’re not connected. But the protocols, if you like, 
are established, and things of that nature. So that when they do 
connect or want to connect, that the standards and protocols and 
all the rest of it are in place. 
 
Is this work I’m sure being done in conjunction with SaskTel 
and are you looking at standard Internet or high speed access, or 
are you looking at cable or fibre optic? What are the criteria or 
the general things that you’re looking at, how sophisticated? 
 
I guess what I’m getting at, for a district, are you working in 
conjunction with SaskTel for an example. Because in my 
community, for example, there isn’t a general provision of high 
speed Internet yet. Is that the kind of provision we need that 
works hand and glove with this system as these protocols are 
developed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Basically SaskTel has been a partner since 
the beginning of SHIN. And that’s exactly what they are 
supplying, is the fibre optics. And as the technology changes, 
then we need to develop new things. And that’s what we’ll be 
doing with our partners. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So is the protocol set up that it requires, for 
example high speed Internet? And my concern is, like where are 
the general level of protocol levels or system levels? And does 

SaskTel have to do a fair bit of work in order to meet the 
standards required for districts, in rural areas particularly, to 
access the system appropriately. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — In the districts that have the Internet 
access, we’re using that of course. And otherwise, we’re using 
. . . the system is using the 56 kilobit lines, kilobit lines — yes, 
exactly. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, we’ll get into the 
breakdown of the budget a bit later, but I understand that there 
was a contract that was undertaken to quarterback, or to 
spearhead or project management on this, if you like, by 
Science Applications International Corporation. And that this 
was a three-year contract and it is due to expire fairly shortly. 
Can you confirm that that general understanding is correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The contract with SAIC (Science 
Applications International Corporation) is up this year; it was a 
three-year contract. And we’re in discussions with them now, 
where we go from here. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Can you tell 
us what the basic tenets of the contract were, and for what 
dollar figure it was for the three years? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The basic contract for SAIC, which is 
administered by the SHIN board, it was for $38 million. And 
that $38 million flows through SAIC as the lead contractor, and 
they subcontract the work also to other partners. So the money, 
the 38 million, is what SAIC is using to build the network, to 
build the programs, etc. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, I believe the information 
in general terms is, by the end of this fiscal year the 
commitment to SHIN is something around $40 million. Is that 
correct? And of that $40 million, if I understand what you’re 
saying, $38 million is to the general contractor. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The $38 million was to actually build 
SHIN. So at the direction of the board, SAIC is the partner that 
is the lead contractor to build what we had given to them, what 
our vision was. And so they subcontracted to other groups, like 
SaskTel, and the money, the 38 million which hasn’t all been 
disbursed, flows through SAIC to fulfill those obligations. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So as I understand it, there’s detailed 
statements of work that are required in order for this contract 
. . . And I won’t use the acronym if you don’t mind; I get crazy 
with some of these things. But the statements of work are then 
the breakdown . . . or the individual total of all the statements of 
work, is that going to add up to the $38 million? Or is there 
general provisions over and above what the detailed statements 
of work are? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Basically the statements of work are what 
the board saw that how SAIC was moving the project forward. 
It divided up the project into pieces that the board could 
actually look at and say this is what we were getting; this is 
where we were going. And that’s how I understood it even as a 
board member. 
 
Does that answer your question? 



April 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 691 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Well that’s getting closer. What I wanted to 
know is that you’ve indicated the total contract to SAIC is $38 
million, and you’ve indicated as well or acknowledged that 
some component of that $38 million would be the statements of 
work. 
 
Now what I’m getting at, can you table for us what the 
statements of work are and how much individually were each of 
them, and will they total $38 million? Or is there a contingency 
or an umbrella amount over and above that, over and above the 
statement of work total to get to the $38 million? 
 
What I’m looking for is like a statement of expenses and detail 
of where you’ve spent the money. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We will get the breakdown of the $38 
million for you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And will that include . . . that will include 
then the subcontracts for example with SaskTel. And could you 
include some description about what service was provided? If 
for example there was a contract with SaskTel for X number of 
dollars, for what services did SaskTel actually provide services 
in order to qualify for that? And if that was under the statements 
of work or outside of them, I’d really much appreciate that 
breakdown. 
 
My understanding is that the contract is going to expire in June 
of this year, which is not all that far off. Can you update us in 
terms of is there going to be a continuity to the project. Or are 
you discussing with other deliverers of services to potentially be 
the people that will be in the subsequent contract? Or where are 
we at on the contract? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think given that we’re in discussions with 
SAIC, I don’t want to prejudice our negotiations with what 
we’re going to be doing. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Okay. Madam Minister, I guess where I was 
heading on that is, given that you’re going to give us this 
information on the details of the $38 million that you’ve spent, 
where would you rate the completion of this project? Is it a 
quarter done; a half done? Do you envisage that? 
 
In order to get it fully meeting the expectation that you and the 
stakeholders set out and that SHIN describes as where they 
want to go as a fully integrated and electronic system of 
information sharing, how much money do you see is going to 
be required in order to get this project meeting those 
expectations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — It’s difficult to estimate what a system like 
this would cost at the end, and we don’t know where the end is 
either, since technology changes so rapidly. What we’re trying 
to do is build it incrementally so that we get what we need now, 
and we have a basic system that we can continue to add onto as 
technology advances, and as our needs demonstrate, and as our 
stakeholders ask, and as our finances allow. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, certainly, you know, 
we’ve talked about in question period that a province to the 

east, Manitoba, and many other provinces — and I believe 
states in the United States and various jurisdictions — are 
proceeding along similar broad direction, if you like, as what 
we are with SHIN. 
 
And as you are aware undoubtedly, that really it sounds like 
they’re pulling the plug on the whole project in Manitoba, or 
indeed have done. Or they’re not sure maybe what’s going on 
here, but the information that we received is that they did an 
audit of the system and had some grave concerns about the 
cost-effectiveness and how the money was spent. And certainly 
that’s where we want to see, is where the $38 million has been 
spent, and have some expectation for how much is going to be 
spent. 
 
These kinds of electronic networks can become real black holes 
of expenditures. And in light of the fact that a neighbouring 
jurisdiction is expressing grave concern about what has 
happened in their jurisdiction, what I’m concerned about is 
what are the checks and balances that you’re putting into place 
to make sure we don’t get into the same situation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think that’s why you’re seeing this 
system being built so slowly. That if we quit now, we’d still 
have what we have to date. We would still have the 
infrastructure. We’d still have the programs that are on already. 
We’d still be able to say, here’s what we spent our money on 
and here’s the value we got for it. 
 
The Provincial Auditor has audited SHIN and has approved the 
financial statements. So we do have value for our money. And 
we’ve done it very carefully and very slowly because of just the 
problems that our neighbouring province had. That we saw . . . I 
mean you could spend a fair amount of money on technology 
but not knowing what you actually need, and in doing it this 
slowly, where you’re going to go with it. You can end up in 
problems like we have seen. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, Madam Minister, without having the 
information that you’ve undertaken to give me in terms of how 
the $38 million has been spent, it’s difficult to give an 
assessment if we’ve gotten good value or not. But in a general 
sort of sense, I . . . You know from what you’ve described of 
the system there isn’t a whole lot really in place. A lot of it 
sounds as if it’s research, it was discussion, it was that sort of 
information. And you know I think that we’ll want to have a 
good look at those sorts of things because value is a very 
relative thing. I mean $38 million is a lot of money, and I’m 
concerned about where we’re going. 
 
Madam Minister, where does your government see the 
long-term direction of SHIN in terms of . . . is this . . . Like are 
you committed to it? Is this an important thing for the health 
care system in Saskatchewan? Is this something that is one of 
the important building blocks of building a better health care 
system in the province? 
 
I would like to give you an opportunity to really sort of share 
where your government is going in this whole SHIN project. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — You asked sort of two questions, so I’m 
going to do the first one — the one about the money — so 
that’ll give you some example of what’s been spent where. And 



692 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2000 

some of this is going to be the names of the projects. So like 
Care Vision Electronic Health Record, we’ve got 300 licences 
at a cost . . . for the configuration of the software for $3 million. 
 
The network design including the deployment of network 
services for our pilot project in the southwest, which is 
connecting the physicians, health district offices in six 
communities and the scheduling in office software is 1 million. 
 
Network infrastructure, architecture security design and 
interface engine and encryption is $3 million. The test lab 
production data centre and support centre is $3 million. 
 
A cost for the projects implemented to date include staff 
training and deployment of 34 work stations serving 120 health 
providers, physicians, and district health staff in the southwest 
for $2 million. 
 
Physician registry, drug network, e-mail, and triplicate drug 
system deployment is $2 million. Year 2000 support and advice 
to districts, 1 million; operation of the network and central 
infrastructure, $3 million. And the list goes on and on. 
 
And the second question about commitment to the system, or to 
information technology, the health system, as I’ve said, is 
probably the last system — the last major sector — to become 
involved in information technology. As a health system you 
can’t function without good information. We need to make 
evidence-based decisions to where to spend our money, the best 
value for our money; we need to talk about admission discharge 
systems and transfer systems. 
 
We’re talking about an integrated system with . . . if you’re 
going to talk about an integrated system, you’ve got to have an 
information system in place to do that. So SHIN is not just a 
stand-alone project that is a frill on the edge of the health 
system; it is integral to where the health system is going. 
 
The information technology is absolutely crucial to having a 
system integrated properly that will work properly. And the 
flow through of people and information will give us the best 
decisions that we make and for deployment of staff, services, 
resources, all those things. We need that information. 
 
So it is a strong commitment to an information system. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. And I’m hoping in 
your commitment to give me this information that you’ll put 
some detail to it. I’m sort of looking at how the thing was 
broken down and those sorts of things. 
 
A further question. In some of these . . . in the statements that 
are released at the end of the year or whatever, there it actually 
shows that contracts that are awarded; anybody in the province 
that receives a contract over X number of dollars is listed. 
 
That’s the kind of detail I guess I’m looking for. You know, the 
same standards of public disclosure as there would be under 
those sort of terms. I’m not looking for anything that’s 
confidential or sensitive beyond that, but basically to the same 
criteria of detail because I think it’s important. 
 
Madam Minister, I appreciate your comments about where you 

see this system. And from what I hear you saying, I really 
detect that you’re saying it’s the underpinning of how the 
system is going to work together really. It is the vehicle or the 
tool that’s going to allow for integration into the system of 
communication and sharing of information. 
 
What do you say to the detractors that are out there that are 
saying that not only is the total commitment unnecessary — and 
it may grow to twice or more total dollar cost than what we 
have right now — but there are those out there that will say that 
the $38 million is really wasted, that the system wasn’t broke, 
and the $38 million could have been spent much more 
appropriately. How do you answer those critics? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think basically much of that is included 
in the answers that I’ve given before about how the system will 
work and how necessary it is to have it work that way. 
 
When we look at admission discharge transfer, you need to 
have an integrated system in a district, and in a province even, 
for some of the specialized services that are maybe particular 
only to Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
And for an emergency response system you need to have good, 
solid information and good, solid technology to hook you up. 
And I think that people that . . . the stakeholders certainly now 
know that there is value to this. The SMA (Saskatchewan 
Medical Association), the college of physicians and surgeons — 
they are very keen on having more of this done. The districts 
are quite keen on doing it. There’s opportunities for now 
hand-held computers for health providers. So you can see the 
benefit of this in home care and in long-term care. 
 
There are some things that are coming, you know, that are quite 
exciting for talking about the amount of work and the time 
spent doing charting or unnecessary paperwork that people are 
trapped in. 
 
So I think that basically people that would look at the system 
may see that it’s extremely complex to try and put an 
information technology system in place. And what we’ve done 
with our $40 million, or what we’ve done with what we’ve 
spent so far, is to build the infrastructure which is hard to tell 
people that here’s a good thing you have because you can’t see 
it. 
 
Now that the projects that are coming on stream people are 
seeing those; the stakeholders are seeing them; and people will 
see them more as clients or users of the system when they start 
seeing, say, the CAT scans being transmitted between 
Saskatoon and Prince Albert and that you don’t have to come 
back to Saskatoon from Prince Albert and have another one 
done. 
 
These are the sort of things you’ll see once people start . . . as 
clients start using the system. And providers are seeing already 
the benefits to the system, and districts that are seeing in how 
they can plan and better integrate their services. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I believe that the 
estimated amount in last year’s budget provided for SHIN was 
$10 million. That’s been reduced to 5.4 this year. Is that just the 
normal cycle or is that an indication of a decreasing 



April 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 693 

commitment to SHIN? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The 5.4 meets our basic commitment of 
$40 million. And as we said, we’re negotiating the contract 
again and we’re talking to our partner. So that doesn’t indicate 
anything except that we’ve met our commitment. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. As I understand it, the 
pharmacy system has their own or a network that they can call 
up and access central registry of drugs and things of that nature. 
Is that system currently on line with SHIN, or is it going to be 
integrated into SHIN at some point in the future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The pharmacy system now is running on 
the SHIN network. When we went with the Y2K (Year 2000) 
overview of the province, we’ve now . . . the pharmacies are 
now on, and when the Y2K work was done, they’re now 
compatible with SHIN and they’re on the SHIN network. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Does this include then 
a registry of clients that are receiving prescriptions and a 
registry of their history? Or what level of detail is there now in 
this whole system in regard to individual clients that are 
accessing the drug plan? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The system the pharmacies connect to now 
is the same system that was before only it’s now through SHIN. 
It’s now on the SHIN network. So it’s faster, it’s cheaper, it can 
access different things like the Formulary now. That’s what has 
helped. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Okay, so what it really is, is an upgrade of 
their existing system in terms of better network, and so that 
allows it working a little more effectively and efficiently. 
 
Where is the project then to actually start? And I recognize that 
there are outstanding issues of patient confidentiality and those 
sorts of things. When will the system be integrated in terms of 
when the pharmacist calls up the fact that I need a prescription 
of some sort, that then shows what my history is, and it’s 
interconnected to the health districts, if they like, so that this 
duplication isn’t in place? 
 
Is that one of the statements of work that are ongoing, or is that 
envisaged, or is that all part of these further negotiations that 
you’re undertaking? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Currently the system does not allow 
pharmacists to get very much information that . . . like the 
confidentiality issues. They don’t get access to a lot more 
information. There is the possibility of that but that would be a 
policy decision of how much we actually allow pharmacists to 
access. Right now there is the ability to flag that if you’ve had 
the same prescription within the last three days, that will show 
up. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Would that deal with the issues that the 
college of physicians and surgeons were concerned about in 
terms of the double or triple . . . you know, not billing but 
prescribing and receiving potentially dangerous or controlled 
substances? 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — The triplicate program you’re talking 
about to deal with narcotics is a separate program that the 
college of physicians and SHIN have worked on so that they 
can flag the use of narcotics. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Okay, thank you, Minister. While I’ve 
heard you say that the patient information is not available to 
pharmacists, and it’s a policy decision that may be made in the 
future, is the information on the network now or does that need 
to be put onto the network yet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — All the drug information for a person is on 
the central . . . is in the central drug data bank. But it’s not 
accessible by the pharmacist. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So there is, in essence, a database of 
individual citizens of the province and their basic medical 
profiles or in regard to their drug usage or prescription usage? 
Okay. And you don’t need to answer because I hear . . . see 
enough heads bobbing in the affirmative to accept that as an 
answer. 
 
We’re certainly not going to be able to complete this. And I 
look forward to the information you’re going to get, but I’m just 
a little bit concerned about where you’re going to go in light of 
the decision that was made in Manitoba. 
 
My information indicates that Deloitte & Touche recommended 
that the program be dropped, and that the Doer government has 
indicated that they are now contracting to have the system 
wound down after the expenditure of 30 to $35 million. 
 
Is there discussions in terms of where this is heading? Is there 
discussions between Manitoba and Saskatchewan for them to 
access or to get some information? You seem to be very, very 
confident and proud of the stability of our system. 
 
Are you thinking of sort of selling it or having people access it 
or . . . It strikes me that there’s quite a difference from one 
province to the next, where one government — a new NDP 
government that is criticizing a former Conservative 
government’s work — is bailing out of the program and you 
seem to be going ahead very confidently with it. Would you 
care to comment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The bottom line in the study in Manitoba I 
understand is that they should not give up on information 
technology, but they need to do something different. So we’re 
involved in the Western health information collaboration that 
has the . . . for Western provinces. And we are sharing our 
information with our neighbouring provinces. 
 
And we are proud of what we have done. And they are looking 
to us to see how come we are successful with what we’ve done. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. It 
says that the Winnipeg Sun reports that in November, health . . . 
SmartHealth — which I guess is their acronymn for their SHIN 
— was being scrapped by the Doer government, and the Health 
minister is in negotiations with a firm to wind down operations. 
 
It sounds like they’re shutting the thing down, where you sort of 
seem to indicate that that isn’t so. But this seems to be very 



694 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2000 

specific. And indeed the project seems as if it is, is indeed going 
to be completely shut down. I’m sorry but it seems as if this 
information which came from the Winnipeg Sun would, I would 
expect, be accurate. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I can’t speak for Manitoba, but I know 
they’re interested. And I mean, as I’ve said, we cannot function 
as a system moving into the 21st century . . . or in the 21st 
century, we cannot function without information and 
information technology. So they have probably reached a point 
where their system is not doing what it was expected to do, and 
now have to rethink what they’re going to do. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, it seems to me from this 
information that Deloitte and Touche were commissioned to do 
an assessment if indeed the project was living up to its 
expectations. And that may be a normal course of events when 
there’s a change of a government, I don’t know. But certainly it 
seems as if that when this review was done, the 
recommendation was that it should be scrapped. 
 
Have you got the checks and balances in place on an ongoing 
basis so that you’re not going to run into that kind of a problem 
that has happened in Manitoba? And how can their system have 
gone so far off the rails, and you seem to be so solidly confident 
that this is a good project here? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Well, like I said, I think some of my 
confidence comes from being involved in this from the very 
moment it started. So I have been on the SHIN board; I’ve been 
through the discussions about where are we going with this and 
how do you actually put a project in place that has such a broad 
vision of where you could go. 
 
And I think that those are the things that the SHIN board 
discussed and came to the conclusion we have to do this very 
slowly. We have to have really solid value for our money — we 
have to be able to show where we’ve spent it and what we got 
for it. And the Provincial Auditor, as I said, has audited the 
SHIN corporation and has given them very good marks. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. I 
think we’re drawing to an end today so I look forward to this 
detailed information that you’ve committed to give us. And I 
certainly would like to thank you and your officials for the 
information you shared with us this afternoon. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I am going to ask 
the committee to rise and report progress, but before I do that I 
wanted to introduce in the west gallery a good friend of 
Saskatchewan farmers, the former national president of the 
National Farmers Union, Roy Atkinson, who is joining us here 
today. Welcome, Roy, to the Assembly. And with that note, I 
wish all members join with me in welcoming Mr. Atkinson, the 
father of the Minister of Health, here with us today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 
 
 


