





























































Hansard: May 17, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1261 
 May 17, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: —Mr. Speaker, I have a petition today to reduce 
fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Rose Valley, 
Wadena, and Naicam. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens in my constituency concerned about the 
continuing high price of fuel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Tisdale, Melfort, and Beatty. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 
regards to the high cost of fuel, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from 
Lloydminster, Swift Current, and even Winnipeg, Manitoba 
realizes we pay too much. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
concerned about the high cost of fuel. And the prayer is as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Swift Current, Regina, Moose 
Jaw, and Gravelbourg. 

I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
people in my constituency concerned about the high price of 
fuel. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the 
city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of citizens from my area of 
the province who would like to see improved cellular telephone 
coverage in their area. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 
 

And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
community of Cudworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present 
petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan regarding 
cellular telephone service. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This is signed by people in the Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and 
Bulyea area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here to reduce 
fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. The prayer goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



1262 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2000 

The signatures are from Davidson, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and 
I even have one from Lethbridge who agrees with the one from 
Manitoba. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens concerned with poor cellular 
telephone service. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 
 

And the petitioners come, Mr. Speaker, from the communities 
of Strasbourg, Bulyea, Regina, Saskatoon, Cymric, and 
Lumsden. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the high cost 
of fuel. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the citizens that have signed this petition are from 
Spiritwood, Medstead, and Glenbush. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of Saskatchewan petitioning on the following 
matters: 
 

To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes; 
 
To cause the government to abandon plans to confiscate 
municipal reserve accounts; 
 
And to cause the government to provide reliable cellular 
service in Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 48 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Social Services: did the Minister of 
Social Services, any employees of the minister’s office, or 
any employee of the Department of Social Services review 
the final draft report or a draft of the final report by the 

Children’s Advocate entitled Children and Youth in Care 
Review: Listen to Their Voices, prior to its release on April 
12, 2000; if yes, who reviewed the document, who did they 
review it with, and for what purpose did they review it? 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a notice of a written 
question. I give notice I shall on day no. 48 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how much has the 
Government of Saskatchewan spent so far in payments to 
farmers under the 1999 Agriculture Income Disaster 
Assistance program? 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a written 
notice. I give notice that I shall on day 48 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Economic and Co-operative 
Development: what was the cost to fly the minister from 
Regina to Prince Albert and back to Regina on May 11, 
2000; what time did the aircraft land in Prince Albert and 
what time did it depart Prince Albert; was the minister 
accompanied by his staff, and if yes, what is or are their 
names? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to introduce 
to you and through you to members of this Assembly two 
members of the Swift Current emergency services or the Swift 
Current Fire Department who are seated in the west gallery. 
They are firefighter Ryan Hunter as well as Captain Wade 
Sutherland, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And while I’m on my feet I’d also like to introduce to you and 
through you the spouse of one of the recipients of the 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal, Mr. Ralph Thistlethwaite. 
 
I’d ask all hon. members to welcome these guests to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. Of course we have the 
entire Assembly today filled with some very distinguished 
residents of our province. 
 
However, as always, I know the members are most interested to 
know what’s going on from the Battlefords and I’m pleased to 
introduce to you and through you the president of the provincial 
Association of Dental Therapists, Mr. Daryl Berg, seated in the 
west gallery, who is with us today. 
 
I ask all members to welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you to the rest of the Assembly and to the guests, I’d like to 
introduce you to a number of members from the Saskatchewan 
firefighting association. These members met with us in caucus 
earlier today, and I’d like to give them a warm welcome for all 



May 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1263 

the sacrifice that they do to keep as safe as we are in this 
province. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to join with my colleague from 
Indian Head to welcome all of the firefighters that are here from 
across the province today. 
 
I had an opportunity to meet with them this morning as well. I 
want to say to the House and to the members opposite that we 
have with us today two firefighters from both Burnaby and 
Ottawa. Mr. Terry Riche who’s with the sixth division. He’s the 
vice-president from Burnaby. And Mr. Shawn McManus who’s 
the Canadian director from Ottawa. 
 
When I met with the firefighters this morning, they assured me 
that in spite of the fact that they were not in their own 
communities protecting the fire services, they could be called 
on here during question period, Mr. Speaker, if we needed their 
services. 
 
So, I’ll ask all of the Assembly to welcome the firefighters from 
across the province to our city of Regina today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly some 
constituents of mine. 
 
First of all Marguerite Gallaway who is a member of the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit and a member of the Order of 
Canada. Margaret served two terms as chairperson for the 
Saskatchewan Honours Advisory Council from 1992 to 1997. 
Her husband, Ron Gallaway will receive a Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal this afternoon. 
 
This is the first time that a husband and wife have received both 
provincial honours, the Order of Merit and the Volunteer 
Medal. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I would also like to 
introduce to you, John Len, the mayor of Estevan, and two 
people who are very dear friends of mine, Harold and Tilley 
Crawberg from Estevan. 
 
And I’d ask everyone to join me in welcoming them. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 23 grade five students seated in the west gallery. 
They’re visiting us here from the Pleasant Hill School in 
Saskatoon. 
 
They’re actually . . . their school is in the Minister of Finance, 
the hon. member from Saskatoon Mount Royal, but he is away 
today so I would like to welcome them. 
 
With them is . . . are their teachers, Barbara Wright, Leo 

Yahyahkeekoot, Cal Arcand, Theresa Fiddler and Gerry 
Adams. And I ask all members to please welcome this group 
from Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you 
to all members of the Assembly, family members of two of my 
constituents who will be later today receiving the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you, and maybe they could stand to be 
recognized, June Kalmakoff, who’s the wife of Bill Kalmakoff. 
And Bill’s son Rodney Kalmakoff, and his daughter, Sandra 
Kalmakoff, and Shelly Lavertue. 
 
And I’d also like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, the husband 
of Alice Leung who later today will be receiving the 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. Her husband Kwun is here, 
and also her daughter, Kimberley. 
 
I ask all members to welcome these family members of 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal recipients to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well I would like to 
join with other members in extending special greetings and 
welcome to this Assembly a number of individuals from the 
Moosomin and surrounding area. Lest I forget, first of all I 
should introduce my wife. I’ve unfortunately made that mistake 
once before; that was once too many. Please greet my wife Lois 
who has joined us today. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we have in this Assembly a number of 
guests from the Moosomin area who have come to celebrate 
with Mrs. B. Middleton in this volunteer recognition ceremony. 
And I would like to recognize her sons — her son Don 
Middleton and his wife Colleen; her son John Middleton, he’s 
back here. And then her daughters Karen Strutt and her husband 
John; and daughter Jean Ross. 
 
As well, the mayor and his wife from the community of 
Moosomin, Mr. Don Bradley with his wife Pat and they’re 
seated over in the right corner. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s so 
many other guests. 
 
I’m just wondering if all the Moosomin guests would mind 
standing so we can give you a warm welcome to the Assembly 
this afternoon. Would you mind doing that please, all of the 
guests from Moosomin. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was beginning to 
feel like a jack-in-the-box there. Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to 
introduce to you today three guests. Two are Regina 
firefighters, dedicated men: Leo Chapman, who is the secretary 
of the Regina Professional Fire Fighters Association; and Kevin 
Sinclair, executive member. And both are seated in the west 
gallery. 
 



1264 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2000 

Welcome to this House, and I would ask all other members to 
join in welcoming them. 
 
And while I’m on my feet I would also like to introduce to this 
legislature Mr. Allan Barss, who is the president of the United 
Church of Saskatchewan Conference of the United Church of 
Canada. Allan is seated just behind the bar over here. 
 
Welcome to this House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you, people that were part of my former life 
when I was on the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) Board of Directors, the administrators that Clay 
Serby so graciously has declined to visit with . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I just remind the hon. member 
to use the members’ constituencies and not refer to them by 
personal names. 
 
Mr. Peters: — And I would ask them to stand please. There’s 
10 of the administrators there. I would like you to stand. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I want to introduce the ultimate firefighter. He’s 
sitting in your gallery. He’s the mayor of Jans Bay and he sits 
on numerous other committees in northern Saskatchewan. He’s 
here — travelled eight hours to visit the Assembly. And I would 
ask all members and all guests to welcome the mayor of Jans 
Bay, Mr. Louis Morin. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to the others 
members of this Assembly, the wife of one of the recipients of 
the medal award this afternoon, Mrs. Dorothy Perry. She’s 
seated behind her husband. Also there are a number of other 
family members of the Perry family with us here this afternoon, 
including seven grandchildren. I believe they’re seated just to 
my left. 
 
And also I’d like to introduce to you someone who was 
influential in nominating Mr. Perry for the award, Mr. Bill 
Small and his wife Agnes from Craven. They’re seated to my 
left. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I debated whether I 
should rise because there are so many distinguished people here 
in the Chamber and I would like to welcome all of them. But I 
want to extend a particularly warm welcome to one gentleman 
and introduce him to the House. This is a person who has 
exemplified the Doukhobor ideals of toil and peaceful life, and 
is a very dear friend of mine, Mr. George Stushnoff. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Since so many people are introducing guests today, I thought it 
important, since so few of us have relatives that come to visit 
the Assembly on many occasions, to introduce my cousin, 
Adele McLeod, who is here as part of the administrator group. 
 
She is the person in charge of the RM (rural municipality) of 
Biggar. And I want to welcome Adele to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatoon Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatoon 
business community honoured its own last night at the 
Saskatoon Achievement in Business Excellence awards night. 
And the winners are as follows: 
 
Business of the year, zu.com communications; new business 
venture, Interactive Tracking Systems; new product, zu.com 
communications; customer service, Yanke Group of 
Companies; marketing, Interactive Tracking Systems; 
community involvement, Glen Scrimshaw Gallery; for exports, 
Wavecom Electronics; and for growth and expansion, Kocsis 
Transport Ltd; innovation, zu.com communications; and for 
strategic alliance, Cosmopolitan Industries in partnership with 
The StarPhoenix and the city of Saskatoon. 
 
In addition, this year’s inductees into the SABEX (Saskatoon 
Achievement in Business Excellence) hall of fame were the 
Pinder family, best known for their pharmacy chain founded in 
1917. The second inductee was Ronald Smith, co-owner of 
Buy-Rite Furniture until his retirement in the mid-1980s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of Saskatoon and district, indeed all of the 
province, benefit from the business community in Saskatoon, 
for their enterprise and their contributions to the economy, the 
quality of life we enjoy, and the opportunities that we have for 
the future. 
 
I’m sure all members will join me in wishing and 
congratulating the SABEX winners and all members of the 
Saskatoon business community. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and along with the 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland, I too would like to 
congratulate the winners of the SABEX presentation awards in 
Saskatoon last evening. 
 
These awards called the Saskatoon Achievement in Business 
Excellence awards represent the highest honour and recognition 
given to the Saskatoon business community. And in fact it 
exemplified exactly what it was intended to do. 
 
I wish to compliment as well the sponsors of this event, 
particularly the Saskatoon and District Chamber of Commerce 



May 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1265 

and the Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan for honouring 
so many of the worthy businesses there. 
 
And again, I would like to make special note of the induction to 
the SABEX hall of fame these two very prominent Saskatoon 
business people, Ronald Smith and the Pinder family. 
 
And as was mentioned, these awards presented in nine 
categories, all of very vital interest to businesses. They were the 
new business venture, new product, customer service, 
marketing, community involvement, exports, innovation, 
growth and expansion. And a new category just this year, 
strategic alliance. 
 
The overall winner, as mentioned, and named the 2000 SABEX 
business of the year was actually a multiple winner, zu.com 
communications. 
 
Congratulations to all the nominees and the winners. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Seeding and Assistance to Farmers Update 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
announce to the House today that as of Tuesday, May 17 almost 
half of this year’s crop has been seeded. This is well ahead of 
the five-year average of 25 per cent and last year’s progress of 
18 per cent at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to update the House on the 
Canada-Saskatchewan adjustment payment activities. Of the 
applications that were mailed out on April 13, 2000 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance has received back from farmers 
about 42,000 applications, and of these has processed just over 
39,500. This means, Mr. Speaker, that SCIC (Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance Corporation) has paid out approximately 94 per 
cent of the applications they have received back. 
 
To date, just over 165 million has been paid out to 
Saskatchewan farmers to help with spring seeding. This 165 
million is in addition to the 40 million in tax cuts on farm fuel 
and educational land tax, 300 million available under the AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) program, and 400 
million available under the spring credit advance program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the good news is that these programs that have 
been put in place as a lifeline for seeding the 2000 crop are 
working. Saskatchewan farmers have now seeded half of the 
2000 crop and are well on their way to seeding a projected 33 
million acres, which is slightly above the 10-year average. 
 
God’s blessings to the farmers and good weather. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lanigan Student Receives Ballet Scholarship 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to tell my colleagues in this Assembly this afternoon 
about the accomplishments of one of the young people in my 
home constituency of Watrous. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Braden Stevenson of Lanigan has been awarded 
the Investors Group scholarship. This scholarship is worth 
$2,000 and will allow Braden to study at the Royal Winnipeg 
Ballet. Students who attend this school benefit from the famed 
ballet company’s tradition of artistry and dance excellence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Braden started dancing at the age of five. His first 
competition was when he was only six years old. Last fall, 
Braden attended his first audition and performed in the Dare to 
Dance, a showcase of Saskatchewan dance performed in Regina 
and Saskatoon. 
 
In December, Braden attended the audition of the Royal 
Winnipeg Ballet summer session and that’s where he received 
the scholarship from the Investors Group. Mr. Speaker, Braden 
will attend summer school for the month of July in Winnipeg. 
 
I would ask my colleagues to join with me today in 
congratulating Braden Stevenson on all his accomplishments. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Norwegian National Holiday 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, today is Syttende Mai, the 
17th of May, the Norwegian national holiday. And I have a 
special greeting today for the Assembly from the King of 
Norway, King Harold, and his wife Queen Sonja. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Norwegian.) 
 
We bring greetings to all of the citizens of Canada and all of the 
Norwegian descendants in Canada with best wishes on this 
national day. 
 
It’s a great pleasure to once again remember this day in 
Saskatchewan because we do have so many descendants of 
Norwegian settlers in this area. And it’s especially an honour to 
do that this year as we have some new people who have joined 
the Assembly. 
 
And on behalf of all of those of us who are Norwegian 
descendants — including the member from Regina Coronation 
Park, the member from Saskatoon Southeast, the member from 
Regina Sherwood, the member from Rosetown-Biggar, the 
member from Saltcoats, and the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers — we would like to celebrate with all of those people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Firefighters 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Throughout today, 
firefighters from Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters 
Association are meeting with MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) and government officials on issues important to 
themselves, their departments, and their home communities. 
 



1266 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2000 

In Swift Current, we’re fortunate to have a team of firefighters 
absolutely dedicated to the important duties they have on behalf of 
Swift Current taxpayers. They’re constantly demonstrating a 
willingness to go beyond the call of duty, to serve taxpayers as is 
evidenced by such projects as a high school based CPR 
(cardiopulmonary resuscitation) training program they developed 
and executed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they are helping to put Swift Current on the 
map. Late last year, viewers of TSN (The Sports Network) would 
have seen our fire department’s combat challenge team competing 
in the Canadian Firefighter Combat Challenge. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
very proud to inform my colleagues that our entry into these 
intense tests of firefighting skills resulted in the top recorded time 
in Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba, and the second best time 
in all of Western Canada — this from a department that is the 
smallest professional department in these competitions. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, more importantly our Swift Current firefighters, 
like all Saskatchewan firefighters, professional and volunteer 
alike, are best at fighting fires. 
 
I can think of no more appropriate opportunity to once again 
encourage all of my colleagues in this House to lend their support 
to my non-partisan private members’ Bill, The Fire-fighter 
Protection from Liability Act, which would allow them to do what 
they do best without the fear of a lawsuit. And that of course is 
protecting our property and saving lives. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Baby Born In Air Ambulance 
 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am pleased to rise in this Assembly today to tell you that I have 
a brand new constituent. And this just isn’t any new constituent. 
This new Athabasca constituent was born in an Air Ambulance, 
5,000 feet in the air, just outside Saskatoon last Thursday. 
 
Early Thursday morning, Air Ambulance picked up the 
expectant mom at 6:15 a.m., taking her to Saskatoon. On the 
final approach, the pilot was told by the nurse to find some 
smooth air and avoid a landing. 
 
The pilot went into a holding pattern around Saskatoon and 
mom gave birth to a child just after 8 a.m., and the Air 
Ambulance touched down at 8:15 a.m. 
 
Mr. Speaker, births in the air are rare, and I wish to congratulate 
everyone involved with this delivery. I’d particularly like to 
thank Norman Meyer, the pilot, and the nurse, Lynn Boudreault 
for their assistance and expertise. 
 
Mom and baby girl are doing just fine. Again congratulations to 
the new parents, and a job well done by everyone involved. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

Polling Results 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, well, well, 
well, well. There’s a new poll out today and the results are very 
clear, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people don’t like the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) budget. And they don’t like the NDP 
tax grab. And plain and simple, they don’t like the NDP any 
more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Support for the NDP is at 17 per cent — 
that’s an all-time low for this party. And the Liberals are even 
less popular than the zit on a school photo-day picture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Deputy Premier. Mr. Deputy 
Premier, are you going to listen to what the people of 
Saskatchewan are telling you? Will you admit that your budget 
and your government are a colossal failure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to answer 
the question from the Leader of the Opposition. And to tell him 
very clearly to enjoy the moment because obviously polling is 
obviously short-lived and whether the results are accurate or not 
accurate will remain to be seen in three and a half years when 
the election comes. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I was interested particularly in that member’s 
response to this poll as compared to a poll done in September of 
1999, when the results were that the NDP were far ahead. Now 
this is when the NDP were far ahead. What did he say about 
polling from The Leader-Post at that time? I quote: 
 

Hermanson said The Leader Post poll is unreliable because 
of the 44 per cent of the people who are undecided or 
refuse to say how they intended to vote. 

 
The poll that you’re so excited about has 45 per cent undecided. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would remind the Deputy Premier that the important poll taken 
in September was won by the Saskatchewan Party. We won the 
popular vote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we didn’t need — we didn’t 
need polls — we didn’t need polls to tell us this. People just 
simply are telling us they don’t like the NDP’s PST (provincial 
sales tax) tax grab. In fact we told the Minister of Finance, 
before the budget we wrote him a letter and we said, cut taxes, 
don’t raise taxes. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, he didn’t listen to us. He didn’t listen to the 
people of Saskatchewan, and the result is his budget is a 
disaster. Saskatchewan people are rejecting this budget by a two 
to one margin. To the Deputy Premier: Mr. Deputy Premier, 



May 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1267 

will you listen now to what the people of Saskatchewan are 
telling you? Will you admit that it was a mistake to raise the 
PST? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this budget delivers the largest tax cut in 
Saskatchewan history, a tax cut that will grow our economy, 
make us more competitive, and create jobs for Saskatchewan 
people. It also provides more funding for health and education 
to preserve our high quality of life. 
 
But you know what that paper also shows? It shows the agenda 
of members opposite. The Leader of the Opposition would pay 
for his tax cut by dipping into the peoples’ savings fund, by 
taking one-time money out of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund for 
an ongoing tax cut taking us back to deficits and debt. 
 
They would not provide any increase in real spending for 
priority areas like health care, even though every other 
government in Canada has done so to preserve our quality 
health care system. And my favourite, they would discard what 
is not necessary. Mr. Member, what is not necessary? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
can tell by the minister’s answer that they’re hurting over there. 
But it doesn’t matter how many times you say it, it doesn’t 
matter how many ads you buy, in the budget insert in today’s 
paper, Saskatchewan people know that your budget was not a 
tax cut — it was a tax grab. And, Mr. Speaker, they don’t like 
it. 
 
Madam Minister, 55 per cent of your own supporters — your 
own supporters — disapprove of your tax grab; 66 per cent of 
Liberal supporters don’t like the tax grab. But the members over 
there, the government, is not listening. It’s no wonder support 
for their party is dropping like a rock. 
 
To the minister: when are you going to get the message? People 
want tax cuts, not tax hikes. Will you admit that your tax grab is 
a complete disaster? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: —Mr. Speaker, this budget is about 
growing Saskatchewan. And I would tell the Leader of the 
Opposition to listen to what our business leaders are saying 
about this budget. 
 
Shirley Ryan of the North Saskatoon Business Association 
says: 
 

There’s no question it will benefit all people in this 
province. It should broaden our economic base. 

 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, we know that broadening our 
economic base means more than tax cuts. It means investments 
in research and development so that we can once again do such 
feats as get the Synchrotron for this province — the largest, 
single scientific investment in Canadian history. 
 
But do you know what? They wouldn’t allow us to have a 

Synchrotron. Do you know why? Because they would not 
support the increase in spending in my department for an R&D 
(research and development) fund. 
 
What’s not necessary that these members would discard? 
Investments in our future, our best and brightest minds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, perhaps 
the minister didn’t read the results of the poll but there was 
really only one thing that the people did like about the budget 
and that was the part that was stolen from the Saskatchewan 
Party — the cutting incomes taxes and taxing PST on First 
Nations people. 
 
Just think, Madam Minister, how popular your budget would 
have been if you had taken all of our advice. Instead, you’re 
taking direction from the Liberal brain trust over there and 
that’s why the NDP is headed for the same direction as the 
Liberals — straight down. 
 
Madam Minister, it’s not too late. We still haven’t passed the 
budget. Why don’t you now listen to the people of 
Saskatchewan, listen to the Saskatchewan Party, scrap this 
budget, and come back with a new one that actually has tax cuts 
instead of raising taxes. Will you do that today, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been very frank 
with the people of Saskatchewan. We’ve told them how we’re 
going to pay for our tax cut. We took the advice of an 
independent commission in terms of broadening the sales tax 
base. We have moved to tax things that are taxed in most other 
provinces in Canada and we still have the lowest sales tax in all 
of Canada of the provinces that have sales tax, no health care 
premiums — the least expensive place in which to live. 
 
What people need to worry about is how they would pay for 
their tax cut. They would pay for their tax cut by dipping into 
the people’s savings account; using one-time money for an 
ongoing tax cut; taking us back to deficits, debts and higher 
taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe in tax cuts. We also believe in 
balanced budgets and quality services for people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That minister, 
that minister knows the people of Saskatchewan are taking their 
savings accounts and moving them to Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last September the people of Saskatchewan sent 
this government a wake-up call. But instead of heeding the 
wake-up call, they crawled into bed with the Liberals, they 
rolled over, and they went right back to sleep. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that may be good news for the Saskatchewan 
Party but today the poll shows it’s not good for the province of 
Saskatchewan. We can’t afford four more years of NDP 
sleepwalking while our province’s future goes down the drain. 
We can’t afford four more years of high taxes, closing 



1268 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2000 

hospitals, destructive labour laws, and failing farm policies. 
 
Everywhere we go, Mr. Speaker, people are telling us it’s time 
for a change. We can’t wait four more years; we need it now. 
Madam Minister, you should start making those changes today, 
or else call an election so we can elect a government that will. 
 
What are you going to do to change the direction of your 
government, a direction that’s failing the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I ask the members opposite, can the 
people of this province afford 10,000 new jobs in the month of 
April, relative to April last year? Can they afford a repeat of 
that? 
 
I ask the member opposite, can the people of this province 
afford the largest single income tax cut in Saskatchewan’s 
history? 
 
I say to the members opposite, can the people of this province 
afford significant increases in funding to priority services like 
health and education? 
 
You know what I ask the members opposite? I ask them the 
question that I’m not getting an answer for. 
 
They would discard what’s necessary, discard what’s not 
necessary, even though our spending per capita is well below 
Alberta’s. I ask the members opposite again, what are you 
going to discard that is not necessary in this province — our 
publicly funded health care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Deputy Premier. Mr. Minister, this 
morning I turned on the radio at 7:30 and the Deputy Premier 
was already trying to downplay this poll. I guess the NDP has to 
get up pretty early these days to do damage control. The Liberal 
leader probably doesn’t even get to go to bed any longer. 
 
They’re going to . . . what did the Deputy Premier say? They’re 
not going to change, they’re not going to listen, they don’t care 
about this poll. They don’t care about high taxes; they don’t 
care about failing health care. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Premier, this poll makes it very clear the 
people of Saskatchewan don’t care about you any longer. The 
people of Saskatchewan are sick and tired of a government that 
doesn’t care, that doesn’t listen; they’re sick and tired of the 
NDP. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, when are you going to start listening to the 
people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, there was another poll 
in the recent newspapers in this province and I just want to read 
some of the headlines that would indicate what is being said by 

the reporters in this province when not paid for by Conrad 
Black, as this poll was. 
 
Here’s the headlines, Saturday, April 8th, “Sask leads job 
statistics.” And then a wonderful picture of our Minister of 
Economic Development. 
 
Then there’s another article May 11th, “Straight A’s for 
Saskatchewan’s credit rating.” 
 
Another one, “Home market booming”, this is from May 9th 
from The Leader-Post. 
 
Another, “Canada Life bringing 75 more jobs to the province.” 
 
Here’s another, March 29th, shortly after the budget, “Forecast 
calls for growth.” 
 
Another here’s on Wednesday of March 29th, “A good day for 
tax cuts.” And the list goes on and on. 
 
I say to the members opposite, enjoy the glory of Conrad 
Black’s poll today . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Call for By-election in Wood River 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Premier, if the Deputy Premier is so confident about the 
government’s policies, then let’s put it to the test. Let’s call the 
Wood River by-election right now. 
 
I know the NDP is very fond of quoting from the editorial page 
when it suits their purposes. Here’s what the editorial in today’s 
paper said: 
 

The government must do the right thing and call the 
by-election as quickly as possible — even if it means 
taking lumps as a result. 

 
Mr. Deputy Premier, if you’re going to stand by this brutal 
budget, if you’re going to stand by your tax increases and your 
destruction of the health care system and your decision to buy 
off the Liberals, then why don’t you put the policies to the test? 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, it’s time for your trip to the woodshed. Do 
the right thing. Call a by-election before the end of June. Will 
you give us that commitment today to call the Wood River 
by-election now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I listened to the 
member from Kindersley and we have to remember that when 
his former leader, Grant Devine, was in government, he waited 
22 months to call the by-election, and never did call the 
by-election, 22 months. 
 
I read the editorial in today’s Leader-Post . . . 
 



May 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1269 

The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
members opposite, I read with interest the editorial in Conrad 
Black’s paper today that said we should call the by-election 
even before Mr. McPherson has vacated the seat. 
 
I understand that he hasn’t signed the documents yet, so there’s 
no vacancy. There’s no vacancy. But I cannot remember in the 
22 months that the Kindersley seat was vacant, The Leader-Post 
ever saying that the by-election should be called. 
 
Now you have to wonder about the ownership of the papers in 
this province and their commitment to fair play when we know 
the by-election will be called within six months. So get ready. 
The by-election will come, and we’ll see how you on the other 
side make out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Coalition Government 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Grant Devine and the Tories, the Premier, the Deputy Premier, 
and the NDP, are exactly similar and have a similar problem — 
lack of public support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the people of . . . Mr. 
Speaker, the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Kindly allow the question to be 
asked. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan went to the polls last year and voted to get rid of 
the NDP government: 40 per cent for the Saskatchewan Party, 
30 per cent for the NDP. Unfortunately for Saskatchewan 
families and businesses, it has been a downhill plunge ever 
since. 
 
So it’s not surprising this morning’s paper are confirming that 
the people have rejected the NDP government. They have 
rejected a budget that raised taxes instead of cutting them. They 
have rejected a budget that ignored the priorities of 
Saskatchewan families. And they have rejected the 
dark-of-the-night deal between the Liberal leader and the NDP 
that overturned the results of the election and installed a 
majority NDP government. 
 
My question to the Minister of Education is simple. In light of 
the fact that most people are opposed to the provincial budget. 
will you show true leadership and withdraw your support for 
the NDP 2000’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, again I want to quote 
from The Leader-Post of September 15, 1999 where the Sask 
Party challenges the poll results of that day which showed them 
a long ways behind in a poll. 
 

Well . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . but that’s my point. The 
polls are not always accurate. And what did Mr. Leader of the 
Opposition say at that time? I quote from the newspaper of that 
day . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, hon. members, order. 
Kindly allow the questions to be heard and the answer to be 
heard as well. I ask for your co-operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from 
The Leader-Post of September 15, and in that article it says: 
 

Saskatchewan Party leader Elwin Hermanson discounted 
the new Leader-Post poll as rogue and inaccurate because 
it had a margin of undecided of 44 per cent. 

 
The poll you’re talking about and giving great credibility to has 
45 per cent undecided and won’t say — and won’t say. So how 
is it that in 1999 you discredit polls that have 45 per cent — 45 
per cent undecided and won’t say — but today you take great 
credibility? 
 
One of those answers isn’t correct. In which one of them are 
you trying to mislead the public of the province? Which one? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, I’d ask hon. members to choose their 
words judicially please. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
September poll that the minister was quoting was proven wrong 
less than a week later on September 16 when the polls we were 
talking about turned out to be right. If the minister thinks that 
poll is wrong, call the by-election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Education. 
Eventually you’re going to have to get up and answer a question 
on the decisions you have made. The people are clearly 
rejecting the coalition government. They are condemning your 
decision to prop up the NDP in exchange for $100,000 cabinet 
post. 
 
People are also condemning your performance as Education 
minister. School divisions are saying your budget forgets 
children. They say your lack of commitment to education is 
going to drive up property taxes. The people are recognizing 
that you reneged on your election promises to increase the 
provincial share of the K to 12 system. 
 
Mr. Minister, in light of yours, and the coalition’s failure to 
honour your election promises with K to 12 education . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The questions must be 
directly related to the minister’s responsibility and his portfolio 
— in his portfolio — not with respect to any party affiliation. 
Order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You have 
completely rejected the promise to the Saskatchewan people 
both in the budget . . . in your election platform and the budget 
to support education. 
 



1270 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2000 

Will you be tendering your resignation from cabinet and leaving 
this abysmal coalition until education receives the proper 
funding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite again: the two polls that I’m referring to were 
both done by newspapers in the province. One is accurate, he 
says, and one isn’t accurate. One works in your favour; one 
doesn’t. 
 
The fact of the matter is we’re three and a half years before an 
election. I know you’ve never gotten over the defeat in the last 
election and the fact that you’re in opposition — but just relax. 
 
I’ve been in opposition. The three and a half years will go by 
very, very quickly. Three and a half years will not be very long 
and then we’ll go back to the polls and then we’ll see what the 
people think. 
 
But to continue to wish that you had worked harder and won the 
last election is a waste of your time. Look forward to the future. 
Three and a half years will go by. We’ll have an election and 
we’ll see what the people think. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people of 
Saskatchewan are looking forward to the future when you’re in 
opposition again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, another question to the 
Minister of Education, or whoever is speaking for the Liberals 
and their leader today. 
 
Mr. Minister, you can run but you can’t hide. The today’s poll 
shows the Liberal Party’s support is disappearing under your 
leadership and most people give all the credit for that collapse 
to you. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have rejected the provincial 
budget; they have rejected the Liberal-NDP coalition; and even 
your own member from Wood River has rejected your 
leadership . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I’ll ask the hon. member 
to pose his question to the minister in his responsible portfolio. 
Party-related issues are not addressed on the floor. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, as the co-leader in this 
coalition and the Minister of Education, the education 
community is saying that your leadership has forgotten children 
and has forgotten the promise to reverse the 60/40 split on 
property taxes. 
 
Mr. Minister, your decision to share a bed with the NDP has 
been a disaster from the first kiss. Will you end this 
dysfunctional relationship and tear up the coalition agreement 
and keep your promise to the children of this province? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 
the member opposite . . . I think I’ve heard the slightest hint of a 
question with regard to education. So I will answer that 
question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget that I voted for and that all members on 
this side voted for provided $28.5 million in additional 
spending for education, $1.9 million in grants-in-lieu, an 
additional 25 million in property tax rebates for a total of $55 
million — the largest increase in this province’s history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And when we talk about what they 
would provide for education — the members opposite — not 1 
cent. Frozen — not 1 penny. Do they care about children? No, 
they don’t care. Do they care about health care? No, they don’t 
care. 
 
The fact of the matter is our budget was balanced, it makes 
sense, and we’re all very proud of it on this side. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we have seen since this session started the complete failure of 
that minister and his responsibility as Minister of Education. He 
promised money for children. He promised that there would be 
a reversal of the 60/40 split on property taxes. And what has he 
delivered? Mr. Speaker, he has delivered not even enough 
money to cover the teachers’ settlement that was just made. 
 
Property taxes are going to have to increase, teachers are going 
to have to be fired, programs are going to shut down because of 
his failure as the Minister of Education. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you abandon this coalition that is failing the 
people of Saskatchewan. Stand up for what you did, what you 
promised in the election campaign. Show your leadership, show 
your support for the people of Saskatchewan, and vote against 
this government and their budget. Will you do so? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
members opposite are having some trouble in hearing the 
responses to their questions. 
 
The Education budget, which we’re all very proud of on this 
side of the House, provided significant new money for 
education. And they voted against that budget. They voted 
against an additional 14 million for special education. They 
voted against doubling the community funding for northern 
community schools. They voted against providing $18.5 million 
on the foundation operating grant. 
 
And you know what? We’ve had, we’ve had people, trustees 
from school divisions . . . In fact I had a trustee from Naicam 
the other day call me and thank me for their capital budget that 
provided new facilities in a member opposite’s riding. 



May 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1271 

We are hearing from all across this province how well it has 
been received with regard to our education funding, and no . . . 
and I remind the members not one . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 67  The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 67, The 
Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2000 be now read 
and introduced for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 68 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 68, The 
Rural Municipality Amendment, 2000 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 69 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 69, The 
Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 70 — The Education (Elimination of Business Tax) 

Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi sur 
l'éducation (élimination de la taxe professionnelle) 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 70, The 
Education (Elimination of Business Tax) Amendment Act, 
2000 be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 2:27 p.m. 
 





 Volunteer Medal Presentation 9 
May 17, 2000 

 
Mr. Jackson: — Ladies and gentlemen, Her Honour the Honourable Dr. Lynda Haverstock, Chancellor 
of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit, Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan. 
 
Please join in singing the Royal anthem, God Save the Queen. 
 
Please be seated. 
 
Your Honour, ladies and gentlemen, welcome to the fifth presentation of the Saskatchewan Volunteer 
Medal. 
 
It is now my pleasure to call on the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, the Hon. Ron Osika, for his 
remarks. Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Your Honour, Deputy Premier, Mr. Hermanson, Mr. Melenchuk, members of the 
Legislative Assembly, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of all of the members of the Legislative 
Assembly, I would like to welcome everyone here today. We especially welcome the eight volunteer 
medal recipients and their guests. 
 
This is the fifth year, as our master of ceremony has pointed out, to hold the presentation for the 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal in this Assembly. In 1995, with all-party support this legislature adopted 
amendments to The Provincial Emblems and Honours Act which established the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. As this honour was created by the Legislative Assembly, it is most appropriate that the 
members of the Legislative Assembly are asked to introduce each of the recipients today, and are taking 
an active part in presenting these noble ladies and gentlemen with this honour. 
 
When we hear of the high level of volunteer service given by the recipients, we will instantly understand 
that these eight people typify the overwhelming volunteer spirit of Saskatchewan people. To our guests 
of honour today, I want to say you are some of our province’s outstanding citizens. My friends, you 
have truly given, and in doing that, you have been a significant part of building a better Saskatchewan. 
 
Too often people hesitate to get involved thinking that a task or a challenge is too large or too 
complicated. Your work shows us that our individual efforts indeed do make a difference in our lives 
and the lives of others. Margaret Mead has said, and I will quote: 
 

Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful citizens can change the world. Indeed, it is the only 
thing that ever has. 
 

Along with all the hon. members of this Legislative Assembly, I say to you, thank you, and 
congratulations. 
 
Applause. 
 
Mr. Jackson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is now a pleasure to call on Her Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor for her address. Your Honour. 
 
Her Honour Dr. Lynda M. Haverstock: — Mr. Deputy Premier, Mr. Speaker, ministers of the Crown, 
Mr. Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Leader of the Liberal caucus, members of the Legislative Assembly, 
distinguished honourees, ladies and gentlemen. 
 



10 Volunteer Medal Presentation May 17, 2000 

Many have learned from the writings of Viktor E. Frankl and I am no exception. Of the holocaust he 
said, and I quote: 
 

We who lived in the concentration camps can remember the men who walked through the huts, 
comforting others, giving their last piece of bread. They may have been few in number, but they 
offer sufficient proof that everything can be taken from a human being but one thing, the last of 
one’s freedoms, the freedom to choose one’s attitude in any given set of circumstances. To choose 
one’s own way. 
 

We have come together in this legislative Chamber, a place which exemplifies democratic rights and 
freedoms, to pay tribute to eight remarkable individuals. Each has chosen to contribute to our society, 
improve upon their communities and enhance the lives of others. 
 
Each comes from their own unique background and has varying skills and strengths. But they have one 
extraordinary characteristic in common. A willingness to give a most treasured gift that all of us possess 
— the gift of time. And by choosing to focus on others, they have already left a legacy in their own 
lifetime, and stand as examples to every citizen to emulate. 
 
It is important for us to have days like today, days when we express our gratitude to citizens such as 
these. Not just for the actual deeds they have done, but for the message their choices send to others. This 
occasion helps us to re-examine our own priorities and reflect upon how we can do things better, kinder, 
and wiser. 
 
If Saskatchewan is to continue its impressive tradition of volunteerism, children and youth must see 
service in action from individuals who are unwilling to be distracted from giving, regardless of the 
demands of their busy lives. 
 
I am very pleased indeed to be able to publicly say thank you to these special men and women receiving 
a medal this afternoon for their generosity of spirit, and for being such superb models for upcoming 
generations. 
 
So in closing I am proud, very proud to bring you greetings on behalf of Queen Elizabeth Her Majesty, 
the Queen of Canada, all of the people of Saskatchewan. We are the beneficiaries of your good works. 
 
And now I would like to invite the secretary to present the recipients of the Saskatchewan Volunteer 
Medal. 
 
Applause. 
 
Mr. Jackson: — Thank you, Your Honour. On behalf of the chairperson and members of the 
Saskatchewan Honours Advisory Council, it is my privilege to advise your Honour, as Her Majesty’s 
representative in our province, that eight citizens duly selected to receive the Saskatchewan Volunteer 
Medal are present today for this purpose, and to read the certificate formally appointing them: 
 

In the name of the Crown in right of Saskatchewan and pursuant to The Provincial Emblems and 
Honours Act Ferdie Ewald of Regina, Ronald Gallaway of Estevan, William Kalmakoff of 
Saskatoon, Alice Leung of Saskatoon, Beatrice Middleton of Moosomin, Geraldine Peppler of 
Yorkton, William Perry of Craven, Patricia Thistlethwaite of Swift Current have been awarded the 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal for 1999 in recognition of outstanding volunteer service and 
exceptional community involvement in the province of Saskatchewan. Presented at Regina this 17th 



May 17, 2000 Volunteer Medal Presentation 11 
day of May 2000. 
 
Signed, Jack Hillson, Provincial Secretary; Roy Romanow, Premier; Lynda Haverstock, Lieutenant 
Governor. 
 

Applause. 
 

Ferdie Ewald 
 
Mr. Jackson: — At the age of 19, Ferdie Ewald volunteered for service with the Canadian artillery in 
Europe during the Second World War. Then throughout a lengthy and varied career in social work, he 
always showed a willingness to go above and beyond his normal duties to respond to human need. 
 
Since his official retirement, Mr. Ewald has built a second career as an advocate for seniors and health 
care. Among those benefiting from his dedication and skill have been the Canadian Seniors Network 
called “One Voice Canada”, and the Regina Senior Citizens Centre. He is a public representative on the 
board of the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association. 
 
Ferdie Ewald organized and hosted an award-winning series of television programs on issues facing 
seniors. He has more than fulfilled his goal of giving something back to the community in which he was 
nurtured. 
 
I call on the member of the Legislative Assembly for Regina South, Mr. Andrew Thomson. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Your Honour, it is my privilege to present to you a constituent of mine, Mr. Ferdie 
Ewald, to receive the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Applause. 
 

Ronald Gallaway 
 
Mr. Jackson: — For half a century Ron Gallaway has juggled innumerable volunteer activities with a 
successful career in farming. His voluntarism is characterized by long-term commitment, continuity, and 
perseverance. He has been an elder in the United Church for 45 years, school board member for 30, and 
Chair of agricultural district board committees for 30, not to mention 15 years as director of a rural 
telephone company and six years on the senates of both provincial universities. 
 
Mr. Gallaway is appreciated for his high personal standards, his unselfish desire to serve without 
expectation of recognition, and his ability to work harmoniously with others. He was a key player in the 
merger of the Agricultural Societies Association and the Association of Fairs and Exhibitions into the 
Saskatchewan Association of Agricultural Societies and Exhibitions and served as its founding 
president. 
 
I call on the Member of the Legislative Assembly for Estevan, Ms. Doreen Eagles. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Your Honour, it is my privilege to present to you a constituent of mine, Mr. Ronald J. 
Gallaway, to receive the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Applause. 
 



12 Volunteer Medal Presentation May 17, 2000 

William Kalmakoff 
 
Mr. Jackson: — Bill Kalmakoff volunteered constantly during a busy and demanding career in 
education. Retirement simply meant an exponential increase in his voluntarism. 
 
He has worked diligently to promote the cause of heritage languages and multiculturalism. He has held 
key positions in the Saskatchewan Intercultural Association, the Saskatchewan Association for Heritage 
Languages, and MultiFaith Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Kalmakoff is committed to the preservation of Doukhobor religious and cultural traditions. He is a 
long-standing trustee and elder of the Doukhobor Society. His volunteer activity also extends to 
bowling, lawn bowling, curling, and barbershop singing. 
 
Bill Kalmakoff is a fine example of the dedicated volunteer who contributes so much to the vibrant 
multicultural mosaic of our province. 
 
I call on the Member of the Legislative Assembly for Saskatoon Greystone, Mr. Peter Prebble. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Your Honour, it’s my privilege to present to you a constituent of mine, Mr. William 
Kalmakoff, to receive the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Applause. 
 

Alice Leung 
 

Mr. Jackson: — Alice Leung is a leading light in the Chinese community, promoting and preserving 
Chinese culture and helping immigrants adapt to Canadian living. 
 
Chinese art, poetry, dance, cuisine, healing and exercises, women’s and seniors’ activities, and pavilions 
at Saskatoon’s Folkfest have all benefited from her leadership, as have the scout and guide movements, 
her church, and Mandarin school. On top of her full shifts at Canada Post, Alice Leung volunteers for its 
annual Christmas letter program, answering children’s letters to Santa Claus. 
 
Mrs. Leung is an inveterate fundraiser, numbering the Kidney Foundation, Lupus Society, Terry Fox 
Run, United Way, and Kinsmen Telemiracle among her causes. Voluntarism is in her blood. “Volunteer 
activities,” she says, “come and find me.” Secure in her pride in her own heritage, Alice Leung 
confidently promotes harmony and equality of races and cultures. 
 
I call again on the member of the Legislative Assembly for Saskatoon Greystone, Mr. Peter Prebble. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Your Honour, it’s my great privilege to present to you a constituent of mine, Mrs. Alice 
Leung, to receive the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Applause. 
 

Beatrice Middleton 
 

Mr. Jackson: — Bea Middleton exudes a palpable enjoyment of her volunteer activity in a community 
known for its high rate of voluntarism. She can be found regularly at the seniors’ lodge, nursing home, 
adult day care and hospital in Moosomin. At age 86 she is far too youthful and vigorous, too busy 



May 17, 2000 Volunteer Medal Presentation 13 
helping seniors, to realize that she is one of their number. She drives seniors and visits them and recruits 
others to do the same. 
 
Mrs. Middleton is a multi-faceted musician, playing piano, organ, saxophone and violin. She contributes 
her musical talents generously to local vocalists, choirs, concerts, parties, dance bands, and the United, 
Anglican, and Lutheran churches. She is a member of the pastoral team of the United Church. 
 
With her characteristic gentleness, grace, and good humour she is an inspiration to those around her. 
 
I call on the Member of the Legislative Assembly for Moosomin, Mr. Don Toth. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Your Honour, it is my privilege to present to you a constituent of mine, Mrs. Beatrice 
Middleton to receive the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Applause. 
 

Geraldine Peppler 
 

Mr. Jackson: — Gerri Peppler has transferred her skills as a media personality to the volunteer field. As 
chairperson of the Yorkton Housing Authority she spearheaded efforts to accommodate independent 
living for seniors confined to wheelchairs. She has served on a geriatric task force. She volunteers in the 
health district and the regional hospital. Her communications background is a great asset to the Special 
Olympics and the Saskatchewan Summer Games. 
 
Gerri Peppler translates her compassion for the disadvantaged and vulnerable into energetic action. She 
has been a long-standing volunteer in the “Coats for Kids” initiative. She contributes her talents and 
experience to Shelwin House, a shelter for battered women and their children, to Saskatchewan Crime 
Stoppers and to Parkland Victim Services. She is hailed as “an excellent embodiment of the volunteer 
spirit” of our province. 
 
I call on the member of the Legislative Assembly for Yorkton, the Hon. Clay Serby. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Your Honour, it is my privilege to introduce to you a constituent of mine, Mrs. 
Geraldine, Gerri, Peppler to receive the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Applause. 
 

William Perry 
 
Mr. Jackson: — Bill Perry has always volunteered his services far beyond the requirements of his 
employment. While on the staff of the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) Training Academy in 
Regina, he founded the volunteer band which continues some forty years later. 
 
He was largely responsible for the sunset ceremony which has prospered into one of our province’s 
leading tourist attractions. He was the volunteer manager and producer of the RCMP festival in 1995 
and the tattoo in 1998. He assists at the RCMP Museum and is president of the RCMP veterans. 
 
When general manager of the Regina Exhibition Association, Bill Perry was instrumental in organizing 
the first Saskatchewan Recreation Facilities Association. He plays a key lay leadership role in 
Lumsden’s Anglican church. He is chairing the committee for an expansion to the district seniors’ home. 



14 Volunteer Medal Presentation May 17, 2000 

He is dedicated to the community of which he is such an integral part. 
 
I call on the Member of the Legislative Assembly for Last Mountain-Touchwood, Mr. Glen Hart. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Your Honour, it is my privilege to present to you a constituent of mine, Mr. William (Bill) 
Perry, to receive the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Applause. 
 

Patricia Thistlethwaite 
 
Mr. Jackson: — Pat Thistlethwaite’s four decades of volunteer service are reflected in the life 
memberships bestowed on her by the Women’s Missionary Society of the United Church, the Swift 
Current Agriculture and Exhibition Association, the National Farmers Union, and the Associated 
Country Women of the World. Her voluntarism is broadly based, proactive, and long term. 
 
After retiring to Swift Current, Mrs. Thistlethwaite immersed herself in volunteering for seniors. Her 
musical talents are put to good use in a band bringing joy to senior care citizens homes in the city. She 
strives for the improvement of social policy through the Saskatchewan Seniors’ Association and the 
Swift Current Senior Citizens’ Activity Centre. Her calendar is full and her telephone never stops 
ringing, because she is a firm believer in the vital role of the volunteer helping others in the community. 
 
I call on the Member of the Legislative Assembly for Swift Current, Mr. Brad Wall. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Your Honour, it is my privilege to present to you a constituent of mine, Mrs. Patricia 
Thistlethwaite, to receive the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Applause. 
 
Mr. Jackson: — Your Honour, this completes the presentations of the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal 
for 1999. Thank you very much for presiding. 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is now my pleasure to call on the Deputy Premier of Saskatchewan, the Hon. 
Dwain Lingenfelter for his remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Your Honour, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, and Leader of the 
Liberal Party, to my fellow members of the Legislative Assembly, and of course our distinguished 
recipients and their families who are with us here today, as well as the many special guests who are here 
with us on the floor of the Assembly and in this gallery, good afternoon and welcome to each and every 
one of you. 
 
I’m pleased and proud to bring greetings on behalf of the people of the province and the Government of 
Saskatchewan, and to join you all in honouring these very special eight recipients of the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. 
 
Congratulations to each and every one of you. 
 
Now the criteria for the medal are: 
 

That the recipient has (and I want to quote from the official manual) provided without reward or 



May 17, 2000 Volunteer Medal Presentation 15 
gain, outstanding volunteer service, or exceptional community involvement in an area that is beyond 
the performance of the individual’s normal duties, or the exercise of the responsibilities of a 
profession to which that individual belongs. 
 

Or to put it in a more simple way, Damien Hess once wrote, and I quote: 
 

Service is giving what you don’t have to give. Giving when you don’t need to give. Giving because 
you want to give. 
 

Now our recipients wanted to give, and for that we are truly grateful — not because you had to, not 
because you needed to, but because you wanted to, to help your community, your family and friends. 
 
Ferdie Ewald, Ronald Gallaway, William Kalmakoff, Alice Leung, Beatrice Middleton, Geraldine 
Peppler, William Perry, and Pat Thistlethwaite, you have all gone above and beyond, and I want to say a 
very, very special word of congratulations to each of you. 
 
And in doing so, you have proven yourselves as great examples to your families and to other citizens in 
our province. And we in our province of Saskatchewan take justifiable pride in the highest level of 
volunteer activities of any other province in the nation. 
 
Now volunteering is an expression of what we know as the Saskatchewan way, an expression of our 
core values, of community, and of co-operation. 
 
So I thank you — not just because of your many years of contributions, but for helping make our 
province such an outstanding place to live, to raise a family, and for setting such a good example for 
your sharing of generosity and selflessness. 
 
And I’d like to end with a quote that I feel illustrates the gift that you have given to our province. 
Mahatma Gandhi once said, and I quote: 
 

Be the change you want to see in the world. 
 
And thank you for being part of the change that has made our province truly great. 
 
Once again, on behalf of Saskatchewan, the government, and the people of the province, congratulations 
on this exceptional award, and I wish you and your families the best of luck in any and all future 
endeavours. Thank you. 
 
Applause. 
 
Mr. Jackson: — Thank you, Mr. Lingenfelter. Ladies and gentlemen, the Leader of Her Majesty’s 
Loyal Opposition, Mr. Elwin Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Your Honour, Mr. Speaker, Deputy Premier, and Leader of the Liberal 
Party, fellow members of the legislature on both sides of the House, particularly to the eight honourees, 
your families, and all special guests in the legislature, I too would like to welcome you here on behalf of 
Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 
 
And I want to join with others in offering my congratulations to all the recipients of this very, very 
special honour bestowed here today. 



16 Volunteer Medal Presentation May 17, 2000 

There is probably no other province in Canada where the concept of volunteerism is as important as it is 
right here in Saskatchewan. The strong sense of community which we all enjoy in this province stems 
from the fact that so many people are willing to roll up their sleeves and get involved in projects in their 
cities, their towns, and villages. 
 
People throughout this great province contribute many hours of their free time to a myriad of projects, 
and they do so for no compensation other than for the sense of a satisfaction of a job well done. If these 
dedicated acts of selflessness did not exist, neither would many of the things in our communities that we 
hold so dear. I believe there isn’t a single town or city in this province where you can’t find major 
projects that were conceived, planned, and completed by volunteers. 
 
And the fact that these eight accomplished individuals have been selected for special recognition this 
year tells us just how dedicated they have been in their own communities. Amongst the bumper crop of 
volunteers in Saskatchewan, you stand above everyone and you should be very, very proud of your 
accomplishments. You are leaders in your communities, you are role models for youth, and you are 
deserving of this special recognition. 
 
The eight of you symbolize what makes our province great and what will continue to make us great long 
into the future. Thanks to each and every one of you for your hard work throughout the years, and my 
sincerest congratulations on this well-deserved honour. Thank you. 
 
Applause. 
 
Mr. Jackson: — Ladies and gentlemen, the Leader of the Liberal caucus, the Hon. Dr. Jim Melenchuk. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Your Honour, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Premier, 
Mr. Leader of the Opposition, ministers of the Crown, fellow members of the Legislative Assembly, 
honours recipients, and guests, I am very pleased to rise on behalf of the Liberal caucus to give thanks 
for the magnificent contributions made to our province and our country by these wonderful people we 
have here today. 
 
As Alice Sandstrom, winner of the Jefferson Award for volunteerism once said: Volunteers polish up the 
rough spots in our communities. 
 
The character of our country and our province, the very nature of who we are can be defined by the 
efforts of these noble individuals. Mr. Speaker, the value of our society can be seen in several ways — 
how it treats the less fortunate, how active people are in civic activities, how committed it is to art and 
culture, and constantly striving to bring out the best in not only others but themselves as well. 
 
Our guests today are the benchmark by which we measure our commitment to our society. And we 
should consider ourselves the luckiest people in the world that we have these people here today that also 
serve as role models to our community, as examples on how best to live our lives, but also showing us 
how far we have come as a society. 
 
We are here to show our respect, our appreciation, our faith in such an outstanding group of people. 
These people have sacrificed their time, their talent, their energy in the service of others. 
 
Saskatchewan people have a deserved reputation for giving, be it financially for worthy causes, giving 
of their time and efforts to help neighbours and those less fortunate, giving of themselves to better the 
lives of others. 



May 17, 2000 Volunteer Medal Presentation 17 
We have tremendous talent in the province of Saskatchewan. We have people who are willing to 
sacrifice not only their most precious resource of time, but their energy and income as well to do better 
for the people of this province. These awards show us all we have that ability to do something to help 
someone else. 
 
And so it is on behalf of the Liberal caucus, I take great pride in recognizing the tremendous 
contributions and accomplishments of each and every one of you to your communities, to Saskatchewan, 
and to Canada. From the bottom of my heart I would like to thank all the award winners today for 
making Saskatchewan a better place to live. Thank you. 
 
Applause. 
 
Mr. Jackson — Ladies and gentlemen, before we conclude the formal part of our ceremony this 
afternoon, the Speaker has asked me to invite all of you to the Speaker’s tea immediately following the 
ceremony in the rotunda and in room 218 in the west corridor. And there you can meet the recipients of 
the Volunteer Medal, the official party, and the members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Following the singing of the national anthem, could you kindly remain in your places for the departures 
from the Chamber in the following order: first, the viceregal party; then the Deputy Premier, the Leader 
of the Opposition, and the Leader of the Liberal caucus; then the Speaker’s party; then the recipients of 
the Volunteer Medal, the members of the Legislative Assembly, and other guests. 
 
I would like to thank Ambiance Quartet for the music this afternoon. As always, of a high standard. 
Thank you. 
 
Applause. 
 
Mr. Jackson: — Mr. Speaker, I have to make a confession to you at this point that earlier today the 
recipients asked me with some concern if they occupied those seats during question period. I reassured 
them on your behalf that they would be sitting elsewhere. 
 
But we all appreciate what you, Mr. Speaker, have done and the House leaders of all parties in 
permitting this ceremony to take place during your time and in your Chamber. We’re sincerely grateful 
and we would like to express our thanks to you. 
 
And this is an occasion where I’m going to ask, and I can say it this time because I’m chairing, asking 
all members of the Legislative Assembly to remain seated and not to applaud and everyone else to rise 
and applaud our members of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
Applause. 
 
Mr. Jackson: — Thank you very much for your thanks to our MLAs. 
 
And now would you please rise and join in the singing of the national anthem, O Canada. 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan. 
 
 


