





























































Hansard: May 15, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1203 
 May 15, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions on behalf of my constituents who would like 
to see some improved cellular telephone coverage in their area. 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Cudworth as well as Bruno, and I believe there is signatures on 
this petition also from Middle Lake. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the high price of fuel. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of St. Brieux, Brockington, Melfort, Gronlid, 
Prince Albert, and Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 
regards to the high price of fuel. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce the fuel 
taxes by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the petition is signed by people from Shaunavon, Waldeck, 
Swift Current, and Eatonia. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
stand today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens concerned about the high cost of fuel, and the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 

by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Davidson and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of people in Swift Current and area concerned about their 
hospital, and the prayer can be summarized as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist in the regeneration plan for the Swift 
Current Regional Hospital. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Waldeck, 
Aneroid, Mankota, and the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present 
petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan regarding forced 
municipal amalgamation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation on 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these petitions are signed from people in the Govan, 
Lajord, Riceton, Gray, the one person that’s left in Lewvan — a 
number of different communities. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to read a 
petition to stop municipal reserve account confiscation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to ban 
permanently and rule out any plans it has to confiscate 
municipal reserve accounts. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the people from Nipawin and Tisdale. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 



1204 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2000 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Signatures are from Regina, Emerald Park, Estevan, Saskatoon, 
and Athabasca. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition of 
citizens concerned of a lack of cellular service. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to ensure reliable cellular service to Watson 
and area by installing a cellular tower at Watson. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever humbly 
pray. 

 
The petitioners are from Leroy and Watson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise with a petition 
to present on behalf of the citizens concerned with cellular 
telephone coverage in the province. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
And the signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Cudworth. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition signed by citizens concerned with forced municipal 
amalgamation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And it’s signed by individuals from Moose Jaw, Central Butte, 
and Crane Valley. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province petitioning the 
Assembly on the following matters: 
 

To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes; 

To cause the government to ensure reliable cellular service 
in the areas of Watson, Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, 
Cudworth, Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to give notice of a written question. I give notice that on day no. 
46 I shall ask the government the following question: 
 

During the 1998-1999 fiscal year, what were the names of 
all the employees of Executive Council; and for each 
employee, what was their title and what were they paid 
during the fiscal year 1998-1999? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I would give . . . also 
give notice that on day no. 46 I shall ask the government the 
following question: 
 

During the 1999-2000 fiscal year, what were the names of 
all the employees of Executive Council; and for each 
employee, what was their title and what were they paid 
during fiscal year 1999-2000? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask 
your indulgence for an extended invitation of our guests at this 
particular point in time. We have four American senators — 
state senators — visiting our House today, and I would like to 
introduce them. 
 
I would ask them to stand when I introduce them. They are 
seated currently behind the bar on the opposition side. 
 
First we have Senator DiAnna Schimek who is from Nebraska 
and was first elected in 1988. She is currently serving on 
committees of Government, Military and Veterans’ Affairs, of 
which she is the chairman, Business and Labour, Urban Affairs, 
and Committee on Committees. 
 
Today we are having MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) . . . they are shadowing MLAs, and the MLA that 
Senator Schimek is shadowing is the member from Estevan. 
 
Also we have Senator Rich Wardner with us from the state of 
North Dakota, from Dickinson, which is our neighbour directly 
to the south. He currently serves on the Finance and Taxation 
Committee, Government and Veteran Affairs, Correction and 
Revision of the Journal, and Administrative Rules, Higher 
Education, and Regulatory Reform Review. 
 
Senator Wardner is a principal or is a principal — retired 
principal, I guess — in real life. He is currently shadowing the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
With today also is Senator Robert Drake from South Dakota. 
Served in the House as a senator from 1995 until the present. 
He has served on the House Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Committee plus the House Local Government Committee, on 
the Legislative Oversight Committee of the State Water Board; 



May 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1205 

served on the Senate Appropriations Committee and is currently 
the vice-chairman of that committee, and was appointed to the 
Midwestern Conference Canada Foreign Relations Committee, 
and appointed to the Agriculture Policy Task Force, also. 
 
And he is currently shadowing our Agriculture critic, the 
member from Kindersley. And we understand that that is a 
difficult job to do. 
 
We also have the state of Kansas, a 28-year member, Senator 
Paul Feleciano who is the ranking minority member in the 
Senate; served on the Financial Institution and Insurances, Arts 
and Cultural Resources Committees, Commerce, Information 
Technology, Judiciary, Transition Oversight, and the Ways and 
Means Committee. 
 
And today he is shadowing our Health critic, the member from 
Melfort. 
 
I would ask that all members welcome these US (United States) 
senators to our Assembly today — state senators. They will be 
here also tomorrow with the government members. We hope 
that they have an enjoyable and educational visit to our 
institution, and that they can learn about our processes just as 
we can learn about theirs. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the government caucus it’s my pleasure as well to 
extend a welcome to our guests from the United States. Myself 
and the minister responsible for the Crown Investments 
Corporation had a chance to spend a delightful few hours with 
our guests yesterday in a more informal setting, and they are a 
great bunch. 
 
We look forward, as a caucus, to having them on our side 
tomorrow so they can get some real education. And we don’t 
know what happened today but anyway we also, on behalf of 
our caucus, want to extend our welcome to our guests from the 
United States. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My error, I 
missed one very, very important person sitting in the Speaker’s 
gallery, Ms. Ilene Grossman who is the coordinator for the 
Midwestern Conference and without whose very competent 
work none of this would happen. Please welcome her to our 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy 
today to have an opportunity to introduce to you and through 
you to the rest of this Assembly, one of my very best friends, 
Mr. Barry Daku, who is sitting in the west gallery. 
 
Barry is currently the plant manager for the new Armstrong 
Cheese factory in Saskatoon, a factory which has just recently 
received $10,000 through the JobStart/Future Skills program to 
help fund staff training. 
 

And Barry’s done a tremendous job in building up this cheese 
factory, getting it functioning well. We’re happy to have him 
here in this Assembly. Let’s welcome him to this gathering. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you today the board members from Building a 
Nation in Saskatoon. They are sitting in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. They are Glen McCallum, Cal Albright, George 
Laliberte, Tom Hengen, Maurice Bear of Peter Ballantyne First 
Nations. 
 
Mr. Bear taught me my first Cree word this morning, 
Kis-is-ski-tche-wan, which means Saskatchewan. So I’ve got a 
little way to go here, but anyhow. These gentlemen represent 
the business community in Saskatoon and are to be commended 
for the outstanding job they are doing in their community. 
 
And I’d like all members of the Assembly to help me welcome 
them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join 
the member in regards to introducing and acknowledging the 
Building a Nation group and Glen, Cal, Maurice, George, and 
Tom. 
 
And I would say this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is great to see people building a nation and 
going forward and developing businesses, you know, from . . . 
people from northern Saskatchewan in co-operation with others. 
 
So again, please welcome them, Mr. Speaker. Tuwaw.  
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker to you, 
and through you, to members of the House, I’d like to introduce 
four special people in the gallery today. They’re four students 
from my constituency, Ken Radtke and Rachelle Marquette 
from Kelvington and Jennifer Zenner and Jaylene Mortenson 
from Macoun. 
 
They are learning the ropes of being an MLA so after . . . during 
the next election they can win and become Saskatchewan 
government members when we’re on that side of the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce to you today, a gentleman who joins us from Regina 
South: Mr. Bert Ottenson, is seated up in the Speaker’s gallery. 
And next to him, if I’m not mistaken, it’s the Deputy Speaker 
who I think we all know. But if you’d join with me at least in 
welcoming Bert Ottenson, it would be appreciated. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1206 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2000 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Member from Canora-Pelly Expresses Thanks 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it has been a long 
time since I had the pleasure to rise in this Assembly and be 
recognized as the member for Canora-Pelly. I want to begin by 
telling all of my colleagues, and to all the people of 
Saskatchewan, that I’m extremely honoured to be back, and 
probably a little relieved as well. I look forward to easing 
myself into the everyday workload of the Legislative Assembly 
and the constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while it has been only four and a half weeks since 
my surgery, I feel that my condition has improved to the point 
where I can be of assistance to my caucus and to the legislative 
process as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to express my thank you’s this afternoon 
to so many people, and I know that I cannot mention everyone. 
I want to thank Dr. Dewar, Dr. Habib, and the entire medical 
team at the Regina General for the care I received throughout 
the last four months. I always believed that my surgery would 
go well and I want to thank everyone for your well-wishes, 
telephone calls, cards, and prayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I especially want to thank my family, Gail, Bryce, 
and Lindsay, and all of my other relatives for their support and 
kindness. It is great to come from a large family. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I want to express my gratitude to all MLAs 
on both sides of the House, to individual staff members of the 
legislature, and to friends from all parts of Saskatchewan. Your 
positive support was appreciated. 
 
I am thrilled to be back, Mr. Speaker, and I look forward to the 
balance of this legislative session. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Purple Ribbon Awareness Week 
 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would very 
much like to welcome the member back from Canora-Pelly, 
safe and sound. 
 
Mr. Speaker, May 14 to 20 has been proclaimed Purple Ribbon 
Awareness Week. This week was proclaimed by the 
Saskatchewan Battered Women’s Advocacy Network, a 
provincial group that looks at addressing the needs of abused 
women and children. The week commemorates women who are 
experiencing violence or who have died at the hands of their 
partners, and it encourages the public to act to eliminate 
violence. 
 
The week begins on Mother’s Day, a day when most families 
gather to celebrate. For some, however, their family is a 
dangerous place to be. Studies show that almost half of women 
in Canada feel unsafe when walking in their own 
neighbourhoods, yet women are more likely to experience 
violence from their partners than from a stranger. 
 
The statistics are unacceptable. Violence in any form should not 

be tolerated. That’s why keeping communities safe is a priority 
for this government. Our work in government has addressed 
violence with a wide range of initiatives. There are educational 
programs for children, shelters and crisis centres for victims of 
violence, programs for batterers, and innovative legislation. 
 
By working together as governments, families, communities 
and individuals, we can eliminate violence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Donation to Upgrade Ophthalmic Imaging System 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives me 
great pleasure to rise today and tell you about the generosity of 
a constituent of mine from Humboldt, Mr. Ron Bell. Mr. Bell 
recently walked into the eye care centre at Saskatoon City 
Hospital and said he wanted to make a contribution. Well Dr. 
Ken Romanchuk, head of the centre, thought his prayers had 
been answered as two weeks prior to Mr. Bell’s visit it was 
realized that the ophthalmic imaging system was starting to go. 
 
Dr. Romanchuk was concerned that if the machine went down, 
people would not be able to be treated and they’d have to go out 
of the province to receive treatment. The machine is essential to 
the treatment of eye conditions resulting from diabetes-related 
problems, age-related macular degeneration, infections, 
inflammations, inherited diseases, and other conditions. And it 
takes digital images of a patient’s eye and then the doctor uses 
those images as references while they treat the eye with lasers. 
About 2,000 people use the imaging system for treatment of 
their eye problems. 
 
Well Ron Bell has donated enough money to cover a $98,000 
software upgrade to the imaging system. The system’s camera 
is state of the art but the software was outdated. Mr. Bell is 
happy to know that the machine will be upgraded and it’ll help 
many people. As he says in his own words, “I know very well 
what it’s like to have eye trouble so I figured this was one way 
of helping out.” 
 
Our sincere thanks to you, Mr. Ron Bell. Your generosity will 
help many people. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskJobs 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning an 
exciting new provincial Internet service for employers and job 
seekers alike called SaskJobs was announced. 
 
I want to tell the Assembly this is a very important and 
innovative new idea that’s coming to Saskatchewan. SaskJobs 
is the most comprehensive provincial system in Canada to 
provide job seekers and employers with online help with 
making the connection. 
 
Employers can use SaskJobs to search for resumés of people 
looking for work and job seekers can use SaskJobs to advertise 
their resumés, search for jobs, and match their skills to current 
job openings. This new program, SaskJobs, is a new feature 
added to our post-secondary education web site. 



May 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1207 

I want to tell members that they can — members and all people 
in this province, I guess, particularly members opposite who 
may be in need of using this site more soon than some of the 
rest of us — that they can find this great site online at 
www.sasknetwork.gov.sk.ca. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina hosts Grey Cup 2003 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly today to congratulate the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders, the city of Regina, and the province on being 
awarded the Grey Cup for 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last time, which was the first time the Grey 
Cup was held in Regina was in 1995, and was a wonderful 
success and was dubbed one of the greatest festivities in the 
history of the Grey Cup. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it was announced that Regina would once 
again be hosting this auspicious occasion Rider pride welled up 
in everyone of us in Saskatchewan — another opportunity for 
the province to show what a great place this place is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the timing of the 2003 Grey Cup could not be 
better for members on this side of the House. As I’m sure 
you’re well aware, Mr. Speaker, that the only two times the 
Riders have won the Grey Cup the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) was not the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it is our hope that the Premier 
calls an election so the people of this province can accomplish 
two goals. First of all, voting out the NDP government with an 
eventual . . . and voting in an eventual Saskatchewan Party 
government. And second, Mr. Speaker, is that they can head 
over to Taylor Field and watch the Riders win their third Grey 
Cup on home turf and with the Saskatchewan Party 
government. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Social Housing 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to draw to the attention of the members of the 
Assembly and the public that the new provincial budget makes 
a very significant investment in social housing and other 
affordable housing initiatives — all this at a time when most 
provincial governments have slashed their housing budgets. 
 
This year our government is increasing the budget for social 
housing by over $6 million including a $1.5 million budget item 
under Municipal Affairs and a commitment of $5 million per 
year in each of the next four years through the Centenary 
Capital Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, social housing in Canada used to be primarily 
funded by the Government of Canada under a formula in which 
Ottawa paid 75 per cent of construction costs, with the 
provinces paying 20 per cent and municipal governments 5 per 

cent. In 1996, Ottawa unfortunately pulled all their funding for 
new construction, and social housing programs collapsed in 
most parts of Canada. 
 
In this provincial budget, Mr. Speaker, our government is 
saying that good quality, affordable housing is a high priority 
and that we will develop social housing even if Ottawa doesn’t 
help. 
 
Social housing is a major vehicle for reducing poverty in our 
province. It’s critical to the healthy development of children, 
and the well-being of families and communities. I’m delighted 
our province is playing a major leadership role in this area, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Southeast Regional College Graduations 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just to 
make a few comments about a couple of events I attended on 
the weekend. Friday night I had the privilege, with my wife, to 
attend the adult basic education grad in Moosomin, and then 
Saturday, the home care special care aid graduation. At the 
ABE grad in Moosomin, Mr. Speaker, there were 17 students 
with five graduates. At the special care aid graduation, there 
were 17 graduates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it shows us a couple of things. It shows us what 
the regional college network is doing for people across this 
province. It also gives people and individuals the opportunity to 
receive the required education and the tools that will be needed 
to help them to adjust and to plan to enter the workforce in the 
coming years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say hats off to each one of the 
graduates, to the staff for all their hard work and dedication, and 
certainly thank you to the regional college network of this 
province, of which Southeast Regional College is a member, for 
the opportunity they present to students across this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Call for By-election in Wood River 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well this has 
got to be the most one-sided trade since the Lindros deal. Today 
the Saskatchewan Party member for Canora-Pelly returned to 
the legislature, and today we got rid of the Liberal member for 
Wood River. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, in the next few weeks, the voters of 
Wood River will have a chance to pass judgment on your 
coalition government. I am confident that they want this 
opportunity soon. 
 



1208 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2000 

Mr. Premier, will you call that by-election sooner rather than 
later? Will you hold a by-election in the Wood River riding 
before the end of June? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 
members opposite that what we won’t be doing is waiting 22 
months, the way Grant Devine did in the Kindersley riding — 
22 months. You remember that. The member opposite who 
replaces Grant Devine as leader of the right-wing party in this 
province — it’s true they’ve changed their name from 
Progressive Conservative to Saskatchewan Party — but your 
party, while in government, waited in Kindersley 22 months to 
call a by-election; in Indian Head-Wolseley, 21 months; in 
Turtleford, 16 months; and in Eric Berntson’s riding, 15 months 
to call a by-election. 
 
What I can assure you is that it will be much sooner than your 
tradition in your party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad the 
Premier . . . the Deputy Premier should recognize that in my 
tradition we’ve always called for by-elections as soon as 
possible, and I didn’t hear him answer that he was going to call 
that by-election by the end of June. I would like him to reiterate 
that. 
 
But it’s pretty clear, Mr. Speaker, that he has a problem because 
this coalition government has been a complete failure. And the 
NDP, just like they did last time around, is going to get 
pounded in Wood River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before last year’s election, we had eight years of 
NDP government — eight years of high taxes, failing health 
care, crumbling highways, and an agriculture in crisis. 
 
Then eight months ago, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals bailed in with 
the NDP. And now what do we have? We have higher taxes, we 
have worse health care, we have worse highways, and there are 
no solutions for agriculture coming from this government. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s no wonder that the member for Wood River 
abandoned your coalition government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition has been quite lengthy in his preamble. Would you 
kindly go directly to the question. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question to this government that is failing: Mr. Premier, will 
you call the Wood River by-election before the end of June? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I remember not that 
long ago during the last election when that member during a 
debate, in his bullying, aggressive way, was saying how he was 
going to be the next Premier. Well I can say, you’re sitting on 
the opposition side and we’re sitting on the government side 
and there will be a by-election. 
 
Now going back to Kindersley, going back to the 22-month 

wait in Kindersley, seeing the result of that change of MLAs, I 
can now understand why you would wait 22 months and maybe 
we should have waited longer. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite that the by-election in 
Wood River will come within the six-month legislative period 
and when it comes, I’m sure all of us will be there putting our 
platform forward. 
 
And as I say, “Jobs up by 10,000 . . .”, Leader-Post, May 6. 
Everything is going just fine. Be patient and the by-election will 
come quite soon enough. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I want to 
remind the Deputy Premier that while he may of, as a fluke, 
won more seats, the Saskatchewan Party won more votes, more 
support . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal member for 
Wood River has already passed judgment on this coalition 
government. He says it’s a failure and he has no intention of 
seeking re-election as a supporter of the NDP government. He 
said he will not betray the voters of Saskatchewan and the 
voters of Wood River. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that he thinks 
there are three other Liberals who have betrayed the voters — 
the Liberal leader, the member for North Battleford, and the 
member for Melville. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to address my question to the 
Minister of Education as one of the signatories to the coalition 
agreement and a leader of this coalition government. Mr. 
Minister, the senior member of your caucus has now abandoned 
the coalition. He says . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The hon. member will 
remember that asking only executive government 
responsibilities of ministers, nothing related to their parties. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the leader 
— one of the leaders of the coalition government. Will you 
admit that your decision to join the NDP has been a complete 
failure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest 
to the Leader of the Opposition Party speaking of Mr. 
McPherson who at one point sat with the New Democratic 
caucus, then with the Liberal caucus. I’m just wondering 
whether Yogi, Yogi who is up in the gallery, is worried about 
Mr. McPherson now coming over and running for a nomination 
for the Sask Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I’d just like to 
remind hon. members not to engage members of the gallery in 
debate. And also to refer members by their constituency, not by 
their proper name. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they’re getting 



May 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1209 

desperate over on the other side. Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Wood River have been really without an MLA for the past eight 
months. The Liberal member used to be an outspoken member 
of this Assembly, but ever since the Liberal leader sold out to 
the NDP he has been muzzled. The gag order is clearly in place. 
 
Well this morning the member for Wood River spit out the gag. 
He slammed the coalition government and he slammed the 
Liberal caucus for being a party to this dirty deal. The member 
for Wood River said he sees no evidence that this government 
has even considered any part of the Liberal platform. 
 
Mr. Minister, one-quarter of your caucus just walked out the 
door. He says the coalition is a complete failure. Will you 
withdraw, Mr. Minister of Education, from the coalition 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting 
listening to the Leader of the Opposition who still hasn’t got 
over his defeat in November in the last provincial election. He 
just can’t accept it. 
 
But what I would say to you, sir, is the next three and a half 
years — the next three and a half years — will go by relatively 
quickly. It’ll go by relatively quickly and then we’ll be back on 
the hustings again, and I think the results will be very similar to 
last time where the public of the province will see headlines like 
this: “Jobs up by 10,000.” 
 
And they will once again vote for the New Democratic Party 
whether it’s in a coalition format or whether it’s as the New 
Democratic Party and you will be relegated to being Leader of 
the Opposition. So don’t be so impatient. The time will come — 
three and a half years goes by very, very quickly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Detox Centre For Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, the 
Riversdale and Pleasant Hill districts in Saskatoon are 
struggling with a major socio-economic problem. This problem 
involves the departments of Justice, Economics, Health, Social 
Services, and Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
In these areas of Saskatoon, there is a major epidemic of 
alcohol abuse and extreme poverty as determined by the 
Saskatoon Health District, the Department of Social Services, 
and the Saskatoon City Police. Mr. Speaker, the Building a 
Nation organization is made up of Aboriginal and Metis 
members of the community of Saskatoon and they are deeply 
concerned about this problem. 
 
The Building a Nation group and the Saskatoon agencies 
believe an emergent detox centre is necessary to respond to this 
epidemic to ease the stresses placed on the hospital emergency 
rooms, and the police and paramedics. 
 
Mr. Premier, this is your constituency. What have you been 
doing to help the people in your riding deal with this problem 
and will you work with them to establish this detox centre? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me 
remind the member opposite, Mr. Speaker; that in terms of 
poverty, this province is the only province across this whole 
country to have seen a reduction in child poverty over the last 
year. That’s the record of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not by 
following the policies of the party opposite; that’s by following 
the parties of the New Democratic Party and the Liberal Party, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, with regards to the detox 
centre, we are working on this question. We understand the 
issue. We are working on it with the other departments, and 
indeed, with the police service in Saskatoon. And we look 
forward, Mr. Speaker, to continuing to serve the people of 
Saskatoon in the most positive, constructive way we possibly 
can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, between April 1999 and March of 
this year, the Saskatoon police made over 2,000 arrests for 
public intoxication — over 2,000 arrests, specifically in the 
Riversdale and Pleasant Hill areas. What is more alarming is 
those 2,000 arrests involved just over 1,200 people. 
 
According to Saskatoon police statistics, those people were 
arrested between 1 and 39 times. An emergent detox centre 
would keep these people out of a jail cell and out of the 
emergency room but could also involve follow-up treatment 
and counselling. 
 
Mr. Premier, an emergent detox centre is needed in this area of 
Saskatoon as a start. But other long-term solutions are needed 
because alcoholism is just a symptom of the underlying 
problem of the abject poverty these people face. 
 
What commitment will you offer from the provincial 
government to help these agencies and the people in your own 
constituency to build this detox centre and develop long-term 
programming to deal with this major problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, let me contrast the member opposite and her party 
opposite — their platform in the last election, Mr. Speaker — 
with the commitments that we have made, Mr. Speaker, on this 
side of the House to deal with crime in our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know we’ve made the commitment of 200 
new police officers. Mr. Speaker, we’ve got $635,000 to crack 
down on violent and chronic young offenders. We’ve got 
Aboriginal policing agreements across the province. We’ve got 
three-quarters of a million dollars, Mr. Speaker, for serious 
crime units in Regina and Saskatoon. 



1210 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2000 

What did the party opposite campaign on, Mr. Speaker? Zero 
for crime; no more money for dealing with crime, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s their record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the Aboriginal community is very 
concerned with this problem in these areas of Saskatoon and 
they need some pertinent, specific, and meaningful answers. 
 
A recent study conducted by the Canadian Council on Social 
Development, released in April, shows that Saskatoon has the 
highest number of native residents of all Canadian cities, and 
that 64.9 per cent of those residents live below the poverty line. 
So not only is there the health issue of alcoholism, but also the 
social and economic conditions that these people face. 
 
Many of the health, social, and justice service providers in the 
area of Saskatoon have identified an issue of major concern 
here, Mr. Minister. The Aboriginal community wants to lead 
and they want to have legitimate involvement in the 
development and delivery of a solution which would include an 
emergent . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. The hon. member 
has been quite lengthy in her preamble, and I’d also like to 
remind hon. members to kindly direct their questions and 
comments through the Chair. Hon. member from Humboldt, 
kindly go directly to your question. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, will you 
ensure that the Aboriginal community plays a predominant role 
in the development and deliverance of a comprehensive 
treatment program to help deal with this problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I live in this 
riding actually and I’m very pleased to talk about what we are 
doing in this riding, which is the core project as it’s called on 
20th Street. 
 
It’s taking an old grocery store, adding a recreational complex 
onto it to bring children off the street into this area where they 
can talk about education, health. Social Services will be there. 
We are now working the Saskatoon Tribal Council, the Metis 
Urban Council, the city of Saskatoon, the Saskatoon District 
Health Board, and ourselves and our different departments. 
 
This is an intersectoral approach to targeting youth at risk, and 
we are having the first partnership in Canada like this. We are 
very proud of this initiative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Madam 
Minister, let us deal directly with the topic at hand. We are 
talking about a social epidemic, an epidemic of alcoholism that 
needs attention now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Aboriginal community is standing up and 
saying it is time to face this issue head on. There is too much 
suffering in this area of Saskatoon among their people. They 

have said, we are through with denial, and they are deserving 
tremendous credit for the leadership that they are showing and 
for the commitment they have to solving this problem. 
 
They have ideas for developing job placement programs within 
Aboriginal businesses in Saskatoon. They want to be 
responsible for healing the chronic alcoholism and the 
accompanying health and social problems. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . Madam Minister, this is a major social and 
economic problem in your own back yard, one that cannot be 
ignored . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Would the member kindly go 
directly to her question, please. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, will you too face the issue and 
send the Building a Nation group back to Saskatoon today with 
your support and a commitment from your government to start 
dealing with this issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to talk 
again about the partnership in this core project. The Saskatoon 
Tribal Council, the Metis Urban Council, the Aboriginal 
community is 100 per cent behind this initiative. It’s an 
innovative approach to dealing with people at risk. 
 
We’re looking at the prevention of some of the major social and 
health problems in this area and with this partnership we can 
make a . . . certainly make a huge difference in the lives of 
people in this area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

District Health Boards 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, today is the deadline for all health districts to 
submit their 2000 budget plans for approval by the NDP 
government. And many health districts are being forced to plan 
for the closure of hospitals or other health facilities in order to 
meet the NDP-imposed master plan. 
 
And to make matters worse, the NDP has ordered health boards 
to keep their plans secret until final decisions on the facility 
closures can be made. In other words, Madam Minister, you’ve 
placed a gag order on health boards so they don’t have to tell 
their communities they are losing their health facilities until 
after the final decision is made. 
 
Madam Minister, will you lift the NDP gag order so that health 
boards can tell their communities what their plans are about 
closures and how it’s going to affect health care delivery in 
their community? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting 
question. For weeks we heard the members opposite talk about 



May 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1211 

forced amalgamations. We were never interested in forced 
amalgamation. For two weeks the number one issue for the 
members opposite was that we were the pornographers on this 
side of the House. And now, Mr. Speaker, it’s all about gag 
orders. 
 
So what I will say again is that the health districts are 
submitting their plans to the Department of Health. Once we 
have had an opportunity to review all of the plans, we will 
either amend the plans, agree with the plans, or disagree with 
the plans. And the health districts will have an opportunity to 
continue the dialogue process with their citizens and with their 
stakeholders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the 
minister. Madam Minister, on Friday I tabled a letter from your 
deputy minister telling the boards what to do in terms of the gag 
order. 
 
Today officials in the Saskatoon Health District are also 
complaining about your gag order. They say they want to 
discuss their 2000 plans with the public before any final 
decisions are made. Last week a board member from Regina 
Health District resigned because of the devastating effect of 
plans that are being put into place in that health district. 
 
Today I have a letter from the South East Health District board 
of directors that, sent to you, expressing their concern about the 
gag order. And I quote: 
 

We are very concerned by the specific instruction that the 
changes that we are incorporating into our health plan are 
not to be discussed with our public or with our staff until 
these changes have been reviewed and approved by the 
Saskatchewan Health. 

 
Madam Minister, all of these districts are saying the same thing 
— they are under a gag order. Will you lift it today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I was able to answer that question last week and I’ve also 
answered again this morning. 
 
But I do want to say this to the member, Mr. Speaker. I just 
received a copy of the CIHI (Canadian Institute of Health 
Information) report and it’s an indication of how well our health 
system is doing, not only in Saskatchewan and in the country. 
What I can report to all members is that when you look at a list 
of 16 major surgical categories, Saskatchewan ranks one or two 
amongst ten of those categories, Mr. Speaker. That’s good news 
for the Saskatchewan health system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the 
minister. 
 
Madam Minister, in their letter to you, the South East District 
goes on to say, that it’s absolutely important that consultation 

occur in a timely fashion. And I quote: 
 

Consulting with the public and the staff, with them after 
the plan has been approved will simply confirm their 
suspicions that we are not really interested in a reasoned 
consultation process. 

 
Madam Minister, if your plans are to close facilities across this 
province, if your plans are to close health care facilities that you 
promised communities they would have in 1993, if your plans 
are to close health facilities in Lanigan, Watrous, Wynyard, 
Imperial, and Cupar, why don’t you say this in an open and 
honest way? 
 
Madam Minister, will you table a list of the facilities that are 
being considered for closure as a result of this budget process, 
the day you get it which is today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, he asks the same question 
only louder, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I can report to the members, Mr. Speaker, is that in the 
last year we have 17 additional physicians practising in the 
province of Saskatchewan. That’s good news. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I can report is that the number of CAT 
(computerized axial tomography) scans have increased to now 
56,000 in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what I can also report, Mr. Speaker, is that we’ve had a 
doubling of the numbers of MRIs (magnetic resonance 
imaging)and therefore access for the citizens of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, again to the minister. Madam 
Minister, you should clearly understand that this process you’ve 
initiated is very, very flawed. You had previous experience in 
the Department of Education. You know in that department 
there was a process when you went to initiate closures. There 
was complete and full discussion about a board’s proposal to 
close a facility — a school —that had to happen beforehand. 
Consultations went on with the community. Consultations went 
on with the staff and the people affected and the students. There 
was widespread and important consultation that occurred before 
any closure was approved. 
 
Madam Minister, why are you going through this convoluted 
process now in health care? Why won’t you open the process up 
and table those communities that are going to have closures? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
what I can report to the public is that our citizens make 4.7 
million visits to a family physician each year, and we have 17 
additional physicians in the province. 
 
What I can report is that 29,000 people receive home care 
services, representing 1.750 million hours of service. 
 



1212 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2000 

I can also say, Mr. Speaker, that there are 800,000 days of 
in-patient patient care in our hospitals. And I can also that there 
are 650,000 visits to emergency rooms in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our system is a fabulous system. It’s the best 
system in the world. And, Mr. Speaker, this side of the House is 
going to do everything it can to maintain and enhance publicly 
funded and publicly administered health care in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
I think that it may be important for you to listen to the question. 
I didn’t ask . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order, please. Order. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister has 
to listen to the question. I didn’t ask for a statistical rendition 
about what’s going on in health care in Saskatchewan. I asked 
for your commitment to table a list of the communities that are 
going to face closure. We’ve heard already from the Regina 
district health budget . . . will have devastating impact on health 
care. We’ve heard that Living Sky has budgeted to close three 
facilities; Regina Health District two more; the South East is 
concerned about the process. 
 
Madam Minister, I don’t really want to hear a statistical 
rendition of what’s going on in health care. I want your 
commitment to table the list of communities that are facing 
closures of facilities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, today I had an 
opportunity to read an interesting article in The Globe and Mail. 
It’s dated Monday, May 15. And, Mr. Speaker, I am going to 
answer the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the person who writes the article is a man by the 
name of Theodore Marmor who is a professor of public policy 
at Yale School of Management. And what he says about the 
statistical information, and I quote: 
 

That’s why the authority of the CIHI report is so important. 
It is both a voice to counterbalance vocal pressure groups 
with a stake in crisis talk, and a reliable source that every 
journalist covering medicare needs to master (Mr. 
Speaker). 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Queen Elizabeth Power Station Upgrading 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise in the House today to announce a project 
that is good news for the environment, for the economy, in fact, 
Mr. Speaker, for all the people of Saskatchewan. I’m referring 
to SaskPower’s plan to install improved technology to upgrade 
the Queen Elizabeth power station in Saskatoon. 

This is an innovative project, Mr. Speaker. The upgrade will 
take the form of the installation of six new 25 megawatt gas 
turbines developed by Hitachi to be used in conjunction with 
the existing technology at the plant. This system will capture 
waste heat from the exhaust in order to produce steam which is 
then used in the existing steam turbines. This combined cycle 
process raises the efficiency of the plant to 45 per cent, 
allowing 215 megawatts of power to be produced from an 
amount of fuel which would otherwise only produce 150 
megawatts. 
 
The benefits of this improved technology are significant. First, 
the refitting of the Queen Elizabeth power station will increase 
the efficiency of the plant from 30 to 45 per cent. Second, the 
advanced technology will reduce levels of nitrogen oxide which 
improve air quality. 
 
Third, over the long term, greenhouse gas emissions will be 
reduced by 200,000 tonnes a year. To put that in perspective, 
Mr. Speaker, that equals the emissions from 30,000 vehicles in 
one year. 
 
Fourth, and finally, the retrofits will increase the efficiency and 
capacity at the Queen Elizabeth power station. This will help 
meet Saskatchewan’s future energy needs. It’s appropriate, Mr. 
Speaker, that this power station fills that role as it was 
commissioned in 1959 to meet the need for increasing electric 
power generation. 
 
Now, over 40 years later, the plant continues to meet the 
province’s future power requirements and much more. 
 
This project also means jobs, Mr. Speaker — 140 person-years 
for construction, and 20 person-years relating to the assembly 
and maintenance of the gas turbines. That is good news for our 
growing economy. This project is developed by a consortium 
with Marubeni, Hitachi, and SNC Lavalin. 
 
I want to congratulate the employees of Queen Elizabeth power 
station. Through their hard work and dedication they have 
played an integral role in keeping the lights on in Saskatchewan 
in the past, in the present, and I am confident, Mr. Speaker, well 
into the future. 
 
Our power utility company must constantly search for new 
ways to add cost-effective power generation to the system and 
find new ways to better serve its customers and shareholders, 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This project, Mr. Speaker, is another economic initiative by 
SaskPower that will serve the needs of the people of this 
province very well. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I guess in the 
province of Saskatchewan we’ve unfortunately developed the 
reputation over the years of being one of the major polluters in 
the country when it comes to our power sources. I think 
anything that tends to lessen that is something that we need to 
look at. 



May 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1213 

I think another thing that needs to be important is that we 
maintain the supplies of energy throughout this particular 
province. I’m a little disappointed that it’s taken this 
government this long to go ahead and even start thinking in 
those particular areas. 
 
There have been other cogeneration things that have had 
opportunity to be developed. This particular government has 
just avoided them. And the people at the back over there 
chuckle. Wind power, other cogenerations up at Melville, all 
those sorts of things — you can call them whatever you wish — 
are things that this government could have done and chose not 
to do, chose not to do. 
 
They talk of jobs that are going to be produced in this particular 
area. There are a lot of other jobs, Mr. Speaker, things like wind 
generation, that the other ones would have gone ahead and 
produced. 
 
Let’s just bring to mind the pipeline that the deputy minister 
likes to talk about. That pipeline, Mr, Speaker, is a total waste 
of time, energy, effort, and money in this province. Had this 
particular government taken that $114 million and put it into 
other cogeneration situations, this province’s reputation of 
being a major polluter in the production of electricity would not 
be as great as it is right now. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be wanting to look carefully at 
what the developments there are, and we would hope that this 
particular government takes a lot more initiative in the future in 
cogeneration projects, in projects that give this province the 
reputation that it should have and could have. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 60, 
The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2000 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 61 — The Engineering and Geoscience Professions 

Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 61, 
The Engineering and Geoscience Professions Amendment Act, 
2000 be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Regulatory Reform) Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 62, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory 

Reform) Act, 2000 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Legal Aid Amendment Act, 2000 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 63, 
The Legal Aid Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
(1430) 
 

Bill No. 64 — The Fiscal Stabilization Fund Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 64, The 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund Act be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 65 — The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 65, The 
Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 66 — The Personal Property Security 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 66, The Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 
2000 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders 
of the day, a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Kindly briefly state your point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a long-established rule in this Assembly that no exhibits are 
allowed to be used. I would like to point out that the Deputy 
Premier twice during question period was using an exhibit, and 
I would ask that he apologize and refrain from doing so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, during question 
period I referred a number of times to a news clipping from The 
Leader-Post that talked about 10,000 new jobs in the province, 
and I think it’s been a long-standing tradition to be able to use 
news clippings or letters from individuals. 



1214 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2000 

And I’m sure when you check the record, you’ll find that the 
headline in The Leader-Post that I was using, of 10,000 new 
jobs in the province, is very legitimate. And I think what the 
member opposite is more upset about is the fact that they have 
been unable to find one good reason to ask about jobs in the 
province because our record . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. members will know that it is 
pertinent to refer to newspaper articles for notes but not to 
display them as exhibits. And I believe that was just more than 
using it as a reference. I would ask the hon. member to kindly 
apologize for using that as an exhibit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize profusely 
for using the news clipping talking of the 10,000 new jobs, and 
I apologize for that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44  The Insurance Premiums Tax 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Insurance Premiums Tax 
Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget introduced sweeping tax reform 
including a proposal to lower income taxes by $440 million. 
And in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, there were changes to the 
sales tax that were proposed, meaning a net tax cut of about 
$260 million. The changes to the insurance premiums tax are 
made under that umbrella of tax reform. 
 
This Bill increases the insurance premiums tax rate from 2 per 
cent to 3 per cent on life, accident, and sickness insurance, and 
from 3 percent to 4 per cent on all other insurance except for 
hail insurance, which shall remain at 3 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every province in Canada has a tax on insurance 
premiums. This is a tax paid by insurance companies on the 
value of premiums written on policies of individuals or for 
property in Saskatchewan. 
 
Increasing the insurance premium tax by one percentage point 
is one component of the government’s overall reform of the 
personal tax system to improve fairness, simplicity, and 
competitiveness. 
 
As you know, the Vicq committee recommended that the 
education and health tax base be expanded to include insurance 
premiums. We chose not to include insurance premiums in the 
education and health tax commonly referred to as the provincial 
sales tax or the PST, but instead we decided to increase the 

insurance premiums tax assessed against insurance companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the insurance premiums tax rate change will 
increase revenue by an estimated $13.7 million in this budget 
year. If we had accepted the advice to increase the PST to 
include insurance premiums, that tax increase to consumers 
would have been $40 million. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of an 
Act to amend The Insurance Premiums Tax Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, no matter 
how you cut it, an increase in taxes is an increase in taxes. Now 
what it means to the consumer at the end of the day is that they 
have to dig into their pocket, dig a little deeper, and shell out a 
little more. 
 
The Minister of Finance has been telling us about the benefits 
of his proposed budget and the tax reductions. And while the 
minister has indicated that rightly so they didn’t put the full 
E&H (education and health) tax on insurance premiums, the 
facts are this piece of legislation expands the E&H tax, even 
though it’s modestly, to insurance premiums. And what that 
means for consumers, Mr. Speaker, is that they have to dig into 
their pockets more, and it actually costs them more just on an 
ongoing basis just to provide for basic protections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister always likes to refer to the Vicq 
report and the recommendations from the Vicq committee. And 
the Vicq committee . . . it’s true that the Vicq report did 
recommend a significant reduction in personal income tax, also 
did recommend an expansion of the sales tax. But at the same 
time one thing the Minister of Finance continues to neglect and 
fails to tell the people of this province is that the Vicq report 
also called for reduction of that tax. And he didn’t . . . when he 
called for the expansion . . . he called for a reduction. 
 
So the government went part way. The government expanded 
the tax. While it eliminated a few services that didn’t put the tax 
on, it didn’t reduce the tax. And the reason for that, Mr. 
Speaker, was because they didn’t have the ability to cut the 
services and to make sure that they were . . . the funding they 
were providing as services was indeed going to meet the basic 
needs of the service rather than just throwing money into a pot 
and not really being accountable for where it’s going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Insurance Premiums Tax Amendment Act, 
2000 I don’t believe was really necessary. And I don’t believe 1 
per cent more would have made or broken this government, 
while all it does and all it says it to the people of Saskatchewan 
is that every time this Minister of Finance stands up we have to 
dig into our pockets. He’s going to find another way to take a 
dollar out of our pockets. Take a dollar away from us and the 
ability that we have to provide for our basic family needs, or for 
the educational or recreational needs of our families, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s unfortunate, it’s unfortunate that this 
government hasn’t learned from other governments across this 
country that have begun to reduce and are making real efforts; 
not only efforts but significant moves in reducing taxes in their 



May 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1215 

jurisdictions without expanding taxes. 
 
And what we’re saying here, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that while 
this government brags about reducing taxes it has actually 
expanded taxes and expanded the cost in many areas to 
consumers of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So we find it, as an opposition caucus, we find it reprehensible 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m having difficulty hearing 
the member from Moosomin when members are debating 
across the floor. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We find it totally 
irresponsible to be going to the people of Saskatchewan on one 
hand promising the tax reductions, and on the other hand, 
increasing the costs of services and increasing taxes. 
 
And for the member from Regina South, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, what this party campaigned on, Mr. Speaker, was a 
campaign of reducing taxes in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Not reducing with one hand and taking from the other hand, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we had evidence and we checked all the 
evidence. We had the WEFA corporation had taken the time to 
review all the significant numbers, Mr. Speaker, and on three 
occasions basically said yes, you can meet your obligations to 
the people of Saskatchewan in your campaign budget. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, The Insurance Premiums Tax Amendment 
Act, 2000 we find . . . I don’t believe is really necessary. I don’t 
believe the Minister of Finance really had to go through with 
this. I don’t believe that the people of Saskatchewan needed 
another tax burden. 
 
Unfortunately it’s before this Assembly and we will take the 
time to discuss it. We will take indeed, Mr. Speaker, take the 
time to significantly review this piece of legislation and the 
reasons as to whether it was necessary and we would like to 
debate it further at a future date. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, at this time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Fuel Tax Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Fuel Tax Act, 2000. New 
legislation is being introduced to address concerns raised by the 
Department of Justice for the need to more accurately describe 
the tax on fuel as a multi-stage tax. 
 
In practice, Mr. Speaker, the fuel tax is pre-collected by the 
major oil companies and passed on to vendors and consumers. 
Although the new Act technically imposes a tax liability on 
each person who deals with fuel, the tax is recovered each time 
the fuel is sold to the next person in the distribution chain. In 
this way Mr. Speaker, the final consumer ultimately pays the 
tax, so it remains a constitutionally valid direct tax, which is 
what the province has the authority to do under the Canadian 

Constitution. 
 
One of the features of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to implement 
the changes announced in the March 29, 2000 budget 
concerning the taxation of propane. Specifically this change 
exempts all propane cylinder fills where the propane is 
dispensed into a cylinder that weighs 100 pounds or less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Finance officials have worked closely with the 
fuel industry and the other provinces in drafting this new Bill. 
In fact, it is the product of several of their suggestions as well as 
information obtained on the best practices for collecting fuel 
taxes by various jurisdictions, including some of the American 
states. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all provinces, the federal government, and the fuel 
industry, entered into a memorandum of agreement two years 
ago to establish the Canadian fuel tax project. This project 
envisions a fuel tax collection environment where, one, all 
stakeholders communicate effectively and share ideas using 
consistent and clear terminology; two, all information is 
accurate, timely, accessible, and trackable; and three, common 
processes are used across jurisdictions providing for a flexible, 
simplified, efficient, and effective system for the administration 
of fuel taxes. 
 
Through the partnerships formed under the Canadian fuel 
project, Mr. Speaker, several improvements are in process or 
have already been made to fuel tax administration in Canada. 
For example, a generic fuel tax reporting form has been 
developed; standard requirements for colouring tax-free fuel are 
being prepared; common fuel tax terminology is being worked 
on; and simplified fuel tax collection and remittance procedures 
are being put into place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill encompasses many of the procedures 
developed through the Canadian fuel project and in effect, 
provides model legislation for this project. Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill is not designed to increase fuel taxes; in fact, there’s the 
exemption that I’ve mentioned. Rather it’s designed to increase 
the procedures for industry and government. 
 
So it gives me great pleasure to introduce this new Bill which 
will provide greater accountability and simplified 
administration for the fuel industry and for government. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to introduce The Fuel 
Tax Act, 2000. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in regards 
to The Fuel Tax Act, 2000 that has just been presented on the 
floor of the Assembly and some of the arguments that the 
minister has given us in regards to that Act. 
 
As I was listening to the minister make his presentation, it 
seems to me part of the argument was simplifying some of the 
process, making sure that the Act fell well within the guidelines 
of what the . . . tax exemptions that were raised under the 
current . . . or the current budget would certainly be followed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about fuel taxes, and I know people 
across this province and certainly our caucus has been well 



1216 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2000 

aware of the fact that the public in general have two views of 
the tax on fuel. One of the views is that when it comes to road 
maintenance and repair in this province that every taxable . . . or 
every dollar raised through taxes should go towards the 
construction, maintenance of roads to upgrade this crumbling 
highway system in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The other thing that people have been asking for as well, Mr. 
Speaker, the fact that the minister has not been using all those 
taxes that he’s deriving from fuel taxes for the road system, that 
consumers in light of the increases that we’ve seen in the price 
of fuel should actually see some of that tax being refunded to 
help bring the price of fuel closer to what would be more . . . 
seen as a more reasonable figure. 
 
Now the minister talked about and I believe he mentioned 
something about coloured fuels, certainly we have other 
provinces where they’ve got a reduction especially in the area 
for farm fuels; non-taxable fuels are coloured such as gasoline 
would . . . on the farm would be delivered as purple gas to show 
that it is a non-taxable fuel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this piece of legislation needs some review 
as to its specific purpose and the reason for it being before the 
Assembly. Therefore at this time, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Tobacco Tax 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 
2000. On February 24 of this year, the Canadian Cancer Society 
made a presentation to the all-party Special Committee on 
Tobacco Control established by the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Assembly. As part of their presentation, they urged the 
government to equalize the tax rate on roll-your-own cigarettes 
with the tax rate on manufactured cigarettes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is on a steady course of tax 
reduction. However, we fully support the Canadian Cancer 
Society’s objective of reducing the use of tobacco, especially 
among young people, and we are committed to do what we can 
in this respect. 
 
This Bill responds in part to the recommendation of the 
Canadian Cancer Society by increasing the tax on every gram 
of tobacco, other than cigarettes, tobacco sticks or cigars, from 
5.7 cents per gram to 7.7 cents per gram effective March 30, 
2000. This change, Mr. Speaker, brings the tax rate on tobacco 
products sold in grams more closely in line with the tax on 
manufactured cigarettes. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, this Bill establishes a minimum tax on 
cigars of 35 cents per cigar. This change addresses some of the 
inconsistencies among wholesalers in how they have been 
calculating and pre-collecting the tax on cigars, particularly on 
lower-priced cigars. Other provinces, Mr. Speaker, are also 
examining ways to change the tax structure on cigars to reduce 
competitive inequities. 
 
The changes contained within this Bill, Mr. Speaker, are 

expected to raise an additional $6.3 million in tobacco tax 
revenue in the current fiscal year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend 
The Tobacco Tax Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in regards 
to The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2000 that’s just been 
presented to us, this is one piece of legislation that I think, other 
than a handful of colleagues on this side of the House, most of 
us would certainly be in support of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a long-going debate in regards to the 
tax on tobacco and we’ve got . . . I believe the minister talked 
about something like $6.3 million increases in revenues as a 
result of the tax. And I would have a feeling that rather than 
seeing an increase in revenues, I think the objective — and 
certainly what my constituents are telling me and my colleagues 
are saying they’re hearing — people would like to see fewer 
people smoking and actually smoking a lot less, which would 
mean a decrease in revenue on one hand. 
 
But on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, I think what it does is then 
we would hopefully see a reduction in the cost of the health 
services that are needed as a result of the problems affiliated 
with smoking in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation really is just a follow-up 
to the budget that the minister has presented and certainly 
bringing into line the tax increases that were in the budget. And 
this is an area that I really don’t have a lot of difficulty in 
supporting the minister in regards to this piece of legislation. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be so bold as to say we can 
let this one roll ahead into committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 27 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 27 — The Certified 
Management Accountants Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed . . . I’m 
pleased to be able to speak to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 
27, The Certified Management Accountants Act. As I looked at 
the Bill, and as the minister said when he introduced the Bill, 
this is a wholesale rewriting of the governing structure of the 
management accountants Act. This Bill was first written back in 
1978 and it probably is time for it to be looked at, to be 
renewed, to be updated, and all those sorts of things. 
 
As the minister also mentioned in his remarks when he 
introduced second reading of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, he said that 
this is a series of Acts that are being updated by his government 
and they have moved . . . done such things with regards to other 
professions such a dentistry, professional engineers, and 



May 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1217 

psychologists. 
 
I believe it was in last session that the government introduced a 
Bill dealing with the professional engineering association or 
society. And I noted with interest that the Minister of Highways 
today had to introduce an amendment to The Engineering and 
Geoscience Professions Act, 2000. I understand that there has 
been some problems with that new Act that was passed in 
previous session and now there is a need to amend it. 
 
Our caucus has met with some of the groups involved with that 
particular problem and we are certainly concerned that this Bill 
doesn’t create more problems than it solves. While at first blush 
and first inspection of the Bill, it seems to be fairly 
straightforward, it seems fairly non-controversial, we certainly 
will want to take our time and have it reviewed; and give 
ourselves more time to review it, to send it out to other groups 
and organizations that could may be affected by the Bill. And 
we will be doing that. 
 
As I had mentioned there has been problems with other Bills 
that were passed or introduced by this government and passed 
with other professional organizations. And so I will . . . as I will 
state again, we will be taking our time in reviewing it. 
 
There are other organizations such as management accountants, 
the chartered accountants, and other professional organizations 
that may have some concerns with the Bill as well as the 
general public. So therefore I think we will take our time. 
 
And one of the reasons why there can be conflicts, Mr. Speaker, 
is because various groups within a profession have different 
training, have different work experiences, have different 
apprenticeship programs. And are more . . . some groups such 
as the chartered accountants are perhaps more qualified to do 
. . . to work in various . . . in certain areas and other 
organizations or other groups of individuals who have 
somewhat less training and experience may not have the 
necessary tools to deal with some of the more complicated areas 
and decisions that need to be made. And therefore it is . . . I 
think it is critical and it’s very important that due process takes 
place. 
 
As we have seen in the past that when this government says that 
there is nothing controversial or contentious in a Bill, in fact 
history does not bear that statement to be true. So there has been 
times where . . . when a seemingly non-controversial and 
straightforward Bill had some portions of it that were in fact 
controversial and did create a lot of conflict. And so as I have 
said, we will want to make very sure that this in fact is not the 
case in this particular Bill. 
 
I notice that some of the provisions within the Bill deal with 
setting up councils and the power of the council, and it deals 
with revisions as to who is a member . . . who can become a 
member of the association and who can’t. 
 
There is also a provision in the Bill which grants immunity to 
members of council if they do their job in good faith. And I find 
it somewhat ironic that — although I don’t necessarily disagree 
with that provision that — but I do find it somewhat ironic that 
that provision is in the Bill when I think of the fact that my 
colleague, the member from Swift Current, introduced a private 

members’ Bill to protect firefighters who go out and attend fires 
outside their area and members opposite failed to support that 
initiative. And I’m not sure how they justify, in this case, that 
this council be immune from legal action and so forth and not 
support the initiative put forward by my colleague from Swift 
Current. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think at this time, until we have had an 
opportunity to, as I had said earlier, to talk to the various 
stakeholders and interest groups and to see how the powers and 
the boundaries that affect each professional organization and 
how they would interact and so on, I think until we have ample 
opportunity to hear back from these people, I think I would now 
have to move adjournment of this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 32 — The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2000 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had an 
opportunity to look at the amendments as proposed under The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2000 and I’d 
like to make a couple of comments, if I could, on the basis of that 
summary. 
 
When I looked at the Bill I think there was some very obvious 
positives to this Bill and I’d like to just highlight the things that I 
think we could agree on. And then there’s some real concerns that 
I’d like to highlight as well before we allow this Bill to move 
further. 
 
One of the things that I’ve noticed is that unlike other mandated 
pension plans, this one appears to be fully funded and in fact is 
running at a considerable service . . . surplus rather. 
 
(1500) 
 
This particular pension plan, it covers not only municipal 
employees but is also used pretty extensively in other urban and 
municipal areas — for instance, school divisions, regional 
colleges, libraries, and I understand that some of the police and 
firefighters are also using this particular pension plan. And in fact 
overall there’s about 9,000 active and deferred members in this 
plan. That is a very good figure and it’s very encouraging to see 
that. 
 
Under this pension plan, from my review, I’ve found that about 
$22 million is actually used annually as benefits out of this plan. 
So the point, I guess, Mr. Speaker, is that this plan is actually 
doing pretty well and I like to see that. 
 
The problem is though, as has been highlighted by the minister 
presenting this Bill, is that it is operating too well. The surplus in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, has created something of a problem with the 
federal Income Tax Act in that you can only have a certain surplus 
in a pension fund and I think one of the problems that this 



1218 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2000 

particular pension fund is having is that to get the cap down on this 
pension plan to comply with the federal Income Tax Act. 
 
Well how best to go about doing that? It would seem to me that 
you would try and direct the surplus back to the employees in 
some particular fashion. Now the reason that this surplus has been 
generated, has probably for the same reasons we’ve been able to 
generate surpluses in other pension plans and in other savings 
accounts. And that of course is the ability of our economic 
times to generate those kinds of returns. 
 
Those things, Mr. Speaker, certainly bode well for our 
particular times right now. And I would be very disappointed if 
savings funds and particular pension funds, like we’re talking 
about here, have not had the opportunity to grow at a rather 
high rate, if not certainly high satisfactory rate. 
 
I guess the problem is, in this particular Act, in trying to 
eliminate some of the surplus and get it back down to an 
acceptable level, acceptable to the federal Income Tax Act. 
 
But changes will be made. And once changes are made we’re 
talking on a fairly permanent basis. Once these changes are 
made it’s very hard to readjust again. 
 
And we know that the economy is not going to boom at 4 per 
cent as they’re predicting federally. I think this government is 
confident predicting only 2 per cent, but still that’s an increase 
in economic activity. What happens when that activity has not 
. . . will not be sustained? What happens when the interest rates 
start to drop as we’re starting to get indications now, 
particularly if we’re trying to follow the United States interest 
rate? I can see particular problems there. 
 
So I guess, Mr. Speaker, when we run up these kind of large 
deficits, I want to make sure that the government in discussing 
these particular amendments do not get themselves trapped into 
a position where not only are we going to have a problem of 
surplus, but we might get into a problem where we’re going to 
struggle with trying to maintain the pension plan with these 
changes. 
 
So I think it’s very critical that we look at those particular items 
when we’re in a downturn market, as I’m sure that that is going 
to happen in a normal cycle of give and take in our economic 
activity. 
 
The other problem that I have with this particular amendment, 
Mr. Speaker, would be if the potential costs to the employers 
have in fact been taken into account. From the records and the 
debate that we’ve had and what I’ve seen so far, this 
government has a real tendency to download a considerable 
amount of the debt load that the province may or may not want 
to hold itself. They downloaded that debt load onto provincial 
. . . from provincial to municipal government whether it’s 
education or municipal. 
 
With that increased debt load that is being downloaded onto 
these governments, are these governments, in fact, going to be 
able to handle the extra costs that they might run into in the 
future when the economy isn’t going nearly as well. 
 
I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that consultation has been taken 

very extensively not only with the employers of the municipal 
governments, the school boards and so on, with the, both the 
police and firefighters, but also consultation with the employees 
that have a very vested stake in this particular pension fund. 
 
So those are a couple of my main concerns. If we’re going to 
. . . if the added costs to the employers in a downturn is going to 
increase the costs of municipal government generally, I think 
we have to be very cognizant of that when we’re putting these 
amendments in place. 
 
Another concern that I have, Mr. Speaker, is that as we move 
into the debate and continue to debate on expanded regional 
municipal districts, I’m wondering if enough thought process 
and consultation has gone into the effect of things like this 
particular pension plan, and how it’s going to be affected when 
the . . . if and when the municipal realignments take place. 
 
I think the amalgamation, whether they’re forced, voluntary, or 
put in place as models and built from that, there is going to be 
an offsetting consequence to the employees in those 
municipalities. And I know once you get into a larger municipal 
environment with a lot more employees, costs generally 
increase. And in fact, the unions seem to be able to move in in 
those situations instead of several small employers become a 
larger employer. And with some of the debate that we’ve been 
experiencing recently, and will continue to hear in this 
Chamber, about forced unionization that has a real concern to 
me when we get into the consideration of the larger regional 
municipal districts. 
 
So I guess for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very 
appropriate that legislation be put in place to try to look after 
the things that have to be looked after, and that of course is the 
surplus — moving it down so that it’s compliant with the 
federal income tax. That’s very positive. And I think to give the 
employees an earlier pension option at an earlier date or 
improve the benefits of the pension plan. All of those things are 
positive and quite supportive. 
 
And I think that we would, when we get into committee and 
working through point by point, I think we can probably put our 
concerns forward, and hopefully they’ll be addressed. 
 
But at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move that we 
move to Bill No. 231, The Fire-fighter Protection from Liability 
Act. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:10 p.m. until 3:20 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 22 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Peters Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Brkich 
Harpauer Wakefield Wiberg 
Hart   
 



May 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1219 

Nays — 26 
 
Trew Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Cline Atkinson Goulet 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Nilson Crofford Hillson 
Kowalsky Sonntag Prebble 
Jones Higgins Yates 
Harper Axworthy Junor 
Kasperski Wartman  
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2000 

(continued) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is one of those pension plans, that, Mr. Speaker, that the 
government has decided to totally revamp and present some 
new legislation on. This particular piece of legislation . . . this 
particular pension plan, Mr. Speaker, is a fully-funded plan, and 
as my colleague from Lloydminster was indicating, this is a 
pension plan that actually had a surplus to the needs of the 
present-time employees. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this Bill moves towards dealing with that 
particular issue because of the tax implications from the federal 
government. I’m not exactly sure, Mr. Speaker, how they are 
planning on doing this, but one of the things that they should be 
looking at doing is reducing the cost to the members of the 
pension plan, reducing the cost of employees’ . . . employers’ 
costs for this pension plan, Mr. Speaker. It’s always beneficial 
to an employee when there is fewer costs to them that their 
take-home pay is enhanced, that they can better afford to live in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We know that Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is a high tax regime 
and it does cost a considerable amount of money to live here 
because of that taxes. And it affects all sectors, Mr. Speaker, of 
society when we have a high tax regime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard much debate in this House about 
amalgamations of municipalities, both rural and urban. That 
will have . . . If that happens, Mr. Speaker, either on a voluntary 
basis, as the municipalities themselves who wish to have it 
happen, or as the government has been seemingly indicating on 
a — as they called it — directive, directed consultation that 
forced amalgamation, Mr. Speaker, it will have an impact on 
the municipal pension plans of the employees that are involved, 
Mr. Speaker, by expanding that pool of employees or by 
reducing that pool. 
 
A reduction of the pool, Mr. Speaker, of members in the 
pension plan may very well . . . (inaudible) . . . that surplus will 
actually have increased rather than decreased, depending on 
whether or not, Mr. Speaker, the members can transport their 
pensions to some other location to their next place of 
employment. 
 

Those are some of the issues, Mr. Speaker, that need to be 
investigated further. Therefore at this time I would move that 
we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 18  The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — Before I call Clause 1, I’ll invite the Minister of 
Finance to introduce his official or officials. I see one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me Mr. 
Brian Smith who is the executive director of the Public 
Employees Benefits Agency. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and welcome, Mr. 
Smith. I just have a couple of questions if I could, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some of the questions that I’d like to start out with: can you give 
me an idea of the size, the relative size of this pension plan, 
relative to other provincial government pension plans that we 
have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. This pension plan, 
that is the Public Employees Pension Plan, has 34,671 members. 
And it has account balances totalling $2.17 billion and 98 
participating employers. And this is the largest defined 
contribution plan in Canada. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. If I could, I’ll continue 
with some questioning. I think I understood you correctly at $2.17 
million? Billion dollars, sorry. 
 
In terms of its actuarial outlook, can you give me an idea of how 
this is going to play out over the long-term of this pension plan in 
terms of liabilities, contributions? I guess my understanding is that 
there’s an increasing number of participants in this as we go along. 
And is this, long-term, is this going to create a problem? Is it going 
to be compensated for already? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No. It doesn’t really matter how large this 
plan becomes or how many members are part of it because it is a 
defined contribution plan and so there’s no defined benefit. 
 
The difference being that the old plans that applied to employees 
who joined the public service, generally speaking before 1980, I 
think, were defined benefit plans and it didn’t matter if you had the 
money to pay the benefits or not. 
 
This is the new plan for the public service that was brought in 
approximately 1980. And this is a defined-contribution plan, 
and that means that the amount of money that is paid into the 
plan is defined. 
 
(1530) 
 
The employee and the government as employer — or the 
participating employer — pay that money in each and every 



1220 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2000 

month. And at the end of the day when the employee retires, the 
amount of money that is there is taken and it is dealt with in the 
way that the employee wants it to be dealt with — such as 
investment, you know, an annuity for want of a better word 
right now, or something like that. And the benefit that the 
employee will get will be equivalent to what that pool of funds 
that has been contributed will earn. 
 
And so to make a long story shorter, there is no unfunded 
liability in this plan. And there is no way that an unfunded 
liability could occur because the liabilities are met each and 
every month as the employer and the employee pay money into 
the plan on behalf of the contributing member of the plan. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I 
was going to ask if any part of this was unfunded, but I think 
you’ve answered that. Some of the other pension plans that are 
in place are in fact unfunded, and I would hate to see it move 
into a direction, including this one, moving into those same 
kind of directions. 
 
The 2.17 billion that you mentioned earlier, as a secondary 
question to that first comment, has that . . . what kind of assets 
is that kind of money involved in, or is in fact the 2.17 billion 
the assets . . . including the assets of the plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. The assets of course would be 
invested in various forms of investment. And I can tell the 
member, Mr. Chair, that basically 25 per cent is invested in 
Canadian equities, 15 per cent is invested in United States 
equities, 15 per cent is invested in equities outside of North 
America. So that’s 25 and 15 and 15 which is a total of 55 per 
cent. Three per cent is invested in real estate; 40 per cent is 
invested in Canadian bonds, 40; 2 per cent is in short-term 
investments — for a total of 45 per cent and that totals the 100 
per cent. 
 
So some of it is invested in Canadian equities, some in United 
States equities, some in equities outside North America, a bit in 
real estate, 40 per cent in Canadian bonds, and then 2 per cent 
in short-term investments. 
 
So I think it’s fair to say it’s a diversified portfolio, no doubt 
determined by our own people at PEBA (Public Employees 
Benefit Agency) in consultation with investment bankers and 
advisors that they deal with and that they . . . that who do some 
work on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair. Indeed 
it sounds like a very diverse portfolio and I think that’s very 
credible. The . . . as those kinds of investments over the past 
little while have been performing very well. We were just 
talking a bit earlier about the municipal employees’ pension 
fund and that that has gone so well that there is a bit of a 
separate problem that has to be dealt with. 
 
Have these funds generally been performing at that rate, at the 
rate that normally you would expect those kinds of funds to, if 
these were in RRSPs (Registered Retirement Savings Plan) or 
some other kind of mutual fund investments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I can tell the member that 
this fund has actually performed very well. For example, for the 

period ending March 31st, 2000, which would be the last year, 
the fund will have returned 15 per cent, that’s one five per cent, 
which under current circumstances is quite good. And certainly 
that’s true of previous years as well. 
 
This fund and the management of the fund and . . . I should 
have said earlier, by the way, it started October 1, 1977. I had 
said 1980; I wasn’t aware that it actually started as early as 
1977. But in any event, the fund has, yes, done very well. And I 
think it’s fair to say that the fund generally speaking exceeds 
what one would expect to do in the private sector in terms of 
management. 
 
I can tell the member that any of us I think would be quite 
happy in our personal affairs if our own portfolios had grown in 
the way that this fund seems to have grown for quite a long 
time. 
 
And we’re very fortunate in Saskatchewan to have the public 
servants we’ve had at the Public Employees Benefit Agency 
who have done a very good job, and also to have some of the 
private sector investment managers that we have that work with 
us. The plan seems to be able to outperform most other 
investment funds year after year so we’re very fortunate in that 
regard. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
Are we going to be running into the same kind of problem here 
that we did with the municipal employees pension fund where it 
performed so well that we got outside of the limit that’s set by 
the federal Income Tax Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, Mr. Chair, we will not run into that 
problem, and the answer is sort of the flip side of the unfunded 
liability issue. You can’t have an unfunded liability in this fund 
because it’s a defined contribution plan, and all of the money 
necessary to give the member or retiree the money they’re 
entitled to will simply be their fund. 
 
And by the same token, you can’t have any excess surplus 
because all of the money that is accumulated belongs to the 
members. So that after you pay for the administration of the 
fund, that money will go to each individual member according 
to their contributions and then the matching contributions of the 
employer. 
 
So, no, you don’t run into the unfunded liability problem and 
you don’t run into the, you know, the accumulation of the 
surplus problem. And the reason for that is simply that the 
province in the late ’70s, early ’80s made the very good and 
wise choice to go into all the new plans that I think we all know 
about — out of the defined benefit into the defined contribution. 
 
As a result of that, we’re avoiding the problems in these plans 
which is certainly gratifying to me as Finance minister, but I 
think it’s also gratifying to the members opposite and all the 
people of the province. So we won’t have the problem with 
surplus contributions accumulating and we won’t have the 
problem with unfunded liability. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
maybe I should know this, but could you explain to me or 
describe a little about — not the advisers because you’ve talked 



May 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1221 

a little bit about the people advising how these funds should be 
manipulated — could you explain to me who is responsible 
ultimately for the administration? Who is on . . . is there a 
recognized committee or a board and who is it made up of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the answer to the 
question is that under section 3 of the legislation, there is a 
supervisory board of the Public Employees Superannuation 
Plan continued as the Public Employees Pension Board. 
 
It consists of seven members appointed by the provincial 
cabinet, but three members must represent employees. And of 
course the employees are consulted about who their 
representatives should be. Three members represent 
participating employers, of which there are 98. And of course 
the employers likewise would be consulted. And then a person 
is nominated by the Minister of Finance to be the Chairperson, 
and that happens to be Mr. Smith who’s here today and who’s 
the executive director of the Public Employees’ Benefits 
Agency. 
 
So there’s seven members, chaired by Mr. Smith — three from 
the employees and three from the employer — and they 
administer the plan. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, how 
many of the current members are actually drawing from the 
fund? And do you project this to increase significantly over the 
next little while? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair. As I indicated earlier, there 
are about 34,600 people in the plan now. The number of people 
who . . . The member asked, I believe, if I heard the question 
correctly, how many people would be drawing benefits from the 
plan. 
 
And the reason for my delay in responding is that it isn’t 
normally the case that members will draw benefits from the 
plan. Normally what will happen is that they will reach their 
retirement age, they will simply take their money, and then they 
will buy an annuity from a life insurance company or another 
financial institution. 
 
And then the relationship between that person and the plan is 
then severed, and the plan doesn’t keep track of whether they’re 
still getting their annuity or whether they’re still living even, 
because they don’t have any ongoing relationship. 
 
But I can tell the member that since the plan’s inception, I mean 
there would have been thousands of people that would have 
retired, taken their money, invested it in annuities; and there 
would likewise be thousands of people who would be receiving 
annuities under the plan, the exact number not kept track of by 
the plan because it doesn’t quite work that way. And then of 
course some of the employees would have passed away 
subsequent to their retirement. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I noticed, Mr. 
Chair, I noticed as well that one of the provisions is allowing 
for retirement age reduced from 55 down to 50. And I’m sure 
you’ve done a lot of numbers to try to project what kind of a 
consequence that would have on this particular pension plan. 
 

So could you just briefly give me an indication of how you 
anticipate the reduction from 55 down to 50 — retirement age 
— how that will affect the plan in terms of its assets, and how 
many more people will come onto the roll in that case? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We don’t anticipate, Mr. Chair, that that 
change will have a great impact on the plan in the sense that 
because it’s a defined contribution plan, whether the member 
retires at 50 or 55, it won’t make any difference to the financial 
health of the plan in the sense that the only money that the 
member takes when they retire is their own money which 
they’ve accumulated as a result of their contributions and the 
matching employer contributions. 
 
So that since it isn’t a defined benefit plan they simply take 
what they’re entitled to. I suppose one could speculate that if 
you had people retiring early that perhaps you then have fewer 
employees in the plan. But that would only be the case if you 
did not replace the employees that were retiring. 
 
And since in the absence of some other decision we can assume 
that if some employees retire early perhaps some younger 
people or new people will come into the public service. They 
would presumably . . . well they would then be part of the plan. 
And so it doesn’t really have any either advantageous or 
detrimental effect on the plan. It is advantageous from the point 
of view of the employees because it gives them greater 
flexibility to retire. 
 
From the point of view of the plan, whether they retire at 50 or 
51 or 55 or indeed 60 or 65, I don’t think it makes a great deal 
of difference one way or the other in terms of the health of the 
plan for the reasons I’ve indicated. And it primarily is designed 
to give the employees more flexibility. It’s not designed to 
benefit the government or the plan or to cost the plan anything. 
It’s simply to say to the employees that if they wish to retire at 
age 50 they can do so. 
 
But of course I should add that the benefit that they would 
receive from the plan would then be less because their 
contributions would be smaller; they would then buy a smaller 
pension. Perhaps in some cases some people retire in their early 
50s but they go on to another career, or they might work 
part-time, or they might be on the farm or something like that. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman, I understand that talking 
about the people that might want to retire a bit earlier, they have 
an option in this plan, I understand, that they can contribute 
voluntarily into this plan. How much of the plan is . . . has 
contained voluntary contributions? And is there . . . now the 
provision will be to allow them to withdraw that. Is that going 
to cause any undo concern with the fund that it’s . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The provision, Mr. Chair, to allow the 
withdraw of voluntary contributions will only apply to 
voluntary contributions that are made after January 1 of next 
year. So that any voluntary contributions that have been made 
up to the present time, and indeed until the duration of this year, 
are locked in. 
 
Next year if you make a voluntary contribution, as opposed to 



1222 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2000 

what the employer and the employee have to pay in, you can 
take that out. But we don’t have any such contributions yet. So 
what we will do is as of next year start tracking the voluntary 
contributions that have been made, the amount of those, and 
yes, people can withdraw those. 
 
Once again, I don’t think it would affect the health of the plan 
one way or the other for the reasons I’ve indicated before that it 
simply is an individual account of the plan member. And if they 
make voluntary contributions, that will increase the asset that 
they have on retirement. If they withdraw that, it will decrease 
their asset, but it will not either increase or decrease the liability 
of the taxpayers or employers. It will simply be in effect a 
savings account of each employee which they can add to or they 
can take away from with respect to future contributions. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, on that particular, the issue of 
the age — the 55 down to 50 and then maybe in the future 
voluntary contributions can be withdrawn — do you think 
people will . . . is this a way to reduce or give an incentive for 
people to move out of the public service? Is it a way — rather 
than layoffs — is it a way to encourage them to leave? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chairman, I would have to answer the 
question no. It doesn’t provide any incentive for people to early 
retire in the sense that they don’t get anything in addition to 
what they would otherwise be entitled to. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that it gives them the flexibility to retire 
early, but it doesn’t really give them anything extra or anything 
that they otherwise would not be entitled to. If they stayed on 
they would maintain the contributions that they had made that 
were mandated plus their voluntary contributions. They don’t 
really gain any incentive financially to early retire. 
 
Their incentives would be for other reasons: that they want to 
retire, they want to be at home, they want to do something else. 
And so in that sense they have flexibility, but we don’t really 
provide any financial incentive. 
 
And I guess that could be contrasted with other plans that there 
have been from time to time whereby government or a Crown 
corporation have given people actually something extra for 
them to retire because they want to downsize the corporation or 
the government. That isn’t the case here. There’s nothing being 
given to people to encourage them to go. It’s only if they 
voluntarily or individually have already decided that that’s what 
they would like to do. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair. Is this 
pension plan — maybe I should know this — is this public 
employees and pension plan, is it transferable from one 
province to another? I’m thinking that when a person wants to 
relocate out of the province, quite often we’re seeing people 
actually relocating out of the province and I would assume that 
would include civil service as well. So is it transferable both 
ways? Is it transferable out and are other pension plans 
transferable into this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, this is transferable. In order to transfer 
there has to be a reciprocal arrangement with another province. 
But since January 1, 1997, the Public Employees Pension Plan 
has been entering into reciprocal agreements. And those enable 

people from here to move to another province and take their 
pension asset with them. It also enables people to move from 
other provinces here and bring their pension asset with them 
and become part of the plan. 
 
So the answer is yes, as long as you have a reciprocal 
agreement. Looking at the list of people we have reciprocal 
agreements with, I’m not sure that it’s a complete list. I don’t 
think it applies to every province or city. But we do have 
reciprocal agreements with some of the provinces, namely, 
Manitoba, Newfoundland, New Brunswick. And then I see we 
have a reciprocal agreement with the Ontario Council of 
Regents for Colleges of Applied Arts and Technology. 
 
So it looks like it’s not a very complete list. It’s a partial list. 
And I think from the point of view of the Public Employees 
Pension Plan, we’re quite interested in entering into reciprocal 
agreements but we don’t have reciprocal agreements with all 
other employees and provinces. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I would 
certainly encourage the administration to continue to try to 
make those kind of flexibilities a reality. 
 
One of the questions that I had asked you earlier, Mr. Minister, 
in a different form, but it has application here. And that 
question is regarding the possible or any planned indexing of 
the pension plan for public employees. And I realize that you 
gave me a response and I thanked you for that privately. 
 
But I think, for the record, would you indicate if there’s any 
plans in trying to index these particular pension plans, because I 
have been getting some questions from retirees in this plan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, there is no plan, Mr. Chair, to index 
this plan, and the reason being that it is a defined contribution 
plan, and I don’t think there are defined contribution plans that 
are indexed. 
 
I think there are some defined benefit plans in other 
jurisdictions that have, as a component of the defined benefit, a 
right to indexing, but that is not the case with respect to defined 
contribution plans. The reason being that the way that defined 
contribution plans work is that, rather than defining whether 
you’re entitled to a certain benefit plus indexing in some cases, 
those plans work by defining the contribution that you need to 
make. 
 
And what we do, and I guess where indexing really comes from 
in this kind of plan, is that when the money is paid in by the 
employer and the employee, we’re responsible to put that 
money into investments that will earn interest for the 
contributing employee. And then when the employee retires, 
that money would go into an annuity that would be chosen by 
the employee. 
 
So it’s a separate account for employees. There is no unfunded 
liability; there’s no defined benefit. And so it isn’t a situation 
where you could bring about indexing I guess even if you 
wanted to, which we don’t because that would create an 
unfunded liability. It would not be appropriate for a defined 
contribution plan. 
 



May 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1223 

Mr. Wakefield: — Good. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, 
I’ve just got a couple of general questions, if I could, just to 
kind of sum up here. 
 
One of them is: what was triggering the amendments at this 
particular time? Was there some particular events or some 
requests that were triggering that? Was it being requested from 
the employers, from the employee . . . or the potential people 
that will benefit from them? I just wondered why this is 
happening now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, this has been requested by 
representatives of the employees who are on the pension board 
and also representatives of the employers who are on the 
pension board. 
 
And once they made these suggestions, a process of 
consultation was undertaken with the various employees of the 
various employers and they were asked what they thought of 
these changes. Generally speaking, the changes were approved, 
and I think it’s fair to say that it’s as a result of members of the 
plan, both the employers and the employees, saying that they 
felt that these changes would be improvements to the plan. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair, how does this 
PEPP (Public Employees Pension Plan) plan kind of, in overall 
general terms, how would it compare with a pension plan that 
— and I know there’s probably lots of them — a generally 
recognized pension plan in private industry or how would it 
compare with other sectors of the economy? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that the plan 
compares just about on par with defined contribution plans that 
are in the private sector. However, that there are not that many 
defined contribution plans actually in the private sector either 
because they still have defined benefit plans or in some cases, 
many cases — probably too many — because people simply do 
not have pension plans. But this is on par with defined 
contribution plans that do exist in the private sector. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister and Mr. Chair. 
Looking into the future, can you foresee any other changes that 
are going to have to be made fairly quickly in this particular 
plan? Can you see that we’re going to have to revisit this in the 
next short while, or do you think you’ve captured enough of the 
changes and flexibility needed, asked for by both employees 
and employers? 
 
Are we getting to what is really needed for the next foreseeable 
future? Because I think it’s important that, if we don’t do it 
now, it might be some time before it gets reviewed again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, we believe that these changes respond 
to the wishes of the employees and employers as far as we 
know them at the present time. We have not had other 
suggestions coming forward for amendment. So at the present 
time we don’t know of any other changes that are being 
requested. 
 
But of course it’s like everything else. We can’t predict that in a 
year’s time that they may not come forward and ask for more 

changes. 
 
But right now there’s nothing on the order paper, to put it that 
way, from the members of the plan or the employers that isn’t 
really being responded to, and no major outstanding issues that 
we see. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Chair, I 
have no further questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just wanted to say 
thank you to the minister and Mr. Smith for answering the 
questions this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d just like to thank 
the member from Lloydminster and the official opposition for 
co-operation with respect to this matter, and also to thank Mr. 
Smith for his assistance. And with that, I’d like to move that we 
report the Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Women’s Secretariat 

Vote 41 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the Minister responsible for 
the Women’s Secretariat to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. With me 
today is Faye Rafter, the executive coordinator of the Women’s 
Secretariat; and Joan Pederson, the assistant executive 
coordinator of the Women’s Secretariat. 
 
Subvote (WS01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I welcome, Madam 
Minister, and welcome to your staff, Faye Rafter and Joan 
Pederson. It’s great to see you again. 
 
Madam Minister, since 1995, since I was elected I’ve had the 
opportunity and responsibility to be critic for women’s affairs, 
for Women’s Secretariat. In fact I think there was a time in 
there where you were gone and I was still here, so I’ve been 
watching it with great interest for the last five or six years. 
 



1224 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2000 

When I was first elected and the first time we had an 
opportunity to talk about it in 1996, I asked you to describe the 
work of the Women’s Secretariat. So when I was preparing for 
today’s discussion, I looked back and at that time you’d said 
that the secretariat work included policy development for 
women, public awareness, policy coordination, administrative 
work related to government goals and objectives, and financial 
work related to government goals and objectives. 
 
This is a huge responsibility for a small department, and I at 
that time had fear that maybe it was just the way the 
government gave lip service to women’s issues. So for the past 
six years I’ve been watching to see what kind of a difference 
this department has made in the lives of women. And maybe 
you could briefly describe to me what the difference is now in 
the year 2000 compared to the year 1996 when we first started 
talking about this. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I’m pleased 
to provide the member with the kind of work we’ve been doing. 
 
I would I think have to concede that in the early days of the 
secretariat there was probably no doubt that we had a bit of a 
narrower role in terms of our relationships with other 
departments of government. But we also had perhaps a 
narrower relationship with the community at large. 
 
And the Women’s Secretariat has worked very hard to build 
substantive relationships with the Aboriginal women’s 
community, with the farm women’s community, with the 
disabled community. 
 
Because one of the things that became apparent as we started to 
do our substantive research into women’s economic and social 
equality, was that not all women were affected the same by 
government policy. And certainly those differences became 
important differences when considering matters like pension, 
income tax, the design of programs, health care funding, 
whatever that you might care to name — that the effect is 
different depending on the circumstances of women. 
 
So we’ve put quite a bit of effort into getting more substance in 
the various areas. 
 
On the federal level, we’ve been involved in national strategies, 
both on violence against women but also on the economic 
indicators project, so the well-being of women can be measured 
in a comparative way from government to government across 
Canada to see the performance of different governments and 
their policies and programs on the well-being of women. 
 
Because of course, Mr. Speaker, some people say that you 
judge a society by the well-being of their women and children. 
And we do think that these indicators are very important from 
the point of view of being able to compare that policy and 
program performance. 
 
The other thing that we’ve done is some very specific work. It 
became apparent to myself and the staff, on reflection, that 
women were perhaps not as familiar with how to have their 
perspectives reflected in government and how to participate in 
the political processes of government. So we did quite a bit of 
work out in the community on capacity building. 

And I’m pleased to say that the work that we have done . . . For 
example, in the Aboriginal women’s community, there was 
very few Aboriginal women elected a few years ago. Now they 
have quite a presence within their self-government framework 
and there’s many women chiefs and councillors today. And 
certainly we have helped facilitate that process within the 
Aboriginal community. 
 
(1615) 
 
As well, we’ve worked with the broader women’s community 
to talk about how to effectively have your input to government, 
to be part of the decision making. And certainly there’s a 
number of committees that exist now between the government 
and the community, whether it’s the STOPS to Violence 
partnership or other things in the child action plan etc., that 
have the government much more in a working relationship with 
the community so that people who perhaps don’t have as their 
first focus being political can have their input into government. 
 
The other thing that became apparent to us, Mr. Chair, is that 
women, although they are often the people who use technology, 
were not using technology much to meet their own needs. And 
we embarked on a large women on line project where we did a 
lot of capacity building in the area of women using Internet and 
computer technology. And this was for women in remote 
locations, rural areas, reserves, and urban areas. And that was 
certainly a very successful program with a huge uptake from the 
community. 
 
So I think that sort of captures some of the things. Now there’s 
been some broad debates going on about some of our safety net 
programs — EI (Employment Insurance), Canada Pension Plan, 
income tax change. And we’ve also felt that, because women 
tend to be more dependent on safety nets, that it’s very 
important any time these policies are changed to look at how 
they’re going to affect women who so far . . . And it’s not due 
to any fault of our own, Mr. Speaker — we still outlive men and 
because of that tend to be both old and poor. 
 
And so part of our goal in the secretariat is to make sure that 
women aren’t frail and elderly and poor, through the various 
policy initiatives. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I never cease to be amazed that whenever we talk 
about it I seem to get this same kind of answer from you. And 
every year we talk about the reports that you’ve done and the 
briefs that you’ve done and the talks that you’ve done and the 
committees you’ve been on, but as far as something tangible 
that’s going to help the women of this province, women that 
need transition homes, women that are still living in hunger and 
poverty, women that live with drug and alcohol problems every 
day, I don’t see anything different that your department is 
working on. 
 
I know that you’ve talked about the successful women on line 
technology program. And I know that you and I had a 
difference of opinion on that because we spent the first 
considerable amount of money that this government has 
actually given to women in the last six years on a computer 
Internet line service when there was so many things that I and a 
lot of other women considered a lot more needful than 



May 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1225 

computer training. 
 
So, Madam Minister, when I look at the reports for the year 
1999 into the year 2000, there was only one report that I saw 
that was a whole lot different, and that was one that you had 
done on a profile of Aboriginal women in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I see that it’s a coloured brochure with a . . . fairly lengthy, 
fairly in depth. Could you give me an idea of how much . . . 
what the cost of this was to be printed and how many copies 
were made? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I will just mention that the quantity 
originally printed was 8,000 for a cost of 41,000. And the 
demand was so high for the report that we’ve printed another 
4,000 for a cost of 14,000 because people had been wanting this 
information to work with in program design, and also in making 
their case to the various people they need to make a case to in 
order to obtain funding and support for the programs I think that 
you’re referring to. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, give me an idea 
of the kind of groups that are looking for this report. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Aboriginal organizations, people within 
the bureaucracy, employment equity coordinators, chambers of 
commerce, Crown presidents, regional colleges, elementary 
schools, high schools, K to 12 schools, education and training, 
women’s studies, people doing human resource policy 
development, health districts, individuals, legal organizations, 
libraries, media, MLAs, Metis Nation, family support agencies, 
unions, crisis services, victims’ services, women’s groups, local 
government, churches, health organizations, city police, RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police), professional associations, 
National Farmers Union board, regional economic development 
authorities, regional service centres, 
federal/provincial/territorial ministers and senior officials, the 
interdepartmental committee on family violence, the 
interdepartmental Aboriginal economic development 
committee, the Action Plan for Children Committee. 
 
And that would just give you some idea of the requests that 
we’ve had from different people. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, one of the 
interesting things about this profile of Aboriginal women in 
Saskatchewan that costs so far $56,000 is the fact the newest 
information is 1996. 
 
Now with the changes now that we have . . . the speed of 
changes that is happening in this province with Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal women, I would wonder whether spending 
$56,000 in a budget that is awfully limited for women, is this 
amount of money, this $56,000, was it just the production or 
was it actually the cost to get the material together? And is there 
any newer statistics than 1996 that could be put into this book 
to actually benefit the women that are needing this material? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — If it wouldn’t be completely 
self-evident, Mr. Chair, why all of these organizations, who 
amongst them spend millions and millions of dollars, would 
base that spending on good, solid information, $56,000 is a very 
small amount to spend on making sure that you spend millions 

appropriately. 
 
So I quite frankly don’t get your point when it comes to that. 
And the reason why the information is where it’s at, if we had 
more money we could do better studies and have them more up 
to date. But we have to pay StatsCanada for special runs on data 
that they don’t normally provide. And that is the most 
up-to-date data that StatsCanada has. 
 
Now if we were able to get more up-to-date data, we would be 
very happy about that. But that would be an additional cost to 
be able to provide that. 
 
And one of the things that providing the information does is that 
it makes people understand that it is important and it is useful, 
and that therefore, they might up the importance within their 
budgetary processes of producing up-to-date information. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Well, Madam Minister, I would definitely 
challenge you to think that this information that’s from 1996 is 
going to make a big difference. But anything that will help the 
Aboriginal women in Saskatchewan is definitely beneficial. 
 
Are you working . . . or how closely did you work with 
Department of Northern Affairs for their input to see how 
necessary this was? I know that in your staff of 14 people, most 
of the money that is spent in the secretariat is spent on 
personnel. So spending $56,000 on top of your personnel must 
have been a large percentage of whatever money was left over 
for your department. 
 
So again, Madam Minister, I’m just wondering who actually 
wanted this material, and have you done anything to make you 
believe that this is really a successful use of your money? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well again, as you know, one of the 
biggest issues in dealing with society’s problem is for people to 
understand society’s problem. And I think the long list of 
people I read out, which I can read again if I read it too quickly 
the last time, suggests people who feel that this is important for 
them to have accurate information. 
 
And whether it’s the women going to their band council to 
justify why they need something in the area of children’s 
funding, whether it’s libraries who are looking at what the most 
appropriate materials they might get that meet the needs of the 
population that they’re serving, whether it’s police who are 
looking at human justice issues and how they might deliver 
more appropriate legal and justice services or community 
policing services — all of these people seem to think that this 
was worthwhile enough information that we had to do a second 
printing. 
 
Because it wasn’t that we were forcing it upon them. They saw 
the value of this information. And it’s no different than when 
you do surveys on diabetes and you identify that there’s a 
certain area where there’s a high intensity of diabetes and you 
decide that you’re going to target your medical spending to that 
diabetes problem. This is no different than that, only we’re 
dealing with social and economic issues as well as health and 
other issues. 
 
And so it’s the notion that you really pinpoint where the 



1226 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2000 

problem is and then use your resources well on that problem. 
And all of these agencies who requested reports are people who 
are using it in that way. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, and Madam Minister, how much 
money above salaries and accommodation and office expenses 
does your department have to deal with specific programs for 
the secretariat? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We just wanted to make sure, Mr. 
Chair, that we were getting this exactly right. The personal 
services which is essentially the salaries and what not, is 
813,000. And then other expenses are 380,000, and that 
includes things like policy documents, meetings with women’s 
groups, small grants, all that other range of things that are done. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, so then you have 
about $300,000 to spend on grants or policy development or 
whatever you may call it. Can you give me an idea . . . can you 
give me a list of the grants that you have given out this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Just a little clarification, Mr. Chair. Do 
you want us to just get a copy of this and send it across, because 
there’s several pages. I don’t think you want me to read it out. If 
we could just get a copy and then we’ll . . . 
 
The total, Mr. Chair, is 106,400. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
So we have 106,400 and grants out of the 300,000. And I would 
believe that . . . also in the annual report I see that there was 
about $70,000 paid out in contract services. Could you give me 
an idea of what the nature of those services were, how many 
people were actually given a contract by your department, and 
give me also a list of that. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, I think I could send this across. 
But they’re very small; it comes to about 9,250. And again I’ll 
get this copied and send it across — contracts. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
perhaps I should be asking the minister if you have a copy of 
the . . . or the answer to the global questions we normally ask. 
Before we can vote this off, we would like a copy of that. I 
know we won’t be doing it today, but we’ll be talking again 
later on and I would like the answers to those questions. 
 
Madam Minister, I just noted that in the grants this year, there 
was the largest by far grant was one for $47,000 to support, to 
research, develop and organize a one and a half day forum for 
WOOL (women’s organization on line program) recipients. 
Could you give me an idea of what that is? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This is I guess a further development of 
the WOOL project where all the people that were involved in 
the project are having a day and a half of further training and 
development and upgrade on the skills they developed in the 
first stage of the project. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I’m sorry; I’m going to have 
to ask you again. I don’t know what the WOOL project is. 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes. Women’s organization on line. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So then we have 
an additional $47,000 out of this year’s money that was again 
for this technology program from the . . . for the last two years. 
Out of the $300,000 that we have for policy development and 
all the other issues that women need, we spent an additional 
$47,000 on women Internet. Plus we’ve spent 50,000, or 
$56,000 on their Aboriginal book, and $70,000 for contracts. 
And I guess on top of that we have $55,000 spent on travel. 
 
Can you give me an idea whom would be doing most of this 
travelling, how often it was done, and typically for what 
purpose? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There would be basically I guess three 
kinds of travel. About once a year on a very special year, 
sometimes twice, I would get together with other women 
ministers about common issues across Canada; the deputy 
ministers who are working as lead developers of different 
projects at the national women’s forum has agreed to, to do 
with the economic and social comparators, the violence against 
women, and projects. 
 
They would be travelling to participate in the work that goes on 
there. And as well there would be a lot of travel around the 
province to meet with women’s organizations to do the capacity 
building workshops that we did last year, to travel to the 
Aboriginal women’s conference, the Metis women’s 
conference, the farm women’s conference, that kind of thing. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, so I’m at 
230,000, or $231,000 approximately, of this $300,000 that was 
spent for . . . money spent beyond personnel. So maybe you 
could break down further where that money went to, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The other money would be things like 
telephones, rent, all those kind of standard things that exist in an 
office. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I notice that, referring to the 
most recent Public Accounts, I see that $44,000 was paid to the 
Minister of Finance to the Department of Agriculture. Could 
you tell me what that money was given out for? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Chair, that money was part of the 
farm stress line. It was actually two years ago that that was . . . I 
think that’s the amount of money you’re referring to in the 
Public Accounts, and that was used for the stress line to put the 
human resource directory on-line. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, Madam Minister, 
and welcome to your officials as well. I wonder if I could ask 
some questions for a moment on I guess an issue that’s of 
growing interest in terms of women in Saskatchewan, and it has 
to do with women in business. 
 
And I know that some of this may come under the purview of 
the Minister of Economic and Co-operative Development, but 
I’m wondering, Madam Minister, if your department . . . if the 
Women’s Secretariat have done any research into women 
entrepreneurs in our province, and frankly the growing number 
of women in business in our province? 



May 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1227 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Actually I’ve been at several 
conferences that the business women have sponsored on this 
topic. Now we’ve provided a directory of programs for women 
in business is one of the activities that we’ve done. 
 
And as well we’ve worked with other departments of 
government on things like the Small Business Loans 
Association program for women entrepreneurs, the 
Co-operative Department supports to home-based business. 
And I just look at all of these things, the neighbourhood 
development organizations that provides support to basically 
community economic development organizations, many of the 
people involved in that would be women. 
 
And so it’s basically both information to women who are 
interested in getting into business and providing also that data 
in our database about the economic circumstance of women in 
business. Because although women are becoming very 
successful in business, I have to say the income levels, pension 
benefits, maternity benefits, etc., of women in business are 
actually still at a very low level. And although it’s encouraging 
to see people doing this, it is not making much of a difference 
in women’s economic status. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I’m pleased to hear, Mr. Deputy Chair, Madam 
Minister, I’m pleased to hear that you identify one particular 
issue and that’s maternity leave as it relates to women in 
business. 
 
I’m not sure I share your concern about whether or not women 
going into business is . . . I mean you brought in a lot of issues 
there that seemingly are more tied to salaries, to people who are 
on a salary than to women who own their own business and, of 
course, theoretically have an unlimited potential to generate 
revenue. 
 
But anyway I’m wondering, I guess the specific question I have 
is, trying to get information in this area in terms of the number 
of women in business in our province — the success rate of 
women in business in our province — is actually quite a 
difficult thing to do. I’ve checked with Women Entrepreneurs 
of Saskatchewan Inc. I think officials have even checked with 
your secretariat and possibly the Department of Economic 
Development. 
 
Do you have any plans or are you considering any plans to have 
a really detailed look at this issue? They are becoming a 
growing, important part of that most important engine of our 
economy — small business. 
 
And I’m wondering, in light of some of your comments on 
some of the other work that the secretariat has done and that the 
cost for that was worthwhile, do you have any plans to try to get 
a better handle on the amount of . . . the number of women in 
business in our province and their impact on our economy? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The Department of Economic 
Development does have the most direct relationship but I will 
give you a little bit of the statistics that we do have here because 
we do pay attention to this area. 
 
The number of women in Saskatchewan who are self-employed 
in 1998 — again the availability of the census data — 34 per 

cent of the self-employed were women. From 1981 to ’98, the 
number who were self-employed increased from 11,000 to 
43,000. And also between 1981 and ’99, women increased as a 
portion of the total labour force from 38.4 per cent to 45 per 
cent. So there’s both an increase in women participating 
generally in the labour force, but also an increase of about 10 
per cent in women-led businesses. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair and Madam Minister, thank 
you for that answer. I think you’ll . . . I think the numbers also 
bear out that women actually are being more successful lately in 
terms of business start-ups than men are. And certainly I’d 
expect that to be the case here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I have a specific question related to one of the issues you raised 
in an answer, two answers ago, and it related to maternity, the 
issue of maternity for women in business. As you know, a 
woman in the workforce has some protection there in terms of 
maternity leave — both for some income while she’s caring for 
the children and also for a guaranteed job to come back to — 
neither of those things exist for women in business. 
 
And I know that employment insurance clearly is a federal 
issue, but given the importance of women in terms of the 
small-business sector of our economy and the increasing 
importance of women as part of our small-business sector, has 
the Secretariat or other organizations that you network with 
considered even any provincial measures that might address this 
inequity where women entrepreneurs, women in business who 
are interested still in having a family face a clear discrimination 
— although inadvertent — as opposed to men who are in 
business or women who are in the workforce? Are you aware of 
or is your Secretariat considering any initiatives in this regard? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Basically I think what I’d say about 
that is because this growth has been fairly recent, and I think 
public policy always lags a bit what’s happening in the 
community. I mean, we’ve still got difficulties in providing 
things like day care on a national/provincial co-operative basis. 
 
And I think the only country in the world that provides 
maternity benefits to people who are not salaried employees I 
think is Denmark. So this is a fairly rare situation worldwide 
but I think it’s important, and I think it’s something we should 
look at because a woman who’s self-employed is just as 
pregnant as the one who’s employed by someone else. 
 
And certainly I think it’s an important area for future 
development and policy. But as you know, of course, in all 
policy areas there’s a cost — a public cost — to safety net 
programs and to benefit programs. And I think some of the 
discussion that you would get into there would be around the 
area of the expansion of that policy. 
 
But for myself, I think those policies should be within the 
framework of EI policy, because that’s a universal system that 
people can contribute to without setting up a separate 
bureaucracy and a separate program. And certainly again, if 
there are people wanting to take up that discussion, I think 
that’s a valuable discussion to have. 
 
(1645) 
 



1228 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2000 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, thank you, Madam Minister. 
Just to wrap up, I guess I think it would be . . . it would do us all 
a service if either your agency or perhaps the Department of 
Economic and Co-operative Development could perhaps 
through the Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan even 
survey women entrepreneurs in the community. 
 
In terms of measuring the cost of any kind of an initiative, 
whether it was on the tax-credit side or some sort of insurance 
side, I think it’s going to be greatly affected by the number of 
people interested in something like that. Because clearly many 
women entrepreneurs aren’t interested for whatever reason, in 
raising a family, or are past that point. 
 
And so it would probably be a service for all of us to find out 
how many people would be interested in something like that. 
And possibly even if they’re, possibly even if they’re willing to 
share the premiums of something like that if it were a 
premium-based thing. And I don’t know what it would be. 
 
But just with that I’d thank you, Madam Minister, and your 
officials, for allowing me these questions, and Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and good afternoon 
to the minister and her officials. 
 
Madam Minister, I notice in your contracts that there is a 
statement here of final payment for funding opportunities for 
Saskatchewan women and families — a payment of $2,500 
going to Lorraine Thompson. I’m wondering what service this 
is actually providing and how Lorraine . . . if she’s a part of any 
other organization? And if you could explain what the initiative 
was meant to do and how it’s meant to help women and 
families. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes. Lorraine Thompson, I don’t know 
her, but she’s the person who did the original publication on 
funding opportunities for women. And then she did an update of 
that document as the information became outdated. 
 
Ms. Julé: — All right. Madam Minister, could you give me the 
dollar figure of the complete funding to Lorraine Thompson. I 
notice this is the final payment. What was the full payment to 
her? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, we’ve got the past year’s 
information with us, and the two . . . actually she updated two 
publications: Sources of Support for Saskatchewan Women and 
Funding Opportunities for Saskatchewan Women and families 
for a total of $8,000. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
just below that statement there’s a statement of some money 
going to Social Services to reimburse them for profiling 
children in Saskatchewan. I guess I just need some clarification 
and justification on as to why Social Services didn’t assume this 
sort of responsibility for funding of that kind of a profile rather 
than the Women’s Secretariat? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It’s a government-wide integrated 
project that all departments contributed to, so it was a matter of 
pooling resources for a number of different departments to be 

able to do it. And it was coordinated. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Madam Minister, I’m just 
going to ask you for two separate pieces of information for the 
next time we meet. 
 
Could you give me a breakdown, a complete breakdown of the 
$300,000 or whatever the actual figures is for all the monies 
that was spent by your department that wasn’t directly on 
personnel? And the other one — could you give a total spent on 
the WOOL, the women on-line project for the next time we 
meet as well? The total amount of money spent? 
 
Thank you, Madam Minister, and to your officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — If I could just say, yes, we’d be happy 
to do that, Mr. Chair. I would just like clarification if we’re 
talking about in one budget year? 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, and Madam Minister, the 
total amount of money spent on this project from the first time 
we started talking about it. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:52 p.m. 
 
 


