





























































Hansard: May 26, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1361 
 May 26, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I rise this morning to present a 
petition on behalf of the people of the southwest area with 
regard to the fuel tax. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And this petition is signed from citizens in the Hodgeville, 
Webb, and Wymark areas. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals 
from the communities of Swift Current, Rush Lake, Sceptre, 
Glentworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 
regards to the high cost of fuel. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from Swift 
Current, Regina, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
stand today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens concerned about the high cost of fuel. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 

government. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And this is signed by residents of Swift Current, Saskatoon, and 
even Calgary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition for citizens of Saskatchewan who are also concerned 
with the high price of fuel, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial government to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
And as in duty bound your petitioners ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by residents of Govan and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 
to present regarding cellular phone service in the Strasbourg, 
Duval, Govan, and Bulyea districts. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 
 

This is signed by people in the Strasbourg, Govan, and Bulyea 
area. 
 
And as in duty bound I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today . . . I have 
a petition to reduce fuel tax. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures are from Fleming, Saskatoon, Martensville, 
Davidson, and even one from Ontario. I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition to reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 



1362 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2000 

And the petitioners who have signed this petition are from the 
centres of Goodsoil and my hometown of Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 

To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes; 
 
To abandon plans to confiscate municipal reserve 
accounts; and 
 
To provide reliable cellular service in Prud’homme, Bruno, 
Vonda, and Cudworth. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, a group of 26 students and teachers in 
the west gallery. These grades 5 to 8 students are from the 
Harvest City Christian Academy in the constituency of Regina 
Coronation Park in the north end. 
 
This is a group that has been here a couple of years running 
now, and it’s always a pleasure to see them come to the 
legislature and have an opportunity to meet with them and share 
a refreshment later. The group are with their teachers Ms. Ruebi 
Erfle and Mrs. Grace Hillsden. I ask all hon. members to join 
me in welcoming this group to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker. And while I’m on my feet, Mr. 
Speaker, there are a couple of other people I’d like to 
acknowledge and I thank the hon. member for Rosthern for his 
understanding. In the west gallery is my cousin Greg Trew, 
Greg with SEIU (Service Employees’ International Union), and 
I’m looking forward to having an opportunity to get together 
and have a little chat with you a little bit later, Greg. 
 
And also while I’m on my feet, is my good buddy, Fred Kress, 
in the back of the west gallery. And I ask all hon. members to 
join me in welcoming these two friends. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
introduce guests to you and through you to the members to this 
House. Seated in the east gallery are 23 grade 7 and 8 students 
from East Central School from Prince Albert rural, and they’re 
accompanied by their teachers, Ms. Val Horner, as well as by a 

number of chaperones: Mr. Joe Bexson, Mr. Glenn Olsen, Ms. 
Connie Walters, Ms. Twila Gola, and Ms. Teresa Worobets. We 
would like to welcome them to the legislature, and I’ll be 
meeting with them in a little later on to try and clarify what they 
all will see here this morning. 
 
Would you join me to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure to stand in my place and introduce to you and through 
to you to all colleagues in the Assembly, a group that the hon. 
member from Coronation Park and I determined would be on 
the right side of the west gallery facing my direction, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They’re 39 students who have come in from White City 
Elementary School. They’re in grade 8 so I know that they will 
have lots of good, interesting questions for me when I meet 
with them later. I want to say that I’ve had the opportunity to be 
at White City School for an Optimist bicycle safety day and to 
speak to the students during an assembly for career days, and 
I’ve always been warmly welcomed by them. 
 
They’re accompanied today by Ms. Joyce Dudley, their 
teachers, and Mr. Geof Schick. I would ask all members to join 
me in giving a warm welcome to the grade 8 students and the 
teachers from White City Elementary School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to join with the member from Rosthern at welcoming the 
students, the chaperones, and the teachers from East Central 
School. It was, a few years back, part of my constituency so I 
was able to get to know many of their parents and their friends. 
 
I’m hopeful that the decorum in the House will be sufficient 
that the member from Rosthern will not have to explain too 
much what happens in question period after the session. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to 
you and to all members of the Legislative Assembly, 
representatives of the Saskatchewan Association of Licensed 
Practical Nurses that are here this morning to witness first 
reading of The Licensed Practical Nurses Act, 2000. 
 
I’d like to introduce Noella Hart who is the president of the 
Saskatchewan Association of Licensed Practical Nurses; as well 
as Ede Leeson, the executive director of SALPN (Saskatchewan 
Association of Licensed Practical Nurses). 
 
And I’d also like to welcome Greg Trew from SEIU, which is 
the union that represents many licensed practical nurses in the 
province. I also understand that there are people from CUPE 
(Canadian Union of Public Employees) here as well who 
represent licensed practical nurses. 
 



May 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1363 

Mr. Speaker, these nurses have come from various parts of 
Saskatchewan to witness first reading of their Act. And I’d like 
to have the legislature acknowledge these nurses that provide 
care to people in this province day in and day out in licensed 
nursing homes, in our acute care centres or hospitals, home 
care, and community care. 
 
So welcome, welcome to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
rise today to extend a welcome on behalf of the official 
opposition to the licensed practical nurses of Saskatchewan. 
And I’d especially like to welcome Heather Cugnet who is from 
the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy and is with them 
today. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Congratulations to Post-Secondary Graduates 
 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, today is a special day of 
pride for thousands of students and their families and friends. I 
wish to extend our congratulations to our post-secondary 
students who have graduated over these past two weeks. 
 
This week, Mr. Speaker, alone, 1,400 students graduated from 
the University of Regina, and 2,900 students graduated from the 
University of Saskatchewan. Thousands more graduated from 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology), the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College, and 
the SUNTEP (Saskatchewan urban native teacher education 
program ) programs. 
 
On a personal note, Mr. Speaker, I will be attending my niece 
Lara’s, graduation from SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College) teacher education program in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these young people are the future of our province 
and this country. And more and more of them are staying in 
Saskatchewan after graduation. In fact, Saskatchewan 
experienced a net in-migration of 4.5 of technical and university 
students two years after their graduation. This is a considerable 
improvement over the mid-’80s, when Saskatchewan lost 7 per 
cent of their graduates. There is reason to be optimistic in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and students are reflecting that optimism 
by staying here. 
 
On behalf of the government, I wish to congratulate all of the 
graduates and wish them best of luck into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liberal Party Leader On-line 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
read with interest in this morning’s paper that the illustrious 
Leader of the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan went on-line last 
night to talk to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

The only problem is, Mr. Speaker, that only three people 
actually wanted to talk to him. All of the three people took the 
opportunity to chat with the Liberal leader last night, which I’m 
told is the exact same number of Liberals in Saskatchewan who 
support the Liberal leader, who has now taken refuge under the 
NDP’s (New Democratic Party) watchful eye. 
 
I got some advice for the Liberal Party and their leader: come 
time for your next convention, I suggest you do it as well 
on-line, because I’m sure there’ll only be about three people 
who will be willing to climb on the leader’s bus to try and save 
his hide. 
 
And I think people should watch that convention closely this 
fall, Mr. Speaker, because I think we’ll find out the real 
definition of the word scrap. We’ll find out really if this is an 
operative word or if scrap really does mean scrap, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

70th Anniversary of Lakeview Elementary School 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, just five blocks west of our 
Legislative Building on 20th Avenue and Cameron Street is 
another imposing and historic piece of bricks and mortar, a 
building that holds within its walls a significant portion of the 
history of the Lakeview district of Regina Lakeview 
constituency. 
 
I’m talking of Lakeview Elementary School which today is 
celebrating its 70th anniversary as a valuable part of the Regina 
public school system. The theme of this day is Celebration 
2000, and the purpose is to celebrate 70 years of success at 
Lakeview School. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a school this close to the legislature obviously will 
have some shared history. For instance, some of the children of 
Premiers Woodrow Lloyd and Allan Blakeney attended 
Lakeview, as I suspect did children of earlier premiers. 
 
The current Chair of the Regina Public School Board, Mr. Bob 
Brown, is an alumnus, as is Dr. Bill Alport, whose 
grandchildren are currently Lakeview students. The roll call 
through the years contains many other Saskatchewan citizens 
who have made important contributions to our province. 
 
Today, beginning at 4 p.m., there will be tours, refreshments, 
and many shared memories. The Lieutenant Governor will be 
there at 6 p.m. for the official cake cutting. 
 
We wish to congratulate all of the present and future students at 
Lakeview School as it continues to supply people for our 
constituency and our province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

State of Agriculture in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to address yesterday’s statement by the member from 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
I find it interesting that this member from the urban sector 



1364 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2000 

would proudly stand up and proceed to tell everyone about the 
good news from the rural sector. The reason why seeding is 
ahead of schedule is not because of the adjustment payment 
activities that this government is so proud of, but rather because 
of the dry conditions existing in this province. 
 
These farmers have quietly gone about their business in spite of 
the lack of support from both levels of government, in spite of 
adverse dry conditions, in spite of the existing high-input costs, 
and in spite of the dismal crop price forecast. To add insult to 
injury, we now hear that the Agriculture minister has publicly 
stated that agriculture is doing very well in this province. 
 
Well, hello, if you wanted to rile up a relatively quiet group of 
people, that was the way to go about it. The last thing the 
farmers need is the Agriculture minister giving the people of 
Saskatchewan the perception that there’s no longer an 
agriculture crisis. 
 
My phones have been ringing off the hook ever since with 
angry farmers. The question that I have for the Agriculture 
minister is, when was the last time you talked to a farmer in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Golden Sheaf Awards 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know 
the member from Regina Lakeview is always bragging about 
the artists and writers in his constituency, and justifiably I 
suppose. But he and other members need to know that some of 
that talent has waded across the creek and has taken up 
residence in Regina Centre. 
 
I’m just a little late in reporting this, but I’m proud to announce 
that two of a three member award winning team live in my 
constituency. At the recent Yorkton Short Film and Video 
Festival, the top Golden Sheaf Award, the award for the 
category Best of Saskatchewan went to the film Daisy. A film 
by the way, which I saw at its premiere. 
 
Daisy was produced by Loreena Weideman from Craven; by 
Hildy Bowen and Dianne Ouelette from Regina Centre; and 
Dianne Ouelette was the director. This totally independent film 
won out over works by larger, well-established Saskatchewan 
companies which makes the award even more remarkable. 
 
That’s an important accomplishment for these three young 
filmmakers. It gives them recognition and respectability in the 
tenuous world of independent short filmmaking. And it makes 
them a bit of money to make their next film. 
 
So my congratulations to Loreena, Hildy, and Dianne, and my 
respect to the Yorkton Film Festival for giving these 
filmmakers a venue where these works can be reviewed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Highways 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been necessary 
for the last couple of weekends for me to travel to Alberta and 

that’s always been an interesting thing when you move down 
the highway from one province to another one. 
 
Recently one of those trips took me from Moose Jaw through to 
Medicine Hat. And it was interesting that as soon as I ended up 
into the Alberta side, there’s a few changes in the highway, but 
also you had the independent contractor that takes care of the 
highways proudly announce who was in charge of the 
highways. 
 
So when I came back from Medicine Hat back to 
Saskatchewan, I experienced the usual things: the speedometer 
. . . or the speed limit changed; we had more potholes; the 
highway got narrower; and I expected for sure we would have a 
sign there saying our Highways minister was proud to take care 
of the highways of Saskatchewan. But there was no such sign. 
 
As I said, the highways narrowed, speed limits became less, 
there was a crash as I hit a few potholes. And sure enough there 
was a sign — it said “Saskatchewan Naturally.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Meota Curler of the Century 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
curling is the sport of Saskatchewan and its greatest enthusiast 
is a constituent of mine, Jessie Fitch. On April 3, the Meota 
Curling Club honoured 87-year-old Jessie as the Curler of the 
Century. 
 
Jessie’s parents were newlyweds in Scotland when they were 
scheduled to immigrate to Canada on the Titanic. Fortunately 
they missed the boat and Jessie was born nine months later. She 
began her curling career in 1939 and has actively curled 
throughout the past eight decades. 
 
By curling in the year 2000, Jessie has reached her personal 
goal of curling in two centuries. She has now reluctantly hung 
up her broom at the insistence of her family. She has been 
described by teammates and fans alike not only as a great curler 
who is very sportsmanlike, but both on and off the ice, she is a 
great ambassador for the sport of curling. 
 
Jessie’s dedication and commitment demonstrate the kind of 
person that makes my constituency the envy of Saskatchewan. I 
ask all members to join with me in congratulating this great 
woman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Funding for Highway Maintenance 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday we heard the Minister of Finance tell us what a great 
job he’s doing of fixing the highways. Mr. Speaker, I imagine 
the highways do look pretty good from the air as he flies over 
them, but those of us who actually have to drive them know that 
they’re a disaster. The minister was bragging about the fact that 
he collects many millions of dollars more in gas tax than he 
actually spends on highways. 



May 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1365 

Mr. Minister, the fact is you are actually spending less money 
this year on highway construction than you spent last year; $61 
million this year compared to 65 million last year. Mr. Minister, 
how can you tell us that you’re fixing the highways and looking 
after them when you’re actually spending less on construction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s a very 
interesting game that the opposition likes to play in the 
legislature every day because they come into the legislature and 
they say we should reduce the taxes that we collect on fuel on 
the one hand; and on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, they say that 
we should spend more on our highways and roads. And I have 
to tell the opposition and the people of the province, Mr. 
Speaker, that it doesn’t add up. You can’t have less revenue 
collected to fix the highways and more spending on the 
highways. 
 
And what I have to say to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 
is that this budget represents the largest investment in highways 
and roads construction and maintenance in the history of the 
province, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the budget does. That’s 
what this government stands for. That’s what the opposition 
voted against when they voted against the budget in the House, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the minister 
might as well give that 10 cents a litre break to the consumers 
of the province because he’s not spending it on highways 
anyhow. 
 
Mr. Minister, over the past decade Saskatchewan has just put 56 
per cent of its gas tax revenues into highway repair — 56 per 
cent, Mr. Minister. That’s dead last of any province in Canada. 
 
The Canadian Taxpayers Federation calls this highway robbery, 
and that’s exactly what it is. Your government charges the third 
highest tax on gas of any province in Canada — 6 cents a litre 
more than Alberta, three and a half cents more than Manitoba. 
And yet when it comes to investing money in highways in 
Saskatchewan, you are dead last. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, when are you going to address the 
deplorable state of Saskatchewan’s highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite, who I’ve had some very I think interesting 
discussions on the issue of highways in his riding, and he will 
know that last week I think we spent about an hour with the 
deputy minister of Highways going over individual roads in his 
constituency. I’m a little surprised that today he would rise and 
play politics with an issue that we’re trying to get solved in his 
area. 
 
But let me tell you, let me tell you the reason that . . . let me tell 
you the reason that 80 per cent of the money we collect on road 
tax on gasoline is used for roads is because we pay about $750 
million in interest which has to come out of taxes — gas tax as 
well — in order to pay for the Grant Devine debt, the Grant 
Devine debt, which the member from Moosomin, the member 
from Moosomin who yells from his desk, sat around the caucus 
table . . . 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well I don’t know about the accumulation of 
debt because I wasn’t around when it happened, but I know 
some members of this House were, and they contributed to that 
debt initially. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, last year you had nearly 400 claims 
for vehicle damage caused by highway conditions. That’s 400 
vehicles in this province that were damaged from just driving 
down the road. Don’t you think that’s a problem? 
 
On top of that, this government only pays for claims at 
unmarked highway hazards. That doesn’t even count the 
thousands of potholes that are marked by little orange flags out 
there. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other day I had a constituent suggest the 
Department of Highways could save a lot of money by just 
marking the parts of the highway that weren’t falling apart. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can you say that you’re doing enough to fix 
the highways when over one vehicle a day is severely damaged 
just driving down Saskatchewan’s highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again, just a 
small lesson of history for the member opposite, you’ll 
remember back in 1982 — 1982 when the then leader of the 
Conservative Party promised to eliminate the gas tax and did 
for a few years and ran the debt up which we are now paying 
off, now paying off . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The question was allowed to be 
heard. Kindly allow the answer to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, for the member 
opposite, he will remember that the Grant Devine government 
did what they’re suggesting today — to remove the gas tax. Ran 
up the debt to $15 billion. Sold the highway equipment. And 
now they have the audacity to come here and say, why are the 
roads in bad shape, after they ran the debt up which we are now 
paying the interest on of $750 million a year. 
 
The member from Moosomin, the member from Kindersley 
who went to conventions; the member from Weyburn who 
worked for the Devine administration; the member from Swift 
Current — all of them Tories who worked hard to build up the 
debt which we’re now having to pay off. 
 
And they have the audacity to say, why are the roads in bad 
shape. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s some 
selective memory at work here I believe. As I recall, Mr. 
Minister, it’s not the Saskatchewan Party that says that 
highways are falling apart —it’s the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, we conducted a poll recently, and the people were 
asked if they felt safe driving on provincial highways, and fully 



1366 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2000 

one-half of the respondents said no, categorically no; and 87 per 
cent said that your government should be doing more to 
improve highways in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you continuing to neglect the 
Saskatchewan highways issue? Why are you continuing to 
ignore the concerns of Saskatchewan people, people who don’t 
feel safe on your roads? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite and my friend from Cypress Hills. Just imagine this. 
Everyday we’ve heard for the last two months a request by 
those members to reduce the gas tax by 10 cents a litre. Even 
The StarPhoenix is saying this is Grant Devine all over again. 
Where would you get the money? Then he has the audacity to 
come here and say: and spend more money in my constituency 
on roads. Maybe we could do one or the other but think about 
the inconsistency of your statement to say get rid of the gas tax 
and spend more money on my roads in Cypress Hills. 
 
Now I think you’re a credible individual, but your questions 
really lead one to doubt whether or not you’re asking on behalf 
of your constituents or just playing politics. Which of those is 
it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Income 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, the 
other day I heard you on the radio declaring that the farm crisis 
was over. I remember another NDP member . . . Minister of 
Agriculture declaring the farm crisis over a little prematurely as 
well, and I wonder if you happen to know where he is today? 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday Statistics Canada released the 
provincial farm cash receipts for the first quarter of the year 
2000. They show a 10 per cent drop in farm cash receipts in 
Saskatchewan compared to the first quarter of 1999. 
 
Mr. Minister, these figures show things aren’t quite as rosy as 
you like to think they are. Why, Mr. Minister, has your 
government put the farm crisis on the back burner? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say to the member from 
Kindersley that certainly I have not declared, nor has anyone 
declared, that the issue of large farm subsidies which are paid in 
Europe and the United States, which caused huge difficulty for 
Saskatchewan farmers, that that issue has gone away. Far from 
that. In fact what we are arguing is that some of the subsidies in 
our neighbours to the south in the United States have actually 
increased in the last six months which will bear even more 
pressure on farmers. 
 
So any of your interpretation that you’re saying that the crisis is 
over, if that’s the comments you’re making . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, I did not say that. The member opposite is 
not telling the truth if he says I’m saying it. I’m . . . 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I will just caution 
hon. members to kindly choose their words judiciously and not 
impugn motives of other members in the House, please. 
Complete your answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to say to the member 
opposite that he should get his facts right. I have said clearly 
that the situation in Saskatchewan is very tight and tough for 
farmers. That’s what it is. 
 
But I have to say that the farm community has been able to put 
together enough cash, along with the taxpayers of Canada and 
this province through payments and interest-free loans, to get 
about 33 million acres seeded this spring and that is a large 
credit — not to you, Mr. Member, who preaches gloom and 
doom — but to the farm families who are out there struggling to 
seed the crop. Leave them alone and quit playing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The farm community 
would dearly love to be left alone by you and your government, 
I tell you, sir. And in fact, there’s a couple of other things that 
you and your government have said recently that they have on 
their mind these days. I remind you of some of the things you 
said in your Throne Speech, Mr. Minister, in which you 
promised two things. 
 
You promised to form a provincial action committee on the 
rural economy made up of the farm leaders involved in the last 
year’s delegation to Ottawa, and you promised to implement a 
long-term safety net program for agriculture. 
 
And what have you done with both of those promises, Mr. 
Minister? You have done absolutely nothing. 
 
And that’s what causes concern in the farm community these 
days. Just because no one is out front protesting in front of the 
legislature — they’re busy at home seeding these days — 
doesn’t mean the farm crisis is over, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, what happened to those promises that you made 
in the Throne Speech — the Throne Speech that promised an 
action committee on agriculture, and more importantly, a safety 
net program. What happened to those promises, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, one thing I will tell 
the member opposite that we’re not doing and that is what he 
did personally to sabotage the farm coalition. Personally, he 
should take total responsibility for that. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite as well, our Throne 
Speech commitments are being dealt with and will be 
announced. 
 
But what I would ask that member and other members who are 
supporting the Canadian Alliance Party — that policy of no 
subsidies for farmers, of no subsidy for farmers that you have 
endorsed — how does this meet with your commitment and 



May 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1367 

argument to have a long-term safety net program paid for by the 
taxpayers of Canada? How do those two mesh? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Not only are the 
farmers upset with you, they realize that you are a failure in 
agriculture and that is why there isn’t a single member on that 
side of the House that represents a rural constituency in this 
province. And there won’t be for a very long time, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Let me refresh your memory, Mr. Speaker. The 
Throne Speech said, and I quote: 
 

. . . (The) government will pursue a long term safety net 
program that can actually meet farmers’ needs in disastrous 
situations like the one we currently face. 

 
Well, Mr. Minister, where is it? Where is what you have 
promised the farmers? Where is the long-term safety net 
program you promised eight solid years ago when you ripped 
up the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) contracts from 
the farmers of this province? Where is the long-term safety net 
promised, that you committed to in the Throne Speech just six 
months ago? Or was that just more political rhetoric from your 
so-called coalition government, propped up by a Liberal . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I understand why the 
member is so upset. They cannot stand good news. That’s the 
problem. 
 
The fact of the matter is they said, they said . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
cannot stand success of farmers. This is the problem. 
 
They said last fall that the program that was being worked on 
would mean that farmers would not be able to seed the 2000 
crop. And every day we talk about the great work being done by 
farmers and a record crop in record time being seeded. And he 
can’t stand that. Do you know why? Because it’s bad politics 
for him, that’s all. And he is disappointed. So he comes here 
today to rev up his troops to see if he can’t get anger and angst 
going again in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, there’s only one answer that your party and 
the Canadian Alliance have — it’s a stock, pat answer — no 
money for farmers, no subsidies, and no plan. I ask you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the good news for farmers 

according to the NDP is a drop of 10 per cent in cash receipts 
courtesy of you and your government. That’s the good news 
that farmers have got from you. 
 
What you can’t stand, Mr. Minister, is people pointing out the 
fact that there are broken promises every day from this 
government: no long-term safety net — well no commitment to 
agriculture in any respect; no commitment to putting forward a 
rural task force on the deplorable situation in agriculture. No, in 
fact the farm crisis is out of sight and out of mind as far as the 
NDP is concerned. You’ve got far more important issues to deal 
with, don’t you. You’ve got hospitals to close, you’ve got taxes 
to raise, and you’ve got unions to pay off. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, the problem isn’t over and what you are 
doing about it is absolutely nothing. Mr. Minister, where is the 
long-term safety net that you promised? Where is the task force 
on agriculture that you promised? When are you going to live 
up to at least some of the promises that you have committed to 
agriculture? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite just a small list if he’ll be patient. The 
removal of the gas tax has been well accepted in rural 
Saskatchewan, I would argue paid for by our friends and 
neighbours across this province. The $50 million in tax 
reduction on property, a commitment made and delivered to the 
people of the province; $260 million, 95 per cent of the 
applications, now paid out to farmers with the cash in their 
account — done and completed; 300 million in AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) being paid out this 
year. You may think it’s nothing. Four hundred million in cash 
advance, interest free, before seeding for the first time — done. 
 
Now you may think that’s not a commitment by the taxpayers 
and families in this province but I’ll tell you, sir, that your 
ability to try to rev up disruption and dissent in rural 
Saskatchewan for political purposes should be, I say, rejected 
because you’re a troublemaker. Let the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Labour Laws 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Labour. Mr. Speaker, the united 
steel workers . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. I recognize it’s Friday. 
Kindly allow the member to be heard. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the united steel workers union 
has now laid more unfair labour charges against Doepker 
Industries and PIMA (Prairie Implement Manufacturers 
Association). And what are these charges for? Well Ken 
Neuman, district director for the union, says the latest charges 
relate to a series of public meetings and statements critical of 
the provincial labour laws. 
 



1368 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2000 

That’s what it’s come to. It is now illegal to criticize the 
government in this province. Madam Minister, what kind of a 
dictatorship are you trying to run here? Why have you outlawed 
freedom of speech? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I’m always 
pleased to answer questions on labour, but I’m particularly 
happy to answer this one because it gives me an opportunity to 
clarify some information. 
 
First of all, the section of the Act that the member is 
complaining about does not prohibit an employer from 
correcting misinformation. It only prohibits attempts to interfere 
with, restrain, intimidate, threaten, or coerce an employee. And 
I might say that that provision exists in every jurisdiction in 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Clearly this government and this Labour 
minister doesn’t realize the chilling effect its labour laws has on 
the new investment in this province. Mr. Speaker, the union 
director has identified some other so-called offences. He says: 
 

On a regular basis you’ve got Mr. Schneider having 
meetings. There’s an information that’s being put out into 
lunchrooms and bulletin boards which is freely being 
passed out by the company. 

 
Apparently it’s now illegal to have meetings and pass out 
information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have accused us of trying to turn 
Saskatchewan into Alabama North. The NDP is turning this 
province into Cuba North. It is now illegal to criticize the 
government, hold public meetings, or distribute information. 
 
Madam Minister, will you change your NDP labour laws that 
outlaw freedom of speech? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. Minister of Labour, if you were able to 
hear the question, you, please . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now I would 
just want to start by reiterating that we hugely value the 
contributions of Doepker Industries in this province. And 
because we hugely value this industry, we have done a great 
deal of work in terms of manufacturing and processing tax 
credits. We have provided training money. Recently, there was 
a $315,000 grant announced to assist in technology for exports. 
 
We greatly value this, but please understand that during any 
union certification process — some of which are successful, 
some of which aren’t — this is the kind of climate that quite 
often exists. It’s controversial. It’s difficult for the people 
involved. But please to understand these are the rules 
everywhere in Canada in an attempt to create a level playing 
field in a difficult discussion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well this climate is 
unacceptable to new investors in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now have a situation where the owner of a 
company isn’t allowed to speak with his own employees. How 
on earth are you supposed to run a business under these 
conditions? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dave Doepker isn’t allowed to talk, but we know 
money talks. And last year the NDP got over $70,000 from the 
United Steel Workers of America — $70,000, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what this is really about. Their union paid off the NDP; 
so now the NDP is paying off the union. 
 
Madam Minister, all we are asking for is freedom of speech in 
the workplace so workers are allowed to hear both sides of the 
story. In fact, we have introduced a Bill to that effect. 
 
Madam Minister, will you allow freedom of speech in the 
workplace? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now I 
appreciate that the member opposite is too young to know this, 
but this has been going on for 55 years. And I’m going to be 
very clear in this answer because it’s very important to 
understand this. 
 
The section of the Act does not prohibit an employer from 
correcting misinformation. The employer can communicate 
with its employees even about collective bargaining so long as 
the communication is not direct bargaining, and is not an 
attempt to undermine the union, and does not interfere with, 
restrain, intimidate, threaten, or coerce. And likewise the union 
is prevented from interfering if the employees are involved in a 
discussion about de-certification. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Leasing Vehicles in the Prince Albert Health District 
 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. The Prince Albert Health 
District leases about 14 vehicles for the various departments 
including mental health services, public health, and health 
inspectors who travel throughout the district. The district has 
now just announced they will be leasing another six vehicles 
because it will save them from paying staff to use their own 
vehicles. They have been paying off . . . they’ve been paying 
staff and nurses anywhere from 68 cents a kilometre to $1.08 a 
kilometre. 
 
Madam Minister, why on earth would the health district be 
paying over a dollar a kilometre for staff mileage in the first 
place? Why, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, or Mr. Speaker, I just 
want to say this: that as the Minister of Health in the province 
of Saskatchewan, I want to assure the public that I deal with the 
larger issues attached to the health system, and I will have to 
take notice on this particular question. 
 



May 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1369 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Prince Albert Health District claims that they will save over 50 
per cent of the mileage costs by leasing these vehicles instead of 
paying off the use of their own. But why are they paying such 
high mileage rates now? 
 
The anticipated federal rate for mileage by Revenue Canada is 
37 cents a kilometre. Anything over that is deemed income and 
taxable. It’s one thing to say they are saving money by leasing 
but the mileage rates they are paying at present are totally 
ridiculous. 
 
Madam Minister, you have health districts across this province 
in financial trouble and anyone . . . everyone is wondering how 
our health care dollars are being spent. Isn’t this an example of 
health care dollars being misdirected? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said I will get the 
technical detail for the member. 
 
But I do know this, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations does on occasion, every 
two or three years, bargain collectively with their unions, Mr. 
Speaker. And their unions come from the Saskatchewan Union 
of Nurses, the Canadian Union of Public Employees, the 
Service Employees’ International Union, the Health Sciences 
Association, as well as the Saskatchewan government 
employees’ union. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if the question that he asked is 
attached to the collective agreement, but I have indicated that I 
will find out the information for the member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It definitely feels 
that we definitely need a value for audit for our health care 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health district says, we think the additional six 
vehicles would save them $30,000 a year. Anywhere the health 
districts can make better use of health care dollars is a good 
thing. This is an example of where changes can be made right 
now to save money at a time where health care dollars are at a 
premium. But this instance of paying health district staff 
incredibly high mileage rates, and of leasing high-priced 
vehicles, is not secluded to the P.A. (Prince Albert) Health 
District. 
 
Madam Minister, any review this government undertakes 
should examine the value for money we are getting for our 
health care dollars. Will you give the public a commitment that 
all ways to achieve better efficiencies in administration will be 
examined? Will you do that, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be very pleased to talk 
about the review that the province of Saskatchewan will 
announce shortly. What I can assure the members is it’s not 
going to be a review done by the Provincial Auditor, where they 
will only look at the revenues and expenditures, Mr. Speaker. 
We are going to have a review of the entire system. 

But I will say this — I will say this, Mr. Speaker — we will not 
go to Bill 11 which allows private surgical clinics because 
that’s what those members want to do, and it’s in all of their 
campaign material. We will not go to private surgical clinics, 
Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we believe in the five 
principles of the Canada Health Act, and we do not call them 
mindless slogans as the Sask Party does, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We will defend publicly funded and publicly administered 
medicare in this country. We do not want to go to a US (United 
States) styled, two-tiered system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 73 — The Licensed Practical Nurses Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 73, The Licensed Practical 
Nurses Act, 2000 be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, hon. members, I 
wish to table the report received from the Provincial Auditor of 
Saskatchewan, the Report of the Provincial Auditor to the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan on the financial 
statements of Crown agencies for the years ending in the 
calendar year 1999. 
 
I so table. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on a point of 
order with respect to the Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, rule 10(4). 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am concerned about the private member’s 
statement made this morning by the member from Watrous. In 
her statement she specifically referred to and took issue with the 
private member’s statement yesterday by the member from 
Regina Qu’Appelle. And the rules of the Assembly state, rule 
10(4) states: “Statements are not debatable and are not 
responded to by any other Member.” 
 
I would ask you to make a ruling on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would contend that that point of order is not well taken. There 
was no debate. Debate follows one another in order. This was 
simply a commentary, Mr. Speaker, on that member’s opinion 
of the events taking place within the province of Saskatchewan 
and was not debate. 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, under rule 10(4) members’ 
statements are not debatable or responded to by any other 



1370 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2000 

member. And the point of order is well taken. 
 
And I would just ask all hon. members to please observe that 
members’ statement period is not a period for debate but to talk 
about constituency issues or other matters other than entering 
into debate. The point of order is well taken. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 66  The Personal Property Security 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Personal Property 
Security Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill has two main purposes. The first is to amend 
section 9(2) of the Act to facilitate the sale of certain assets from 
the Bank of Montreal to Saskatchewan’s credit union system to 
ensure continued banking services in certain rural Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
The second purpose, Mr. Speaker, is to provide for the transfer of 
all assets, employees, and functions of the personal property 
registry to the Saskatchewan Land Information Services 
Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with regards to the first point, as you’re aware, the 
credit union system has purchased 17 Bank of Montreal 
branches in rural Saskatchewan. We’re pleased and encouraged 
by the creativity which the Bank of Montreal and the credit 
union system have shown in ensuring that banking systems will 
continue to be provided in these communities. 
 
Towards that end, Mr. Speaker, Credit Union Central has 
requested that an amendment be made to The Personal Property 
Security Act, 1993 to facilitate this transfer. The amendment 
would allow the credit unions to accept an assignment of 
security under the federal Bank Act without risking the 
immediate loss of their security position when it’s registered 
under The Personal Property Security Act, 1993. 
 
The change in wording, Mr. Speaker, does not represent a 
change in policy, but rather a clarification of how the section 
would apply to this situation. The position of debtors or loan 
holders with these institutions will not be affected in any way 
by this amendment. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, this government 
proposes this change to the Assembly to support the credit 
union system’s ongoing commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
With respect to the second main purpose of the Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, you’ll recall that the Saskatchewan Land Information 
Services Corporation was created in January of this year. Its 
mandate is to carry out the automation of the land titles system 
in the province and to integrate land titles with the provincial 
geographic information system, commonly known as GIS. 
 
The increased efficiencies resulting from this will provide 
improved services and better turnaround of land titles 
operations. And this will be of tremendous benefit to the public 
as well as to businesses and professionals such as realtors, 

lawyers, home builders, surveyors, financial institutions, and 
the mining industry. As the activities of these and other 
businesses increase, Mr. Speaker, so too does their contribution 
to the growth of our provincial economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of this will contribute to the diversification of 
our economy by supporting the growth of our information 
technology sector and by the sales of new technologies and 
services leading the way to new, well-paying jobs for our young 
people right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The transfer of the personal property registry to the new 
corporation is an integral part of this process, Mr. Speaker. By 
linking it with the land titles system, we’ll be able to enjoy 
new-found efficiencies. And these efficiencies will include 
one-stop access to both the registry and land titles services at 
the regional land titles offices and access to the personal 
property registry through the Internet. 
 
I should point out, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill also clarifies that 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council through regulations will set 
out the rules about access to, and disclosure of, information 
contained in the registry. Also, Mr. Speaker, it clarifies that fees 
for registry services will be paid to the corporation. The 
information contained in the registry remains the property of the 
Government of Saskatchewan and the registry, Mr. Speaker, 
remains a public registry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed changes to this Act will be well 
received by the credit union system and will also be viewed 
positively by rural communities. This is one of the many 
examples, Mr. Speaker, of this government seeking to assist in 
maintaining viable rural communities. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Personal Property Security Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Bill being 
presented, Bill 63 I believe, the personal property amendment 
Act — 66, sorry — has a couple of issues with it that we want 
to check into further. The bit about the banking end of it and 
changing that over, especially with the credit unions and things 
like that, we need a little more time to have a look and see and 
talk to the different interested parties on that and get their view 
on it and see whether it is as non-influential as the member 
opposite says. 
 
As far as the land title and the personal property changeover, we 
know that Land Titles has been going through a number of 
changes recently and some big dollar changes. And huge costs 
are involved there. The members opposite may say it is 
progress, and I certainly hope it is for the amount of money that 
they’ve spent on it. I mean if it wasn’t, it would be a real shame 
and we’d need to be looking into that. 
 
Again on this area we’d like to talk to the people that it’s going 
to be involving the most — as mentioned, a lot of the rural 
residents and property owners — to see how it’s going to affect 
them and if they have any concerns on it. 
 
So at this point I’d like to adjourn debate on the Bill. 



May 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1371 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 64 — The Fiscal Stabilization Fund Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 64, The Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund Act. This Bill formalizes our government’s ongoing 
commitment to responsible fiscal management by creating a 
fiscal stabilization fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, long-term success requires the ability to withstand 
economic volatility and changes in revenues. Our economy is 
tied to the global economy and to forces that are beyond our 
control such as the price of . . . commodity prices like wheat or 
oil, for example. 
 
And we can’t control those forces, Mr. Speaker. But sensible 
fiscal management principles dictate that we can create the 
capacity to manage them, to try to manage as best we can, and 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund provides that capacity. 
 
Since 1925, we’ve been relying on transfers from the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority and its 
predecessor, the Saskatchewan Liquor Board, for fiscal 
stabilization. Enactment of the Bill being given second reading 
today will continue the tradition of prudent and good fiscal 
management; but more importantly, Mr. Speaker, it will 
strengthen accountability and openness over the stabilization 
process — make it more transparent and clear to people what is 
being done with public funds. 
 
Currently, stabilization is being achieved by adjusting transfers 
from the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. Profits 
generated by the authority are recorded in the General Revenue 
Fund but only as they are withdrawn. Accordingly, the earnings 
left in the Liquor and Gaming Authority are not reflected in the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the enactment of this Bill will ensure the 
stabilization process is more fully and openly reported each 
year. All Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority profit 
will be reflected in General Revenue Fund income each year. It 
will be paid into the General Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker. All 
expected transfers to and from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, 
which is the fund being created by this Bill, will be reported in 
the annual budget. And all Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
transactions will be reported in the Public Accounts. 
 
(1100) 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, this Bill links the principles of 
government accountability to prudent, long-term fiscal 
management by introducing a target fund level and long-term 
plan. This Bill specifies a target level of 5 per cent of the 
previous year’s revenues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this long-term target will ensure that unexpected 
events do not jeopardize the government’s continued capacity 
to serve the residents of the province. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill holds the government accountable for long-term fiscal 
management practices directed towards sustaining that target 
balance. 
 

The Bill requires that the government publicly present a 
four-year plan outlining how it will manage the fund to 
maintain or achieve the target level over the four-year period 
and to help ensure, Mr. Speaker, that we do not return to 
deficits or increasing the public debt. 
 
The enactment of this Bill ensures the government will be fully 
accountable for its budget stabilization plans. This Act comes 
into force upon assent but will be retroactive and deemed to 
have been in force on April 1, 2000. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 
The Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we have debated this particular issue before in the 
House in estimates and I’m sure that we will be debating it 
many more times in the House over this session and in the 
future years. 
 
The government likes to call this the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
Actually probably a better name for it is the fancy slush fund 
because the government claims it’s going to use this money to 
maintain its balances in the budget. That means they’re going to 
park the money there for a period of time until they believe they 
need it within the Consolidated Fund to balance the books, 
which is basically what they have been doing with the Crown 
corporations’ money up until this point. 
 
The minister says that all of the profits from the Liquor and 
Gaming Commission will have to be transferred every year. 
Well I wait to see that happen because the experience we have 
with this particular government is they only make those 
transfers when it’s in their political interests — not on an annual 
basis — but when it’s in their personal political interest to do 
so. And I still have a great deal of suspicion. Mr. Minister, that 
is exactly how they will continue to operate in the future; not 
that they will have that many years, Mr. Speaker, to operate in. 
 
In the discussions I’ve already had with the minister on this 
particular issue, Mr. Speaker, it turns out that there is actually 
no money in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund even though the 
minister claims that there’s over $400 million there. What is 
actually in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund or the fancy slush fund 
is a little note, Mr. Speaker, signed in crayon by the Minister of 
Finance that I owe me money. 
 
There’s no money there. He admitted it, Mr. Speaker, already 
that they spent the money. So there is no money there for this 
fund to be established, so the real question is what is the 
political purpose for having this particular fund in place? What 
is the particular purpose? 
 
The Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker — who has since left this 
province — but the Provincial Auditor said the government 
needs to include in their financial budgets, in their financial 
statements, all of the numbers of the government, not just the 
Consolidated Fund, but all of the government’s monies 
including the Crown corporations, including the Liquor and 
Gaming Commission, and then determine whether or not you 
have a balanced budget and determine whether or not the 



1372 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2000 

province is as fiscally stable as the Minister of Finance likes to 
claim that it is. 
 
But they’re not doing that, Mr. Speaker. They’re shuffling 
money off into their fancy slush fund. Then they turn around 
and spend it and they write out a little crayon note that says, we 
the Government of Saskatchewan owe the fancy slush fund 
some money. But there’s no money there; they’ve spent it. 
 
And so when they’re claiming they use it to stabilize the fiscal 
resources of this province, what they’re doing is trying to 
stabilize the political resources of the government. And they’re 
failing in that area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need to take a very serious look and a very critical look at 
this particular piece of legislation before it passes this House, 
Mr. Speaker. Therefore I move adjournment. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the Minister of Finance 
to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have sitting beside 
me, to my left, Dr. Paul Boothe, the deputy minister of Finance, 
and to his left is Mr. Terry Paton, who’s the Provincial 
Comptroller. Beside me to my right is Mr. Jim Nelson, who’s 
the director of the audit branch in the revenue division of the 
Department of Finance, and behind Mr. Nelson is Mr. Doug 
Lambert, who is from the revenue division as well. 
 
Behind me is Mr. Glen Veikle who’s the assistant deputy 
minister and is responsible for the Treasury Broad branch. 
Behind Dr. Boothe is Mr. Bill Van Sickle, the executive 
director of the corporate services division of the Department of 
Finance, and behind Mr. Paton is Ms. Joanne Brockman, who’s 
the executive director of the economic and policy branch of the 
Department of Finance. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, I would like to move resolution 1, which is: 
 

That a sum not exceeding $457.627 million be granted to 
Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 
31, 2001. 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would like 
to welcome your officials here, Mr. Minister. We had the 
opportunity of course to meet them once before and we’ll 
proceed, but before I proceed, Mr. Chair, I wonder if I could 
defer for a moment to my colleague who has a introduction. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Yes, Mr. Chair, with leave for the introduction of 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, in the 

Speaker’s gallery this morning, we are joined by some very 
special guests of one of our pages, Carla Huber. Her parents and 
grandmothers are in the gallery: Bob and Sheila Huber from 
Lipton, and Alma Huber, the grandmother of our page, from 
Lipton, and Anne Onrait from Balcarres is also joining us here 
this morning. 
 
Mr. Chair, I want to assure them that their daughter is doing a 
very excellent job — and granddaughter — is doing an 
excellent job on behalf of the members of the legislature. And 
I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming them to the 
legislature here this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, as I 
mentioned, it just seemed a short while ago we were doing this 
exercise with at that time we were looking at the interim supply 
for a two-twelfths period which of course is expiring fairly 
quickly. 
 
I guess I would like to get an indication from you or from your 
officials, was this money at this time sufficient? Have we been 
able to accomplish what you had projected it would do in the 12 
. . . in the first two-month period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I can tell the member it 
was sufficient and it enabled the government and the third 
parties to carry out the activities that they need to carry out for 
that period of time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you. Was there any particular 
shortfalls in any department or any particular program that was 
initiated or proposed to be initiated? I think it’s important for 
the public in particular to know that the plans and projections 
that you’ve put forward are in fact moving forward and not 
delayed again for first those two months and now maybe one 
more month. 
 
Those programs and the initiatives are quite important in our 
province and I know people are looking forward to them. And I 
just wondered if there was any particular delay in any one of 
those programs or initiatives moving forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — None that we are aware of, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I wonder if you could 
tell us how much of the money that was granted to each 
department in the first 12 months’ appropriation was actually 
spent into those departments or was there some move from one 
department to another? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, we can’t move money from one 
department to another but roughly one-twelfth of a 
department’s annual budget is spent by each department per 
month. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The particular 
capital projects that were proposed, and a lot of the areas are 



May 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1373 

planning to see . . . I’m talking now about projects for schools 
or for health districts or in fact for highways. 
 
Could you tell us if any of those have started and are in 
desperate need to keep the interim supply of money coming? 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I think in a general sense, Mr. Chair, 
it’s fair to say that there are many projects in departments like 
Health and Highways and work is ongoing on a monthly basis, 
whether they’re in the planning stages or the construction 
stages. And certainly it’s important to maintain a reasonable 
cash flow to those departments so that they can undertake the 
capital work that is budgeted for. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. One of 
the other areas of concern is the . . . in the programs area is the 
farm aid program. We were just told recently, I think just 
yesterday, that the cheques have been going out on a pretty 
regular basis. 
 
Now correct me if I’m wrong. Is that in last year’s budget or is 
that money that will be . . . is projected from this year’s budget 
and therefore have an implication on interim supply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, there is $140 million was 
budgeted in 1998-99 budget as part of AIDA. And so that 
AIDA money was budgeted in 1988-99 — $140 million. Then 
in the budget year ’99-2000, which was last year, there was $40 
million I believe in AIDA money, combined with $40 million I 
believe from the federal government, for a total of $80 million 
with respect to that fiscal year. 
 
And I’m advised that those were the expenditures for those 
fiscal years under the AIDA program. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Is there 
any plan to use the one-time, special one-time payment that was 
anticipated in recent announcements for agriculture programs? 
Will that be coming out of this particular coming year’s budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as I indicated, Mr. Chair, the money 
that has gone out was budgeted in 1998-99 and 1999-2000. 
There also . . . as a result of the recent budget, there was some 
money earmarked for property tax relief, and that will be going 
out in this fiscal year, and also will be part of the budget for this 
fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in a 
situation like interim supply, is that going to cause any 
particular delays in those programs that are projected for this 
year’s budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No. We don’t anticipate any delays from 
what we anticipate to do in this year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you. That’s encouraging because 
those programs are certainly . . . we’re looking forward to them. 
The farmers and producers in Saskatchewan are desperately in 
need of those particular programs as you’re well aware. 
 
I’d like to talk a little bit about now the revenue side. Where 

we’ve been discussing the expenditures, on the revenue side has 
the . . . in the first two months of the interim supply covered so 
far, are they on line, are they in track? Are they in track, in fact, 
all the departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, they are, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chair, in your . . . Mr. Minister, in your 
recent announcement that the credit rating had been changed to 
an A level in the province, is there a significance in that 
particular change? Is there a significant advantage now that 
we’ll be able to see on the revenue side or the expenditure side 
that might have some influence or significant effect on the 
interim supply that we’re debating now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I think the answer is, not in any way that 
could be easily quantified, Mr. Chair. And the reason for that is 
that although we have gone generally speaking to an A credit 
rating, our bonds have been trading — that is investment in 
Saskatchewan government bonds are trading now as though we 
had a AA credit rating. Because we have a better trading 
experience attracting investors to government bonds than most 
other jurisdictions in Canada. 
 
So even though our credit rating has improved, we won’t 
necessarily get better interest rates because we’ve already been 
getting interest rates as if we were rated as AA even though 
we’re only single A, which sounds kind of odd. 
 
But I must tell you that the credit rating upgrade probably will 
not save us any interest money in the short term, although in the 
longer term, again hard to quantify, the fact that Saskatchewan 
is perceived by outside observers to be a stable province with a 
good fiscal management, means that it’s seen as a better place 
for investors to invest in government bonds, but also to invest in 
business because they know that the tax rates are going to be 
stable; we’re not going to be raising taxes; there are no hidden 
surprises. 
 
And so in the long term it’s very good for the province. Hard to 
quantify. And I don’t think it’s going to improve the interest 
that we pay or significantly affect either the revenue side or the 
expenditure side, because the investment community outside 
the province has been for some time saying that Saskatchewan 
is well managed. 
 
And one of the things that I learned, talking to some of the 
credit rating agencies and investment bankers in the East when I 
was there, is that they regard the latest budget as having been a 
step in the right direction which they believe will further 
improve our credit rating in the future. 
 
And so it’s good to get the credit rating upgrades we’re getting, 
which I think we’ve got six in the last few years. Maybe it’s six 
in the last five years. We’re back to the A’s from being sort of 
at the bottom of the pack. So most of them are saying we’re 
headed in the right direction, but I don’t see any short-term 
interest saving for the reasons that I’ve indicated, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I guess 
I was thinking in terms of — and I think you’ve answered — I 
was thinking in terms of some significant savings in debt 
servicing and I think you explained that . . . or in investing 



1374 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2000 

opportunities. 
 
The one area that I would like to go back to when I was talking 
about the particular programs, and that is in the area of health, 
and that’s the Health Transition Fund that was announced 
earlier on. And my understanding was that some of that money 
has already been spent and directed toward those health districts 
that are experiencing some in-debt situations. 
 
Can you tell me how much of that fund has been reallocated to 
that particular objective and will that continue out of that fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I believe, Mr. Chair, it’s approximately $26 
million has been sent to Regina, Saskatoon, and East Central 
Health District. And it is not anticipated at the moment that any 
more of the transition fund will be spent until we have the 
opportunity to have a better examination of the health care 
system. 
 
And I might say that one of the things we do need to look at is 
the debt situation of the health boards, and if some of them have 
debt situation that is unsustainable — it doesn’t mean that you 
have to pay the debt off all at once — but it may mean that in 
assisting them to a transition plan to a sustainable health care 
system, you need to come up with a debt reduction plan, a plan 
that tells you how you’re going to retire that debt. 
 
And if we did that in the right way, I think we could assist the 
health districts in providing health services in the sense that 
they would then have more of their resources available to 
provide services to the public. 
 
So the debt is definitely a part of what we need to look at in the 
health system. We also need to look at sustainability, how you 
retire debt, and how you make sure that the amount of dollars 
available matches the amount of services that people need and 
where they need those services to be delivered. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair. If I 
could follow that a little bit. The amount of money that you 
indicated that had been allocated to, I think you said, two health 
districts, there is several more health districts in a debt situation 
in the province. And I’m wondering if there’s a particular 
reason that those two or a limited number were looked at as 
opposed to looking at some of the other districts and how that 
might imply or affect this interim supply that we’re discussing 
now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — These are very good questions, Mr. Chair, 
but these are questions which would be more appropriately 
dealt with in estimates with the Minister of Health. Detailed 
questions with respect to the expenditures within a department 
normally would be addressed to the minister in charge of that 
department. 
 
And while as Minister of Finance I’m pleased to provide the 
$150 million of taxpayers’ money to the Department of Health 
for the transition fund, the detailed questions really should be 
directed to the Minister of Health. 
 
I’ll just say to the member that the money has gone to those 
three health districts because of advice received from the 
Minister of Health. In so far as other details go on the interim 

supply motion, those questions would more appropriately be put 
in Health estimates. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. We’ll 
certainly be doing that. The question that I was getting to was 
maybe not so much in detail, but the fact is that these had been 
. . . payments have already been made. To which ones, I can 
appreciate your comments about estimates in the particular 
department. My question was: is that going to affect our 
discussion here with regarding the second interim supply 
debate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well to answer the question, I don’t 
believe that the question is strictly related to the interim supply 
debate. We’re trying to get one-twelfth of the appropriation for 
each department so that they can carry out the things that they 
need to do, and the question of the Health Transition Fund is 
not directly related nor would it fail or succeed based upon what 
we did with the interim supply Bill. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, 
as far as the Health Transition Fund goes, we now have another 
$12,000,500 allocated for a statutory interim supply. Is there any 
indication on that . . . those funds will be spent in the next month? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as I indicated, Mr. Chair, that is pending 
review by the Minister of Health and the Department of Health. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then the Centenary 
Capital Fund actually was allocated money in the last interim 
supply as well. Can you give us an idea if that money has been 
spent, and if so, what on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No. No funds have been expended from the 
centenary fund, and the . . . so the fund is unexpended at the 
present time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know that a number 
of these funds are going to be considered for use for capital 
expenditures in Education, and the minister has made a number of 
announcements about capital projects in Education. 
 
Can you explain to us how this centenary fund works with the 
education capital fund when it comes to how the dollars are being 
spent. Does the school board apply separately under this fund or 
are they going to apply just through the Department of Education, 
the normal funds for capital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We’re going to, Mr. Chair, in answer to the 
question, use the process that has been established within the 
Department of Education because we think it’s a good process. 
We don’t think we have to reinvent the wheel or have a separate 
process within government. We think that prioritization of 
projects according to the existing system is what we should do 
so that we can continue to have the involvement of the 
Department of Education and the stakeholders, like the school 
boards that are presently involved in deciding how the capital 
money should be spent. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, there are 
. . . I know that this fund is also going to be used for other 
projects as well. I’m wondering if right now the criteria has 
been laid out and the decision has been made how that money 



May 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1375 

will be spent, and at this time there has been applications put 
forward for any of the different areas that could be spending 
this money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We’re still in the process of consulting 
with stakeholders in each area with respect to what the criteria 
should be and how the money should be spent. And that process 
is still underway with the exception, I guess, of the K to 12 
education where there already is a good process in criteria in 
place. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you again, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, the 
fund then is accumulating, both in the transition fund for health 
care and in the centenary fund. So as the money is allocated and 
kept separate, does that mean that there is interest gaining on 
that money at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No. The funds are not kept separate in the 
sense that they’re not drawn out until they’re needed. So what 
this means is that they would have access to the funds. It 
doesn’t mean they necessarily would get the funds or spend the 
funds — it means that they would have access to the funds. 
 
So because the funds haven’t been sent to them or set out, the 
funds would not be accruing interest. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Then at 
the end of the year perhaps all these funds are not spent, is there 
going to be an allocation of interest put into this fund so that 
you can say a percentage of it wasn’t spent, there’s this much 
money set aside? Will there be additional money for the fund 
for next year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, the answer is no. In accordance with, 
you know, good principles of cash management if the funds 
were not needed, the funds would not be drawn out, no interest 
would be paid on them; we wouldn’t go into operating debt, for 
example. And if the funds were not used, the funds simply . . . 
that budgetary allocation would simply lapse. 
 
Having said that, it’s our intent that the funds will be used. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I note in the material that was 
sent over that there hasn’t been any money allocated for paying 
interest, servicing the public debt. Can you explain to me and to 
everyone why the interest isn’t paid on a monthly basis, or is 
there just a set time in the year that all of the interest is paid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It’s a statutory requirement that the interest 
be paid and that’s set out in law. And it’s not part of an interim 
supply motion, nor is any other statutory payment, because 
those payments are already set out in law as distinct from 
requiring resolution of the legislature. 
 
Ms. Draude: — And, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, then I 
understand that under Education then nearly 20 per cent of it is 
a statutory amount — 103 million or thereabouts. Can you tell 
me what the statutory amount is? Is that wages? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, that represents the pension obligation 
that has to be paid from the General Revenue Fund to fund the 
pension obligations that we have to the teachers, I believe, 
arising out of the old plan as distinct from the new plan, which 

is . . . The old plan is an unfunded liability plan and payments 
have to be made by statute to ensure there’s enough money in 
that plan to meet the obligations to pay the pension obligations 
to teachers. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then if I follow that 
further, then that would mean that the 681,000 under Executive 
Council, ’99, under Finance and so on — is that all pension 
fund money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, Mr. Chair, the member would not be 
correct in making that assumption. All of the items listed as 
statutory amounts are statutory amounts, but not all of them 
would be pension amounts. In the case of Executive Council, 
the $681,000 represents salaries of the members of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Then, Mr. Minister, if I can ask you then, 
could you advise us what the 99 million is under Finance, the 7 
million under Justice, and so on, so we have an understanding 
of where this statutory amount is being spent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, in answer to the question, Mr. Chair, 
in Education, the statutory amount is the pension obligation for 
the teachers’ pension plan. 
 
Executive Council is the salaries of members of the legislature 
who are also members of Executive Council. 
 
Finance is largely pensions, not entirely but mainly pension 
obligations. 
 
Justice is court services and judges’ salaries among other 
things, but primarily those two things. 
 
Municipal Affairs is a variety of statutory obligations including 
the various authorities like the Wakamow Valley Authority, the 
Wascana Centre Authority, and so on. 
 
The Legislative Assembly amount is for the members of the 
legislature salaries, the salaries not related to duties of members 
of the Executive Council. 
 
And I believe that’s most of them except the Chief Electoral 
Officer whose entire allocation is in fact statutory. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’d 
like to ask another question. And maybe with your indulgence 
just for maybe my understanding, when we’re looking at the 
budget estimates, then there’s the statutory amounts and the 
amounts to be voted on, how is the one-twelfth interim supply 
calculated? Do you have some preferences? Is it a straight 
calculation, or do you have preferences from department to 
department as to, from their view, what is needed and maybe 
others don’t? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No. It’s a straight one-twelfth calculation. 
You take the amount of money allocated to the department for 
the year pursuant to the budget, deduct the amount that is 
statutory because that will be paid out according to law. The 
rest needs to be voted by the legislature. 
 
And with respect to the rest, you simply divide that by 12 and 



1376 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2000 

then the monthly allocation is that figure. And it’s the same for 
each department listed. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman. 
And I appreciate the material that was circulated recently. And 
just looking at it on the second page under the heading, lending 
and investing, there is a one-twelfth of the amount to be voted 
under Agriculture and Food, for instance, what would be the 
lending and investment opportunity or initiative there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, it’s investment in Crown 
agricultural land held for resale, $400,000; and advances for the 
Agri-Food equity fund, $10 million. So mainly monies to go 
into the Ag-Food equity fund to be used to try to mainly 
encourage value-added initiatives in agriculture, which I think 
. . . I know the member is familiar with. That’s the bulk of their 
lending activities. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I 
suspect that the same kind of things apply then in lending and 
investing to Economic and Co-operative Development, as an 
example. It’s an important item, in my view, in this province to 
get that economic development at a level where I think the 
province can start taking advantage of the results of the 
economic development. The response you had earlier partially 
answers that I think, but is there something particular with the 
Economic and Co-operative Development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. I think, Mr. Chair, that’s generally an 
accurate statement that the member has made. In Economic and 
Co-operative Development most of those lending activities 
would be related to the small-business development program 
and also the northern development fund. 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I assume that 
the one-twelfth interim supply would keep those on track 
because I think those are really quite important. I think that was 
really supplementary to a question I had asked earlier, but 
would you confirm that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I can confirm that. I think that’s a 
correct statement, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman, under the heading again, 
lending and investing, it would seem odd from my vocabulary, 
investing and lending in Highways and Transportation. Does 
that mean the capital projects for Highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That relates, Mr. Chair, to the Canada 
agriculture assistance program. I think it’s referred to as the 
CAIP (Canada/Saskatchewan Agri-Infrastructure Program) 
program. And it relates to the money that would be advanced 
with respect to short-line railways. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have one or two 
other questions but I would like to, if I could, Mr. Chair, defer 
to one of my colleagues to ask another question. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To the minister. 
Mr. Minister, while this question may not relate directly to the 
interim supply Bill we’re debating here this morning, however 

going back to the budget speech, I believe you indicated on July 
1 there would be a reduction in the flat tax. And as I understand 
it, the last time we had a reduction in a tax because there’s an 
Act in regards to the flat tax . . . I’m just wondering if we need 
to have an amendment to the current Income Tax Act in regards 
to that reduction, and if so, where is that Act? Is it going to be 
coming forward shortly so we can deal with that matter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, the member is quite correct, Mr. 
Chair. The reduction to the flat tax will require an amendment 
to The Income Tax Act, and I’m advised by the officials that we 
should have the legislation prepared very shortly. They still are 
in consultation with the officials from the Department of Justice 
with respect to the drafting of the Bill. 
 
But obviously we need to present that Bill fairly shortly. And in 
fact, there may be other changes to The Income Tax Act 
consequent upon the budget which may be done at the same 
time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, just a follow-up question. I 
think the minister can appreciate some opposition members, in 
debating and planning for session and debate, that the sooner 
we have the legislation . . . I think the indication was before 
session started there’d be somewhat of around, give or take, 80 
pieces of legislation. And the concern we have is how many 
pieces of legislation are going to be dropped on our lap just at, 
to what would be considered the last moment as we get closer 
to the summer months. 
 
So I think we’d just like to have an indication as to when we 
could expect that. You’ve indicated that you’re currently 
working on drafting it, but if we could have a rough idea when 
that piece of legislation would indeed be coming forward. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I appreciate the point the member is 
making, Mr. Chair, and I agree with the point. And we need to 
get the legislation into the House just as soon as we can. And 
that requires consultation with the Department of Justice to 
prepare the Bill; also consultation with the House Leader and 
the Opposition House Leader. 
 
And all I can tell the member right now is I appreciate the point 
he is making. We need to get the legislation before the House as 
soon as we can. And I’ll undertake to ask the officials to please, 
in fact, produce the legislation and get it into the House just as 
soon as we can. And we’ll endeavour to do that and make every 
best effort to do that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Having said that, 
Mr. Deputy Chair, to the Minister as well, while we’re asking 
for and we’d like to know when legislation is coming forward, 
it doesn’t necessarily mean that the opposition is winding up the 
questioning in this Assembly. It could take us quite a while yet 
to address all those concerns. But just to remind the minister 
that if legislation drags on and it comes in later, it certainly just 
adds to number of days we’re going to be sitting here in the 
Assembly. 
 
One other question as well, Mr. Minister. While we’re dealing 
with that, I’m just wondering — I understand the Chief 
Electoral Officer has indicated as well for political parties to 
have tax credits, there would need to be a change or an 



May 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1377 

amendment to The Income Tax Act as well. And I’m 
wondering, Mr. Minister, if that would be included in the 
changes that you will be bringing forward. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — My understanding, Mr. Chair, is that 
amendments would be required to The Income Tax Act and I 
believe also to The Election Act, 1996 or one of the elections 
Acts — I’m not sure if it’s The Election Act, 1996 or the 
election expenses Act, but in any effect two pieces of 
legislation. That would be required. 
 
I am not actually the minister in charge of the Chief Electoral 
office and those matters. I believe that is the president of the 
Executive Council. And so I can’t say; it’s not my duty or 
responsibility to say what position of the government is. But 
certainly I understand the member has an interest in the 
question, and I have every confidence that the members of the 
government are very interested in discussing that question with 
the opposition. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of 
committees. I’m pleased to note that the minister is interested in 
discussing it. I’m hoping he’ll be interested in actually doing 
something about it. 
 
My question to the minister is in relationship to the servicing of 
the public debt. The public debt under this one-twelfth does not 
show any funds going to that particular purpose. Previous to 
these interim supply, we had two-twelfths done last month. Was 
any money allocated there to servicing of the public debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the public debt, the servicing of the 
public debt is not dependent upon the interim supply vote 
because we pay the public debt pursuant to statutory obligations 
to do so. I should explain to the House, Mr. Chair, that the 
public debt is not paid one-twelfth at a time or once a year. It’s 
paid pursuant to contractual arrangements that are arrived at 
with people that invest in government bonds. 
 
And the obligation to pay the interest on the debt and when it 
shall be paid will vary depending upon the nature of the debt 
and the nature of the obligation that arises with each person to 
whom we owe the money. 
 
But the statute, the law requires that we pay interest on the 
public debt. This will be done regardless of what happens to the 
interim supply. No money will be allocated to the public debt 
from the interim supply. It’s all already allocated, and the 
obligation to pay it arises by statute. 
 
So I don’t know what I can say other than that. It simply is all 
paid by way of statutory obligation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That question 
was leading to this question. 
 
We have seen on the financial market some changes, significant 
for the last few years, changes to the interest rates and to the 
exchange rates with US dollars. What kind of an impact is that 
having on the repayment of the provincial debt? How much of 
an increase are those changes? 
 
The interest rates I believe went up 50 basis points this week. 

The interest . . . the exchange rate to the Canadian dollar has 
been dropping in relationship to the American dollar. What 
impact is that having on our repayments and how much 
additional money is that going to cost us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The short-term changes to the interest rates 
don’t necessarily have the impact that you might assume at first 
glance because most of our debt is due on an average of eight 
years from now. So that the interest rates that we pay are 
generally speaking, set, and they don’t go up just because the 
Federal Reserve in the United States or the Bank of Canada 
may raise the interest rates. 
 
So it’s difficult to say that a short-term raise in the interest rates 
today, for example, will increase our cost because we may be in 
effect locked in for an average of eight years, Mr. Chair — if 
the member sees what I mean, and I think he can. So by the 
time the debt is actually payable and we renegotiate at a 
different interest rate, the rates may have come down. That’s 
my first point. 
 
My second point is that one of the things that the Department of 
Finance, in particular the treasury and debt management branch, 
has done a very good job of in the last few years is decreasing 
the amount of debt that we owe in US dollars. And we’re at 
about 80 per cent of our debt in Canadian dollars, 20 per cent in 
US dollars, so that we’ve minimized our exposure to a low 
Canadian dollar. 
 
But having said that, generally speaking, for every 1 cent, every 
1 cent change in the dollar — every 1 cent the Canadian dollar 
drops — the interest cost for the province of Saskatchewan will 
increase by about $3.2 million. And the changes that have 
occurred thus far with respect to interest rates and exchange 
rates, we don’t think will appreciably affect the forecast in the 
budget for interest costs. 
 
But certainly it can have some impact, not so much as would 
throw us off the targets that we’ve set out there, largely for the 
reasons I’ve indicated — that our debt tends to be negotiated on 
a longer term, firstly. And secondly, we’ve minimized our 
exposure to American dollar debt by going mainly to Canadian 
dollar debt in the last few years. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the 
things though that exchange rate does have is the current US 
debt that is . . . debt that’s being held in the US. And the interest 
rate has an impact on any renewals that may be taking place. 
Some of the debt is probably rolling over continuously, not all 
of it obviously, but different segments. And that which is being 
rolled over at the current time will be impacted by the current 
interest rates. 
 
So how much debt is being rolled over at this particular time? 
And when you’re considering the exchange rates, what was the 
dollar base that the budget was based on when it was originally 
proposed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I’m advised that this year we 
will be renewing about $1.6 billion in debt, and that none of 
that debt is US dollar debt. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What was the 



1378 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2000 

US dollar base that was used to calculate the repayments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — 68.03. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Chairman, that’s all the questions we have at this particular 
time. Therefore we’re prepared to allow this Bill to move 
forward. 
 
I’d like to thank the minister and his officials for coming in 
today. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. First I’d like to 
thank my officials for assisting me today. And I would also like 
to thank members of the opposition for their co-operation with 
respect to the interim supply. 
 
And with that, Mr. Chair, I would like to move resolution no. 2 
which is: 
 

That towards making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2001, the sum 
of $457,627,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolutions be 
now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move: 
 

That Bill No. 72, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year ending on March 31, 2001, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly and 
under rule 55(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and 
third time. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second and third time and 
passed under its title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 12:05 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 18 - The Public Employees Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 301 - The Mennonite Central Committee 

Saskatchewan Act 
Bill No. 302 - The Renaming of The Regina Golf Club Act 
Bill No. 303 - The Saskatchewan Roman Catholic Dioceses 

Reorganization Act 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
Bill No. 72 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 
Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 2001 

 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Assembly, 
accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 12:09 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, kindly enjoy your weekends 
and come back safely. This House now stands adjourned until 
1:30 Monday. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:10 p.m. 
 
 



May 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1379 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
On page 1299 of Hansard No. 45A, Wednesday, May 24, 2000 
please correct the following paragraph: 
 
The Cathedral Village Arts Festival features performances by 
one of the smallest demographic groups in North America: an 
English-Canadian, grandmother, MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), cabinet minister Libra drummer with 
the Cathedral Village Drum Circle — I’m afraid I’m a 
demographic group of one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To read: 
 
The Cathedral Village Arts Festival features performances by 
one of the smallest demographic groups in North America: an 
English-Canadian, grandmother, MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), cabinet minister, djembe drummer with 
the Cathedral Village Drum Circle — I’m afraid I’m a 
demographic group of one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
 
We apologize for this error. 
 


