





























































Hansard: April 03, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 387 
 April 3, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions on behalf of people throughout the province 
who are adamantly opposed to forced amalgamation of 
municipalities. And the petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reject proposals of any forced 
amalgamation of municipalities. 

 
And the signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Plunkett, from Humboldt, St. Benedict, Middle Lake, 
Cudworth, and many places throughout my constituency, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today to reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Macoun and 
Midale. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of people from my constituency concerned about the 
high tax on fuel. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Beatty and Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — A petition in regards to the amalgamation of 
municipalities. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reject the proposal of any forced 
amalgamation of municipalities. 
 

I so present and it’s from the towns of Burr, Humboldt, and 
Guernsey. 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
regarding the 10 cent per litre reduction on fuel tax. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And this petition is signed by people in Macoun and Torquay. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of people in my hometown of Swift 
Current concerned about funding for our hospital. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist in the regeneration plan for the Swift 
Current regional hospital by providing approximately 
$7.54 million, and thereby allowing the Swift Current 
Health District Board the opportunity to provide improved 
regional health care services. 

 
This petition is signed by people in Swift Current. 
 
I so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to do with the Minister of Municipal Affairs putting 
another stake in the heart of local governments in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, I just remind hon. members not to 
initiate debate while presenting petitions. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reject proposals of any forced 
amalgamation of municipalities. 

 
The communities, Mr. Speaker, are Guernsey, Bredenbury, 
Saltcoats, Esterhazy — a number of communities from around 
the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise in the Assembly to 
present a petition regarding forced municipal amalgamations. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



388 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And these are signed by people from Cabri, Oungre, Tribune, 
and the Weyburn area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise to present a petition 
from the citizens of Blaine Lake who are concerned about 
having a full-time position in the Blaine Lake Medical Clinic: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
overrule the Parkland Health Board to change its decision 
and allow the Blaine Lake Medical Clinic to have a 
permanent position with consistent hours and days. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

From the citizens of Blaine Lake. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition opposed to 
enforced municipal amalgamation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures are from Cabri, Abbey, and various other places 
throughout Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition against amalgamation of municipalities. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reject proposals of any forced 
amalgamation of municipalities. 

 
The petitioners are from Plunkett, Humboldt, Guernsey and 
Muenster and Burr. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
stand today to bring concerns of forced amalgamation in the 
province. And the prayer is: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reject proposals of any forced 
amalgamations of municipalities. 
 

And I have petitions from Lanigan and Guernsey. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
overrule the Parkland Health Board decision with regard to 
the Blaine Lake Medical Clinic; and 
 
Petitioning the Assembly to halt any plans to proceed with 
the amalgamation of municipalities in Saskatchewan; and 
 
Petitioning the Assembly to ensure reliable cellular service 
to Watson and area; and 
 
Petitioning the Assembly to cause the government to 
provide funding for the Swift Current regional hospital. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to my colleagues in the Assembly, it’s a great privilege to 
introduce my uncle and aunt who are seated in your gallery, my 
Uncle Frank and Aunt Maxine Wall of Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those people who are familiar with my ethnic 
background, they’ll know that I have a number of uncles and 
aunts. These are special though, however. My Uncle Frank and 
my father started into business over 40 years ago. They’re still 
in business today together investing in Swift Current and 
creating jobs. And they claim to have done so without an 
argument and I guess there’s no one to dispute that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just ask all my hon. colleagues to join 
with me in welcoming them here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 
and through you, a group of great grade 12 students, 13 in 
number, from the Maymont School. And I would like to thank 
them for coming. And it’s very encouraging to see students 
come to the legislature and see the politicians at their work. 
And join me in extending a welcome to these students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to inform members of the House that this 
week has been proclaimed Sexual Assault Awareness Week. 
The aim of this week is to raise awareness about sexual assault 
and sexual abuse as a means to preventing it. 
 
We all know from our experience that women are at 
significantly higher risk of sexual assault and sexual abuse than 
are men. In fact, a 1999 study from the Canadian Centre for 
Justice points to the fact that one out of every four women is 
sexually assaulted at some point in their lives — an entirely 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 389 

unacceptable situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Furthermore, 60 per cent of sexual abuse and assault victims are 
children and youth. In particular, girls were identified as being 
at higher risk of sexual assault by a family member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes that sexual assault and 
abuse is best addressed by working in co-operation with 
communities, families, and individuals; and by undertaking a 
multi-faceted approach to addressing and preventing its 
continuation. Zero tolerance of sexual assault and abuse is the 
goal of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
By providing funding to and working in partnership with 
community-based groups, we’re making progress in developing 
a range of integrated services to address the needs of those who 
have endured sexual assault or abuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge all members of the Assembly to join with 
me in recognizing the importance of this week. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Courageous Youngster from Hafford 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I would like to acknowledge a courageous 
young girl from Hafford — five-year-old Chantel Marie 
Saccucci. Chantel was diagnosed on February 11 with acute 
monoblastic leukemia. This is a rare leukemia that affects only 
15 to 25 per cent of children and is usually found in people over 
the age of 60 and Down’s syndrome kids. 
 
When diagnosed, she was given only a 20 per cent chance of 
beating it. She has undergone two chemotherapy treatments to 
date, and has needed platelet and blood transfusions between 
treatment. She is feeling pretty good, however she has her good 
and bad days. 
 
Her doctor has informed the family that Chantel has to go into 
remission within the next two treatments. When she does go 
into remission, it will be off to Vancouver for a bone marrow 
transplant. 
 
Her 15-month-old brother, Travis, was 100 per cent match and 
will be her donor. The efforts and support of the Hafford 
school, her family, community, and surrounding area cannot go 
without recognition. 
 
It was an honour for me to be invited to take part in a perogy 
sale and coin drive held by the Hafford school which raised 
$1,200; and a dance put on by Chantel’s uncle and neighbours 
as a show of support for Chantel, her parents, Eric and Annet, 
her two brothers, and one sister. 
 
The Mayfair area is holding a cash raffle to help with the 
expenses incurred by the Saccucci’s. 
 
I would ask that the members of the House pray for Chantel’s 
speedy recovery. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Meadow Lake Spartanettes Win Provincial 
High School Championship 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tonight sports 
fans all over North America will be watching the last game of 
the US (United States) college basketball season which should 
be a good game, I am told, and a game that features two teams 
that only lost between them, about 15 games this season. 
 
You will excuse me, Mr. Speaker, if I say, big deal. In the town 
of Meadow Lake in my constituency, we have the Meadow 
Lake Spartanettes, a team that has not lost all year long and a 
team that won the provincial high school championship. 
 
A team that defeated teams from Lake Lenore and from Moose 
Jaw last month at the Hoopla tournament in Saskatoon. A team, 
Mr. Speaker, that in its final game, had to hold its composure 
and conditioning into an overtime period before finally winning 
the championship. I owe the member from Moose Jaw North I 
think probably a meal of consolidation. Mr. Speaker, a 
consolation I should say. Mr. Speaker, consolidation has 
already taken place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for a team at any level to reach the top and to do 
so undefeated is a remarkable achievement and I want to 
congratulate head coach Carla Waterman, her staff, and 
especially her team for this season. I also should recognize the 
tremendous support the team received from their school friends 
and relatives throughout the season and especially at the final 
tournament. 
 
Not only did the Spartanettes win the provincial championship, 
Mr. Speaker, the team has 11 players returning for next season 
— the beginning of a dynasty. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to rise on behalf of the official opposition in 
recognition of Sexual Assault Awareness Week. Mr. Speaker, 
sexual assault, and particularly sexual assault and exploitation 
of children, is considered to be, unfortunately, one of the fastest 
growing industries in the world and it continues to be one of the 
most rapidly growing kinds in our country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rape is a violent crime. It’s a violent invasive 
crime and a very frightening experience. This type of violent 
crime affects all women, no matter what their age, race, or 
economic status, and all women are potential victims. 
 
Recent statistics have shown that one out of every four women 
will be sexually assaulted at some point in their life. But what is 
even more disturbing, Mr. Speaker, is that young girls are at a 
significantly higher risk of sexual assault by a member of her 
family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one asks to be sexually assaulted. Nor does 
anyone’s behaviour justify or excuse the crime. People have the 
right to be safe from a sexual violation and it is the offender, 
not the victim or the survivor, that must be held accountable for 
their crime. 



390 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, speaking out about sexual assault may be an 
essential part of the recovery process for survivors. However 
victims should not be forced to speak publicly or privately 
before they are ready. Every survivor is the expert of their own 
recovery and for many recovery becomes an ongoing process of 
healing, change, and empowerment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as legislators in this province we all have a 
responsibility to ensure that everyone is kept safe, particularly 
our children. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rendezvous 2000 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker it 
was my pleasure to attend this past weekend, Rendezvous 2000, 
an important conference of the francophone community in 
Saskatchewan, on behalf of the Premier and the Minister of 
Aboriginal and Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 
Vendredi soir, la réunion a marquée officiellement le passage de 
l’association culturelle franco-Canadienne de la Saskatchewan à 
leur nouvelle entité représentative l’Assemblée communautaire 
fransaskoise. 
 
Samedi soir, Rendezvous 2000 a honoré les bénévoles, ces 
artisans du développement communautaire qui ont consacré leur 
temps and leur énergie à l’épanouissement des communautés 
francophones de notre province. 
 
M. le Président, la Saskatchewan est reconnue pour le 
dévouement de ses bénévoles et nos francophones comptent 
parmi les plus actifs. 
 
Les communautés francophones de la Saskatchewan savent 
dialoguer dans le but de créer des partenariats entre elles, avec 
d’autres communautés et organismes, et avec les 
gouvernements. 
 
Le gouvernement de la Saskatchewan attache une très grande 
valeur à ces efforts pour renforcer les liens entre les 
communautés et établir des paartenariats dans le but d’attiendre 
des ojectifs communs. 
 
Grâçe au rôle de liaison accru de l’Office de coordination des 
affaires francophones, nous prenons présentement des mesures 
pour resserrer nos propres liens avec les francophones de la 
Saskatchewan. Je suis optimiste. 
 
Merci, Monsieur le Président. 
 
(Translation: Friday evening, the meeting officially marked the 
transition from the Association culturelle franco-canadienne de 
la Saskatchewan to their new representative body, the 
Assemblée communautaire fransaskoise. 
 
Saturday evening, Rendezvous 2000 honoured volunteers, the 
artisans of community development as they were called, who 
sacrificed their time and energy to the vitality of the 
francophone community of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is well-known for the devotion of 

its volunteers and our francophones count among the most 
active. 
 
Saskatchewan’s francophone communities know how to reach 
out to build partnerships between themselves, with other 
communities and organizations, and with governments. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan attaches a very large value to 
these efforts to reinforce the ties between the communities and 
to establish partnerships with the goal of reaching common 
objectives. 
 
Through the improved liaison capacity of the Office of 
French-language Co-ordination, we are presently taking 
measures to strengthen our own ties with the francophones of 
Saskatchewan. I am hopeful. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Bible College and Theological 
Seminary Moving to Alberta 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was very 
disappointed to learn this morning that the Canadian Bible 
College and Theological Seminary have decided to move to 
Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are approximately 375 students in the 
college, 110 students in the seminary, and roughly 100 
employees that have found greener pastures in Alberta. 
 
I find this very disconcerting that yet another successful 
organization is leaving our province, particularly when 
Saskatchewan is suffering from the brain drain. We can ill 
afford to have our young minds leaving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Bible College and Theological 
Seminary has been providing high quality educational 
opportunities since 1941. Not only is this a major loss for 
Regina, but Saskatchewan as a whole, as students who were 
interested in attending the college will now have to leave 
Saskatchewan and move to Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is happening after a so-called historic budget. 
But now we find out that it’s a day late and a dollar short. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Provincial Sales Tax 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the Minister 
of Finance has had a weekend to reflect on the terrible budget 
that he brought down last week. Perhaps he’s realized he’s 
made a terrible mistake. 
 
The front page of today’s Leader-Post is a graphic illustration 
of how your PST (provincial sales tax) tax grab is hurting 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 391 

Saskatchewan seniors. 
 
Anne Finnik of Regina spends $205 a month on 
non-prescription drugs. She says: 
 

If I stop taking the drugs and vitamins I won’t survive and 
if I take them I won’t have any savings. 

 
Oh, what an awful choice you’ve given her, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you attacking low-income seniors like 
Anne Finnik? How can you sit there and not take action while 
seniors are being hurt by your PST tax increase? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite in answer to the question, that if there is any individual 
in the province — I don’t want to speak about this particular 
case — that is taking a lot of painkillers to control pain and a lot 
for stomach relief, we do want to hear from that person, and 
perhaps working with the medical community want to see what 
prescription alternatives may be available, because there’s a lot 
of medication being consumed there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say to the House that I find the Leader of the 
Opposition’s response to be quite surprising today, because he’s 
been complaining about the PST package, Mr. Speaker. But 
according to The StarPhoenix and The Leader-Post of Saturday 
when he was asked if he would commit to changing the tax 
package that I presented in the budget, Mr. Speaker, he would 
not commit to changing the package, Mr. Speaker. And the 
reason is because he knows it’s the right package. 
 
So in the House he’s against it; he goes out of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, and he says if you elect me I won’t change it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister 
says to this senior, come and see me and maybe we can work 
out a deal. Well all that he’s offering right now is a new sales 
tax credit. However, Anne Finnik qualifies for only about $77 a 
year — that’s about half of her tax bill for non-prescription 
drugs. And that’s not even considering, Mr. Minister, your tax 
grab on other items and your hundred dollar a day tax grab on 
SaskTel and SaskEnergy bills. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is a real life example of a low-income senior 
who will pay more tax under your new system. This is a living 
and breathing example of how your PST tax grab is hurting 
low-income seniors. How many more low-income seniors will 
you hurt in this PST tax grab? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, on July 1 of this year the 
Saskatchewan flat tax is going to be cut in half. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And that tax, Mr. Speaker, is a tax that 
seniors have been hit very unfairly with. 

And on January 1 of next year, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
flat tax is going to be gone, the high-income surtax is going to 
be gone, and the debt-reduction surtax is going to be gone, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I’ll say to the member opposite that this is a tax package 
that will put every taxpayer in Saskatchewan in a better position 
than they are now, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why when the 
Leader of the Opposition left this Chamber the other day, he 
would not commit to reversing the tax package, Mr. Speaker. 
Because he knows that this package is in the long-term best 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan. And so it is, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m hearing just as the 
Finance minister is hearing from people all over Saskatchewan 
who are very, very upset with his budget. You know, he only 
tells half the story. He tells about the tax cuts but he hasn’t been 
talking about the tax increase. 
 
In fact he told us that the PST tax grab exempted family 
necessities. I think those were his words. Nothing could be 
further from the truth. 
 
Mr. Minister, non-prescription drugs are a necessity for many 
people, including seniors on fixed incomes and families with 
young children. Are you trying to tell us that when your 
two-year-old or our two-year-old has a fever, that a children’s 
Tylenol is a luxury item that they don’t really need? 
 
Mr. Minister, your PST tax grab is another attack on 
Saskatchewan families, and it’s also an attack on low-income 
seniors. And what’s worse, it wasn’t necessary. You didn’t have 
to do it. Every other province is cutting taxes without raising 
other taxes like the PST. Only the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) and only this Finance minister thinks that the way to cut 
taxes is by raising them. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question: why don’t you just cancel this 
unnecessary tax grab? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I say again that this is 
very curious — that the member opposite stands up in this 
House and says he’s against our tax package which is going to 
cut the Saskatchewan flat tax in half on July 1, bring in a 
supplementary senior’s tax credit of $1,000 on top of a basic tax 
credit, Mr. Speaker, of $8,000, and on January 1, eliminate the 
flat tax, the high income surtax and the debt reduction surtax 
and, Mr. Speaker, bring about the biggest reduction in personal 
income taxes in the history of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I don’t know why the Leader of the Opposition says that 
he’s opposed to that, Mr. Speaker. But moreover, as I said 
before, when he leaves the House and he’s asked if he will 
commit himself to reversing the tax package we’re bringing in, 
Mr. Speaker, he says no, he will not commit himself to doing 
that. Very curious, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say something else, Mr. Speaker, and that is this 



392 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

legislature has been sitting for three days and do you know how 
much the spending promises of the opposition add up to so far? 
$1.27 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Health Care 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, we’ve heard a lot over the last few days about 
the NDP’s vision. Well let’s talk about the NDP’s vision for 
health care. You yourself have been going around the province 
preaching gloom and doom and talking about the need to look 
at privatization of some services and which services to leave 
alone. 
 
Surgical theatres are shut down, hospitals are closing, nurses 
and doctors are leaving the province, and a health care system 
that you’re in charge of, you yourself describe as being, quote: 
“on the ropes”. Is this the NDP vision of health care, Madam 
Minister? What’s next? 
 
Madam Minister, will you clarify for the people of this province 
what your vision for health care is? What services are you going 
to privatize and discontinue from public service? What 
hospitals are you going to close, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the members will know in this budget that was delivered by the 
Minister of Finance last Wednesday there was an increase of 
$113 million, or an increase of 5.9 per cent in real money. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s no question that if you look at the budget that 
was delivered last Wednesday, if you include the health 
transition fund, health spending in this province represents 40 
per cent of all program spending in our provincial budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I have been talking about to the public is the 
need to have a public dialogue. We need to have a discussion 
about medicare in this province. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
been talking to my colleagues all across the country in order 
that we can clearly understand what is working in health care, 
Mr. Speaker, and what we need to improve. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
the people of this province are very nervous about your 
comments about dialogue, because most times when you talk 
about dialogue they understand it means closures or shutdowns. 
Madam Minister, you talk about how much the budget has been 
increased for the local health districts, but you have to 
remember that last year 32 districts were running deficits 
totalling over $50 million. So the actual real increase in the base 
spending of your budget was very little; certainly not enough to 
meet the increased costs that all divisions are going to be 
facing. 
 
Madam Minister, your wellness model is suffering a terminal 
illness. And what you are saying across the province is that it’s 

hit the wall, the whole process. Those are your words, not mine; 
it’s some vision, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, will you stand up in the House today and tell 
people specifically, are you going to take MRIs (magnetic 
resonance imaging) out of the public system? Are you going to 
take ultrasounds out of the public system? Because that’s what 
you were speculating about. Are you going to privatize the 
public system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the members 
that this government is not interested in going to a two-tier 
health system, nor is it interested, Mr. Speaker, in going to a 
private health system. That has been suggested by the member 
from Weyburn, has been suggested by the member from 
Rosthern, that we look to Alberta for our system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I can tell the members, having spoken with my colleagues 
from all across the country, is that this province is spending 
more as a percentage of our budget than practically any other 
government in this country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I can tell the members is that every government and every 
health system across the country is under huge pressure because 
of growing costs of prescription drugs, because our population 
is aging and they’re using more and more health services. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, in this province 14 per cent of the population 
uses close to 45 per cent of our health services — and I’m 
talking about people over the age of 65. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do need to have a discussion, and I welcome 
that in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about 
two-tier health care in this province. Well isn’t this ever 
wonderful because today it was announced that you’ve hired 
two-tier Harvey to be a special adviser to Executive Council. 
 
Madam Minister, will you confirm that indeed you’ve hired the 
former member, the big Liberal candidate from Arm River, to 
be a special adviser to Executive Council and the Premier. Is it 
your adviser as how you’re going to two-tier the system in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
And while you’re at it, in talking about all the Liberals, the 
Liberal leader takes great pride in quoting from his letter to the 
editor in saying how much accessibility he has to the federal 
government. Madam Minister, are you putting two-tier Harvey 
and the Minister of Education in charge of your programs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, what I find so interesting about the member’s 
question is, if I look at the Saskatchewan Party pamphlet that 
was delivered to all of our households in the last provincial 
election, what the Sask Party was committing to was a steady, 
gradual reduction in government spending and taxation, and a 
firm commitment to balanced budgets. 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 393 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this coalition government has a balanced 
approach to governing where we will have tax reductions that 
are affordable, program spending that is affordable, and debt 
reduction, Mr. Speaker. Those are the principles of this 
coalition government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Partnerships Program 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education. 
 
Mr. Minister, it isn’t a very good day if you happen to be a 
student in Saskatchewan today. The SSTA (Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association) is saying that the budget forgets 
children. 
 
Now we find out that university students are also victims of the 
NDP budget carnage. Apparently when your Finance minister 
read the budget speech the other day, he forgot to mention that 
the NDP was cutting the partnerships program. 
 
You remember that program, don’t you, Mr. Minister? That’s 
the program that helped create summer jobs for students — jobs 
that are desperately needed to assist students struggling with 
skyrocketing tuition costs. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you explain to our students why cutting 
summer . . . student jobs is a good idea when your NDP 
government already has the second worst job creation record in 
Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
thank the hon. member for the question. 
 
I think what the people of Saskatchewan would want to know is 
that their provincial government is spending its money very 
prudently in the best interest of the people of Saskatchewan. 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, is that the summer 
employment program, which provided a subsidy of a dollar 
twenty an hour, is substantially less than the federal government 
provides in their subsidy program. 
 
We’re not in the business of competing with the federal 
government, Mr. Speaker, and we simply believe that the 
money is best spent in other ways in order to meet the 
objectives and to make post-secondary education accessible to 
the students of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I find the minister’s answer to the 
question very interesting. My question, my second question, is 
to the Minister of Post-Secondary Education. Mr. Minister, 
when we called the telephone number for the partnership 
program, we got a recording. The recorded message announced 
that the program had been cut in the NDP’s budget on March 
29. The message goes on to say that employers and students 
should contact Human Resources Development Canada. 
 

But the news only gets worse from there, Mr. Minister. You see 
the deadline for the federal government’s student employment 
program was March 31. That means students lose out both ways 
thanks to the NDP. 
 
Mr. Minister, why did you keep your plan to chop the summer 
student employment program a secret? Why didn’t you tell the 
students and employers so that they could act on the federal 
program before it expired on March 31? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, again if the hon. member 
would care to address the response, what he would recognize, 
Mr. Speaker, is that we have no intention of competing with the 
federal government. Employers understand both programs, Mr. 
Speaker. They understand both programs and will make use of 
the federal program as they see it available. 
 
But it should be noted, Mr. Speaker, that when one looks at the 
Post-Secondary budget overall that it was considered a priority 
by this government . . . an increase of in excess of 5 per cent at 
a time when inflation was 2 per cent — substantially more than 
inflation, Mr. Speaker. And I think that the president of the 
University of Regina, David Barnard, summed it all up when he 
said: 
 

. . . there are “positive signs” in the budget . . . the critical 
issues for Saskatchewan universities is to strive for 
sustainable quality. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is what is happening in this budget this 
year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I have another question for the 
Minister of Post-Secondary Education. Mr. Minister, you are 
spinning an interesting cover story but it isn’t going to help a 
single student. You intentionally left any message that the 
partnership program was going to be terminated out of the 
budget. There was no news release, no public announcement of 
any kind. 
 
I guess your Finance minister was too busy introducing his 
$160 million tax increase to come clean with the students. So 
students who desperately need summer jobs are out of luck. 
And employers willing to create jobs through the partnership 
program are also out of luck. 
 
This is typical NDP solutions to a problem: everybody loses. 
 
So what advice do you have for students who are looking for 
work this summer. Should they follow their friends and family 
members who have already left for Alberta? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is an interesting 
point put by the hon. member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
When the last campaigns were held, Mr. Speaker, there were 
two parties in that election campaign that said post-secondary 
education was a priority. They sit on this side. There was one 
party that sat on their tongue when it came to priorities for 
post-secondary education and it is on that side, Mr. Speaker. 



394 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

The fact of the matter is, the fact of the matter is that there are a 
number of employment opportunities that are available to 
Saskatchewan students. There is a federal program which is 
richer than the provincial program, Mr. Speaker. We’re not in 
competition with the federal government to spend taxpayers’ 
dollars. 
 
We are committed to spending the most prudently we can in 
order to achieve the objectives of making post-secondary 
education as accessible to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, if post-secondary education is a 
priority then why did you cut the program? My speaker is for 
the Minister of Education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, following the budget speech last week the minister 
stated how proud he was of the Education budget. He said 
critics of the Education budget just didn’t know good news 
when they saw it. 
 
Teachers, school trustees, and taxpayers are not blind, Mr. 
Speaker. They know the difference between good news and bad 
news. What the education system in this province received last 
week was bad news. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister is totally out of touch with the people 
who deliver education services in this province. He’s totally out 
of touch with taxpayers who are protesting tax levels across the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education has insulted educators 
and taxpayers by suggesting if they don’t like the budget, they 
can just go ahead and raise the mill rates. Mr. Minister, can you 
please tell the school boards and property taxpayers how this is 
a good budget for education when you also suggest they raise 
local taxes to maintain programs, schools, and staff. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The member opposite talks about the roles of boards of 
education. And let me just state that this government strongly 
believes in the autonomy of the boards of education who are 
responsible for matters relating to the delivery of education 
programs within their own division. This includes the 
responsibility for establishing their budgets and mill rates 
locally in accordance with their local needs and priorities. 
 
But let me just say that we believe school divisions have been 
treated more than fairly in this budget — 28.5 million, budget to 
budget; 18.5 million, 4.7 per cent increase in the foundation 
operating grant; an extra 20 per cent for capital projects. And 
you know what? More for special education; more for the 
handicapped; more for community schools; more for northern 
communities. And you know what? Nothing from you. Zero. 
Frozen. Not one dime. And we will not let that happen ever 
again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The one thing the 

minister forgot to talk about is they also talk about more taxes 
— that’s the more that you’re talking about. In the last 
campaign the minister promised to add $50 million to 
education. Such is his formidable power within this coalition 
government, Mr. Speaker. And now he’s only able to deliver 
about one-third of that amount. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister also promised to increase the 
provincial share of education costs in his election campaign, 
and he failed on that front too. The overall picture for K to 12 
education is dismal in this province. The school boards cannot 
maintain the status quo with what’s provided in this budget, let 
alone the other challenges they are facing. 
 
They face utility rate increases; they face increased busing 
costs; they face the teachers’ contract and the out-of-scope 
contracts as well. And you say, just pass the cost on to the 
taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Minister, in light of the inadequacies of funding in this K to 
12 budget and your support for the mill rate increases, how 
much do you suggest the boards should increase the mill rates? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 
when we talk about increases for education I would just like to 
remind the member from Kelvington-Wadena about her 
election platform in her pamphlet. This does not even mention 
education. Not one word. 
 
And you know what? When we talk about education . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I’m having difficulty hearing 
the answer. Please allow the member to respond. Allow 
members to be heard and allow members to respond. Please 
co-operate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly I can tell you that if there 
was an Education minister from that side over here, there would 
not have been 1 cent for K to 12. 
 
But let me tell you what we’re doing. A 4.7 per cent increase 
over 1999 grant — more than twice the Saskatchewan inflation 
rate; 25 per cent more for curriculum actualization — an 
increase of $262 per student. 
 
And not only that, for the designated disabled program, an 
additional $300 for level 1 and an additional $3,000 for 
category 2 for our disabled special needs students. 
 
That is a huge increase, Mr. Speaker, and we’re very proud of 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — So, Mr. Minister, the question is, what is your 
thoughts on the mill rates? You avoided the subject completely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all the NDP government has done in this 
provincial budget is downloaded the educational responsibilities 
to school boards and to taxpayers. The minister can go on and 
on about this budget and about the tax cuts in one minute, and 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

the next time he says just raise the mill rate. Which is it, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Mr. Minister, this budget is about the Minister of Education and 
his NDP government trying to whitewash school boards and 
taxpayers, and it’s not working. Mr. Minister, you can rearrange 
the Education budget into operating funds and capital funds and 
any other funds you want. But in the end the funding to schools 
means that they’re going to have to cut schools or staff or 
programs. 
 
Raising the mill rate is not an option for school boards that are 
facing tax revolts in their community. Mr. Minister, in light of 
inadequate funding by your NDP government, do you endorse 
school boards cutting staffing or programs or closing schools? 
Which one do you think we should do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems that 
the members opposite again are having a little trouble hearing 
the answers to the member’s question. 
 
The fact of the matter is that the budget over budget increase is 
7.2 per cent. The operating grant increase is 4.7 per cent. 
There’s an over 20 per cent increase in capital and there is an 
increased $14 million for special education, as well as increased 
funding for community schools. 
 
And do you know what? I haven’t even mentioned yet the $25 
million rebate on ag land in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Now when you add all that together, that’s 20.4 million, that’s 
an additional 5 million on capital, an additional 25 million on 
property tax rebates. You know what? We’re getting close to 
$50 million overall. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure that the taxpayers and 
the school boards across this province are going to be shaking 
their heads tonight trying to figure out how you came up with 
nearly $50 million like you just said. Fifty million dollars to 
education; that’s what we needed. That is not what you are 
giving. 
 
What we’ve asked you right now is what kind of a mill rate do 
you think we should have to give so that schools can keep their 
schools open and keep their teachers and keep programs? What 
are you suggesting we do out in Saskatchewan to provide 
education to the students in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
opposite talks about what, you know, we should do for education. 
And I’ve told her what we’re doing for . . . I’ve told her what 
we’re doing for education. 
 
And when you add it all up — and you can add it up — 7.2 per 
cent, $28.5 million new money for K to 12 budget over budget; 
4.7 per cent increase or 18.5 million on the foundation operating 
grant; an additional $1.9 million in grants in lieu for a total of 5.3 
million; an additional 14 million for special education. 
 

And you know what? When you add in the 25 million, you add up 
the numbers, but I don’t trust that you’d ever come up with the 
bottom line because you’ve never been right with the numbers 
ever, and you’ll never be right ever in the future. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, if I may, I rise requesting 
leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the government 
gallery this afternoon we have been joined by Harold Henderson 
and other members of the Pasqua First Nation who are visiting the 
legislature this afternoon and who I had a chance to chat with 
outside before the commencement of the session. I’d ask all 
members to kindly welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Julé: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the minister in welcoming the members of the Pasqua 
First Nations on behalf of the official opposition of 
Saskatchewan. Welcome. 
 
And I too hope to talk with some of you today before you leave. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, with leave, of course, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, with due respect I’d like to, along 
with the colleagues, be able to give welcome. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to do it officially, of course, in the language 
which I speak, which is Cree. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Education Amendment Act, 2000 
/Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 13, 
The Education Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced and 



396 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 14, The 
Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Use of Props and Exhibits in the Assembly 
 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, hon. colleagues, I 
want to remind hon. members of the long-standing practice of 
this Assembly prohibiting the use of props and exhibits. 
 
Last Friday, members on both sides of the House used 
documents as a prop or as an exhibit. Order. Order please. 
Neither incident is in keeping with this Assembly’s practice. I 
draw members’ attention to page 520 of the House of Commons 
Procedure and Practice which summarizes the practice as 
follows: 
 

Speakers have consistently ruled out of order displays or 
demonstrations of any kind used by Members to illustrate 
their remarks or to emphasize their positions. Similarly, 
props of any kind, used as a way to make a silent comment 
on issues, have always been found unacceptable in the 
Chamber. Members may hold notes in their hands, but they 
will be interrupted and reprimanded by the Speaker if they 
use papers, documents or other objects to illustrate their 
remarks. Exhibits would also be ruled inadmissible. 

 
I ask all hon. members for their co-operation in respecting this 
long-standing practice of the House. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Always a pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to supply 
information to the opposition. Here are the answers to question 
40, and by leave of the Assembly, also the answers to question 
41 and 42. 
 
The Speaker: — Answers to questions 40, 41, and 42 are 
tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Cline, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 
Romanow that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
reaffirm my position on the budget and to once again talk about 
a number of the issues that I think the hon. members opposite 
failed to recognize, or failed to hear in the budget speech. 
 
For one hour last week — or approximately one hour — we 
talked about the very good things in this budget. And then again 
today, I hear the questions coming across — they obviously 
didn’t recognize the good things in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m going to take a few minutes and go over a few of them 
again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — It’s very, very important, Mr. Speaker, that 
people understand this budget. So I want to talk about this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a budget about growth and opportunity. It’s a budget about 
hope and prosperity — not just today, but in our future, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a budget that gives an opportunity for our children 
in the future, and it gives an opportunity for the people of 
Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It had four main elements. Fiscal responsibility and good 
government — Mr. Speaker, this was the seventh consecutive 
balanced budget delivered by this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, because of the operation of this 
government and its past practice as a good government, this was 
also the seventh consecutive year of economic growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, economic growth like oil drilling up 31 per cent 
last year — 31 per cent; gas drilling up 63 per cent last year are 
just a couple of the major illustrations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has dealt with a debt. This 
government, before dealing with a debt, dealt with even a more 
significant issue — the deficit. Since 1991, we have brought the 
debt down from 72 per cent of gross domestic product to 38 per 
cent today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — And by 2004, Mr. Speaker, it will be 31 per cent 
of the provincial budget. Mr. Speaker, this is a sign of a good 
government. 
 
I just want to hit each of the items very shortly. I’m not going to 
go through it in the depth I did the other day. 
 
The second element of this budget was a sustainable, effective 
health system. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about some of 
the elements of that, that system, Mr. Speaker. 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 397 

We hear the members opposite talking about it’s not enough. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it will never be enough for people who want 
everything. There is nothing that any government could do to 
meet all the demands of the public. They must make difficult 
choices, and that’s what this government has been faced to do 
over the last number of years. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the fact that in the last 
two years we put 17 per cent into the Health budget — 17 per 
cent. That doesn’t include what we put in this year, Mr. 
Speaker. And in that same period of time, inflation rose by 
about 3.5 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, that is thirteen and a half 
per cent greater than inflation in the last two years. 
 
On top of that, Mr. Speaker, this year and this year alone, we’re 
putting in 213-million-new dollars into health care —
213-million-new dollars into health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t know what I hear from the opposition, Mr. Speaker. I 
don’t know what we could do to make them happy. I don’t 
know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the third element of our 
platform — economic growth and opportunity. Mr. Speaker, in 
the last five years the people on social assistance rolls in this 
province have decreased by 6,000. That is due to good 
government, Mr. Speaker. It’s due to putting in the student 
employment supplement program, Mr. Speaker. It allowed us to 
start training people who were in the past dependent upon social 
assistance to get jobs in our community, to move off the social 
assistance rolls. That is what this government has done to help 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the only province in Canada, Mr. Speaker, that there are 
fewer children living in poverty today than there were 10 years 
ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — That’s good government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about education and 
training. We’ve increased K-12 funding, by more than the rate 
of inflation, each and every year. Capital funding to complete 
115 projects this year alone. Capital funding for post-secondary 
infrastructure improvements. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, but I 
think that spells good government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for just a minute about two or three 
other major items, other opportunities. This year there is $250 
million dollars in the Highways and Transportation budget — 
the largest expenditure ever for the highways infrastructure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — This government also has put forward $120 
million centenary capital fund to help deal with infrastructure 
needs within this province, Mr. Speaker — $120 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a good budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now want to talk about tax fairness in our new 
tax system. Mr. Speaker, this government believes in a tax 

reform system that sticks to its major principles, guided by our 
three principles, Mr. Speaker. It must be sustainable and funded 
from new revenue, and this is, Mr. Speaker. It has to be 
matched by investment and priority public services, a balanced 
approach. This does this, Mr. Speaker. And most important of 
all, it must be fair, progressive, and putting lower income 
people first, and Mr. Speaker, this budget does that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, 70 per cent of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers will pay income tax rates equal to the residents of 
Alberta when this is fully implemented. That is good for the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
know what the members opposite are complaining about. This 
is a balanced budget that advances the priority agenda of the 
people of Saskatchewan. It’s not one that contains Alberta envy, 
it isn’t one that worries about greener pastures somewhere else. 
It’s one that deals with the needs of the people of Saskatchewan 
today and in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time . . . Mr. Speaker, I 
think it’s time that the people in this Assembly look to what’s 
best in this province and not talk so much about what’s better 
somewhere else. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when the members opposite found so much 
of what they liked in the budget, so much of what they liked in 
the budget, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t know what to say. Mr. 
Speaker, there was a bigger tax cut than they promised in their 
election platform and they didn’t know how to react to that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I want to vow to let all the members 
know that I am in support of this budget, if it wasn’t obvious. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak on behalf of 
the constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy. They are proud, 
hard-working people who have contributed much to their 
communities and to the province. Farming is the mainstay of 
our area and the people directly and indirectly involved with 
farming have been experiencing some very tough times. 
 
We have a government that took a year to decide that this 
problem needed attention, and now another year has passed and 
most farmers have yet to see even one dime from the programs 
this government is boasting about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government talks about economic 
development, but when farmers in my constituency wanted to 
move ahead and develop a pasta plant, the NDP stood in the 
way by supporting the monopoly of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
Our farmers want the opportunity to sell their grain to who they 
want, when they want, and for the best price so they do not have 
to rely on government. 
 



398 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, as if rural people have not had enough, this 
government has decided they will throw forced amalgamation 
into the mix. Mr. Garcea is now holding meetings throughout 
Saskatchewan to get public input; but at the very same time as 
the meetings are being held, the NDP has already started 
implementing forced amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week in Weyburn, Assiniboia, and Humboldt, 
we experienced how forced amalgamation works in the real 
world. By a simple phone call, a service was eliminated. This 
was carried out without any consultation with anyone in the 
communities of Weyburn, Assiniboia, or Humboldt. Minister 
Axworthy just announced that the courthouses in these 
communities would be closed, period. He said: oh no problem, 
the people from these communities can access service 
elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in these areas are still paying taxes like 
everyone else in Saskatchewan, but now they are going to incur 
extra costs out of their own pockets to receive these services. 
Did anyone think about access to justice, loss of jobs, costs that 
will be added to local police budgets, extra cost to the taxpayers 
who will now have to pay for lawyers and witnesses to travel to 
other centres, the importance of a judge who lives in a 
community and cares about that community? And every time a 
community loses another service the other businesses in that 
community are also negatively affected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what the NDP calls effective, efficient 
service while the people of Saskatchewan call it two-tiered 
justice. We will now not only have waiting lists for health care, 
we will now have waiting lists for justice as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Minister Axworthy said money would be saved by 
closing these courthouses — 150,000 the first year; 250,000 the 
second year. What he failed to mention was that he has 
increased the budget for administration in his own office by 
500,000 for one year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time this government got their priorities 
straight. No money to maintain services in rural communities, 
but $500,000 to hire more bureaucrats in his own office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — The NDP owe all the people of Saskatchewan 
an explanation for their actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, very alarming to me, and it should be to all people 
in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency, is that in the Stabler 
report Weyburn is not considered an economic centre. We 
simply become part of the Estevan economic region. Mr. 
Speaker, this is not acceptable. 
 
During the election campaign, I cautioned the people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy about the winds that were beginning to 
blow and what they could mean if the NDP were re-elected. The 
first concern was would we have a judge? Even I never 
imagined that not only would we lose a resident judge but that 
we would lose our entire courthouse. 
 
Concern number two: would the school district boundaries 
become coterminous with health districts and possibly with 

RMs (rural municipalities)? 
 
Concern number three: would we lose the Weyburn hospital 
which is the only remaining acute care facility in our 
constituency? 
 
Judy Bradley said I was fearmongering. Mr. Speaker, sad to 
say, the predictions are now coming true. And last week in the 
budget the new health transition fund was unveiled. What is this 
fund for — to close more hospitals? 
 
Mr. Speaker, make no mistake all that is happening is part of a 
plan and the plan is to silence the voice of rural Saskatchewan. 
Part of this master plan, and probably the real push behind the 
NDP’s plan of amalgamation, is the seldom mentioned part in 
the Garcea report about eliminating eight MLAs (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly). If they are cut from rural 
Saskatchewan, and I am sure that that is the plan, the voice of 
rural Saskatchewan will be even further diminished. The NDP’s 
plan is one of control at all costs. 
 
As further proof of this, I’d like to quote from an interview 
Minister Serby held on March 28th with the media. 
 

Media, question: So, no legislation this session? 
 
Minister Serby: I don’t know the answer to that question 
today. 
 
Second media question: Well don’t you have to wait for 
Garcea’s final report in August? 
 
Minister Serby: His final report is due in August, and his 
final report will be reflective of the recommendations of 
which I would be making at the end of April. 

 
This is what the NDP call democratic consultation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy and all of 
Saskatchewan know all about this government who brought us 
health districts with the promise of wellness. What we really 
have is less service, fewer hospital beds, longer waiting lists, 
nurses who are overworked and stressed to the limit, 25 of 32 
health districts in the red, loss of local control, loss of the Plains 
Hospital. And for all this we are spending more tax dollars that 
ever before on health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — So what does this government do? 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly, a 
gentleman who is seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, John 
Froese from Swift Current. John is here attending the 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association meetings that are 
happening in Regina. I believe he’s on the board of that 
organization and involved to a great degree with it, and also 
with the Lac Pelletier Regional Park just south of Swift Current. 
 
John’s also an entrepreneur in Swift Current, involved in the 
glass business. I just ask all members to welcome John here to 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Cline, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 
Romanow that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Hermanson. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So now we look at 
what does this government do about health care. They continue 
to live in the past and defend old-style medicare. It does not 
matter that real people have lost access to timely, adequate care. 
Only the name matters. 
 
But I wonder, Mr. Speaker, what good is free if you are at the 
back of the line. As one gentleman from Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency expressed in a letter to this government, and I 
quote: 
 

You people have already messed up our health system with 
your health boards which are millions in debt, so leave us 
alone. Remember what you did to the Bengough Hospital? 
Closed the hospital, stole all their assets, plus hundreds of 
thousands of dollars, plus $50,000 they had saved from the 
ambulance fund. No thanks, we do not want you in our 
face or our affairs any more. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is how the people of Saskatchewan feel about 
this government and they have absolutely no confidence in 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have watched while 
the NDP have systematically destroyed what our grandparents 
and parents spent a century building. At the beginning of the 
1900s, governments were working diligently to populate rural 
Saskatchewan. Now we have a government intent on doing the 
exact opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have lost schools, railroads, elevators, 
hospitals, and our highways are a disgrace. Communities have 
been split apart and they now go in all directions to access 
services. Yet this government budget continues to grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are demanding to 
know where is our money going. Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan have had enough and they are not going to sit 
quietly any longer. 

The NDP have closed physical structures and discontinued 
services, but they have not killed the spirit of our people. The 
whole issue of forced amalgamation has brought communities 
together like few issues before it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week the people of Saskatchewan were 
presented with a budget which is full of deceit and doublespeak. 
We will give the people an historic tax reduction, but first you 
must pay PST on more items starting immediately, and tax 
relief will be phased in over four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the people wanted and need is immediate tax 
relief not more taxation. We must stop the drain of people from 
our province. I believe the smoke and mirrors of this budget 
will confirm for people the fact that this government has no 
intention of giving real tax relief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has infuriated most groups in the 
province who rely on government for funding because they had 
been told one thing in the budget speech, but upon closer 
examination have actually realized the opposite. Mr. Speaker, 
the NDP say they can’t give tax relief now; they can’t put more 
dollars into health and education and farming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the government who never has money for 
hard-working people of this province, but they have lots of 
money for the things this . . . for other things. This is a 
government who gave us Channel Lake, SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company), Guyana, 
patronage in the Crowns. Remember Jack Messer? Remember 
the Don Ching deal? And now millions are being spent on deals 
like SecurTek, virtual office, FleetNet. And Mr. Speaker, they 
are now sitting on a $700 million slush fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a government that makes decisions and 
changes where the people of Saskatchewan come last . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask all hon. members 
to allow the hon. member for Weyburn-Big Muddy to continue 
with her budget debate. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe the people 
of Saskatchewan are ready to fight for their communities and 
their democratic rights. Never again are we going to be so naïve 
as to think that this government is acting in our best interests. 
 
In my address to the legislature last fall I said that if we listen 
closely we would hear the sound of thundering hooves in the 
distance. Well, Mr. Speaker, they are a whole lot closer and 
louder than then. This government would be hard pressed to 
find support in any corner of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party is proud to speak for the people of this 
province who for far too long have been without a voice. We 
will speak with common sense and we will hold this 
government accountable. Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a distinct pleasure 
to stand in this House today in support of one of the best 
budgets ever brought down in this Assembly. 



400 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we listen to the 
diatribe and the rhetoric from the members opposite, it becomes 
all the more clear as to the importance of what we are trying to 
do in this budget, of what we are trying to do on this side of the 
House, and of what this coalition government stands for. 
 
Let there be no mistake, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that what the 
member opposite, particularly the one from Weyburn raises 
today is exactly, exactly what we would see — God forbid that 
that party ever came to sit on these benches. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — The fact that the member from Weyburn, the 
seat that Tommy Douglas used to represent, the fact that the 
member would say, and I quote: what does it matter, what does 
it matter if you’re at the back of the line, so what if medicare is 
free? 
 
So what if medicare’s free? What does that mean? That means 
that she’s been watching far too much Ralph Klein, that she’s 
been hanging on to too many of Stockwell Day’s dinner 
functions. That’s exactly what that means, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What does it matter if it’s free, if you’re at the back of the line? 
That is exactly the point of medicare: that everybody — 
everybody — in this province is treated equally. Everybody has 
their needs met in accordance with the way they’ve got to be 
dealt with. 
 
It does not mean what the member for Weyburn alludes to — 
that if you’ve got the money in your hip pocket, you can bounce 
to the front of the line. And I think it is shameful, it is a 
disgrace, and it is an embarrassment to the people of Weyburn 
that that representative would stand in the House today to say 
that. Who does she think she is? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — And yet this is exactly, this is exactly one of 
the bright new stars of this bright new party on the opposite 
benches. They come forward with this mantra that they were 
going to do things different, that they were robbed of the 
election victory, that they should be over here. Well we’re 
slowly starting to see what they would do if they were over 
here. 
 
What does it matter if it’s free if you’re at the back of the line, 
says the member for Weyburn. What does it matter? Where 
have you been? Where has that member been? What does she 
believe in? 
 
It’s clearly not the medicare that we’ve fought for on this side. 
It’s clearly not the medicare that was invented here in 
Saskatchewan. And it’s clearly not the medicare that 
Saskatchewan people, including those in Weyburn, support. 
 
(1445) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is very interesting to 
listen to what the members opposite have had to say over the 
last few days as they’ve entered into this debate. Because it is, I 
think, no matter what they try to put forward and no matter how 
much they try to drape themselves in the Saskatchewan flag, it 
is not what Saskatchewan people believe in. 
 
Saskatchewan people do not believe in that type of right-wing 
rhetoric. It is absolute right-wing rhetoric. And we know it. It is 
Ralph Klein times two. It is Stockwell Day and Preston 
Manning. We don’t need to talk about the good old days of 
Grant Devine, although I noticed the member for Estevan 
yesterday said, or on Friday, said how pleased she was to have 
dedicated so much of her life serving him in his constituency 
office. What a pleasure. 
 
And it’s nice to see that this is how this party’s come forward. 
This bright new party with no connections whatsoever, they tell 
us, to the Devine government. The member for Swift Current 
claims that, oh he has no connections to the Devine 
government. But he happened to work for it. Oh but that seems 
to just escape his mind. 
 
The member for Weyburn who on Friday was a disgrace in 
ripping up the phone book in here. The only thing she’s ripped 
is another page out of the Tory platform that they ran on back in 
the ’80s and inserted it smack dab in the middle of the Sask 
Party platform. That’s what she’s ripped out. It’s a rip-off of 
what Saskatchewan people believe in. And it’s shameful. It’s 
absolutely shameful. 
 
But this is what these members opposite believe. Well the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena chirps from her seat. You’d 
think she’d know better after four years. But nevertheless, here 
we go. She says, well, today in question period she asked the 
Minister of Education, what are we doing for education 
funding? 
 
The minister outlines very clearly what there is for education 
funding and points out, very interestingly, that . . . What did the 
member campaign for in education funding? Zero. Nothing. In 
fact, it didn’t even warrant a mention in her pamphlet. 
 
But this, but this is the member that they have decided, on the 
opposition side, will speak for them on education matters. Well 
clearly she’s got such an excellent record. Clearly her platform 
just speaks for itself. What was in the platform again? Nothing. 
Absolutely nothing. She couldn’t even find the space for one 
line or spend the money to put the ink on it to say what they 
would do. 
 
That’s what the member for Kelvington-Wadena, the education 
spokesman, the shadow cabinet minister for the Saskatchewan 
Party — that’s her commitment to education, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting, absolutely interesting, as we listen to the 
members opposite talk about these things. We listen to them 
talk about health care. Well we certainly hear what the member 
for Weyburn had to say. We listen to what other members are 
calling for. They’re calling for value-for-money audits — 
value-for-money audits in the health care system. Well what it 
turns out as we listen to more and more of it, they don’t want an 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

audit of the health care system, they want an autopsy, because 
that’s what will be left of medicare if they ever end up on this 
side of the House. 
 
And if you doubt it, just listen to the number of references that 
they make to what Ralph Klein is doing opposite, in their 
attempt to justify what Ralph Klein is doing in Alberta with 
their platform. 
 
Even Albertans don’t like what Mr. Klein is proposing. Who 
would have thought that in Conservative Alberta that the 
Liberals would be seeing huge gains in support of public 
medicare. Why? Because Albertans, like other Canadians, like 
Saskatchewan people, like Canadians in every part of this 
country, support medicare. 
 
I should qualify that by saying Canadians with the obvious 
exception of the members opposite who seek to destroy it, to 
undermine it, to drive it out of our national social programs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we look at the budget, you can see 
where our parties on this side stand. These are the parties that 
brought this nation medicare. These are the parties that believe 
in continuing to change, to — medicare. 
 
They don’t plan on doing it as the members opposite have, 
through privatization. How many times today have we heard 
them ask about privatization of health care. They asked about it 
because they believe . . . the member for Melfort raised it 
several times in question period. I don’t know whether the 
member for Cypress Hills was present at the time, but he did 
raise it. The privatization word was raised many times. Why? 
Why? Because the member opposite would like to lead us down 
a path towards privatization in medicare. 
 
As the member for Weyburn says, what does it matter if it’s 
free if you’re at the back of the line. What does it matter if it’s 
free. So what would they do? Would they impose a premium? 
Would they put a fee on? Would they allow user fees? Would it 
be direct payment? What is it we’re going to become? 
 
The fact is, under that party opposite, they will oppose this 
budget because it puts more money into medicare. Hundreds of 
millions of dollars more into medicare. That’s what it needs. 
And the member for Kelvington knows full well that that’s 
exactly what it means. By putting more money into medicare, 
we are making medicare better. Clearly we want the federal 
government to step back to the plate and add money back in. 
Clearly we recognize there need to be more changes. 
 
But for the members opposite, that’s not the issue. They want 
medicare to fail. And that’s really what the agenda is. And it’s 
not simply reinventing or putting back in what Grant Devine 
had. They, the right wing in this nation and this province, have 
found a new way to move, and that’s right to the extreme. 
 
Take a look at what Ralph Klein’s doing. Take a look at what 
Stockwell Day is doing. Take a look at what the parties 
opposite are proposing. It’s the same plan to destroy the most 
important social program in this nation. Why? Because it’s 
good for Canadians? I don’t think so. 
 
They want to do it because it is good for those people who 

believe that in every aspect of life there must be profit. No one 
on the opposite side has been able to tell us how for-profit in 
health care that Ralph Klein’s proposing in Alberta — which 
they champion — nobody can tell us how, by introducing profit 
into the system, they’ll provide better services. 
 
Isn’t that the fundamental question? Isn’t that the fundamental 
question? If we were to allow for-profit medicare, which is 
what the members opposite on the far right want, how by 
introducing for-profit do you introduce better services? 
 
Well for once the opposition benches have fallen silent. Why? 
Because there is no answer. They cannot answer the question 
because it does not work. 
 
Well it’s an interesting thing to listen to the members opposite. 
They’re saying . . . The Leader of the Opposition made this 
statement in his response to the budget speech immediately. He 
says, the legislation we have which licenses health care 
facilities, the Bill that we had passed which licenses health care 
facilities, will keep out for-profit institutions. 
 
Let me repeat that. It will keep out for-profit medicare. Keeps it 
out of the system. It keeps it out of the system. But in Alberta 
they’ve introduced similar legislation. Why? To bring it in. To 
bring it in. 
 
So the member opposite says it’s the same legislation. It’s not 
the same legislation. But the telling part of this is the fact that if 
those members opposite were sitting in the treasury benches and 
controlled the cabinet and allowed to approve the regulations, 
we know they would make it like Alberta’s and they would 
allow the privatization of our medicare system. That’s what 
they’re trying to do today by saying this is the same type of 
Bill. It is not the same type of Bill. The motives are different. 
The legislation is different. And I can tell you the way that we 
administer it on this side is different. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite 
know that what we say over here is true — they know it. And 
they know that if they ever ended up sitting on the government 
benches, that they would move towards a privatized model of 
medicare. We know that that’s what they would do. 
 
And for the arrogance of the members opposite who sit here day 
after day and preen as if they were the government, what they 
are not doing is they are not laying out truthfully what they 
would do on this side, because we know what they’re doing 
today is simply laying the argument. They’re laying the 
argument for privatization of medicare. They’re laying the 
argument for user pay. 
 
As the member for Weyburn says, what does it matter if it’s 
free? The woman who now represents the seat held by Tommy 
Douglas says, what does it matter if it’s free? Does anybody, 
anybody in this House believe that that’s what the people of 
Weyburn think? Does anybody believe that that’s what the 
people of Saskatchewan think? And does anybody believe that 
we would ever, ever allow that to happen? But that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is exactly what those members opposite are trying to 
put forward. 



402 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

Yes, they argue that they’re going to vote against this budget. 
They are going to vote against it because it doesn’t have 
provision for us to do an autopsy on medicare like they want. It 
doesn’t allow for the extra billing. It doesn’t allow for 
privatization. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget invests in medicare — 
medicare as we all know it, not as they want to define it. And 
that is one very good reason to support this provincial budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s another very good reason to 
support this provincial budget that does not involve spending. 
And that is the fact that this budget delivers the largest tax cut 
in Saskatchewan history — the largest tax cut in Saskatchewan 
history. 
 
Outside of this House, the members campaigned in this 
September election saying that they supported lower taxes, 
saying that we needed to introduce lower taxes. And yet the 
first opportunity they have in this House to vote for lower taxes, 
they’re going to vote against them. 
 
Explain to me this, I say to the members opposite, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, explain to me this: how is it that when presented with 
a budget that will deliver $400-and-some million in income tax 
cuts, a net benefit of $260 million, how is it that you can oppose 
that budget and still say that you support income tax cuts? How 
is it you can say that you are the champions of tax cuts, when 
you won’t vote for them? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the question that many of us are 
asking. For the five years that I’ve been in this Assembly and in 
five budgets we have voted to reduce taxes. Every single budget 
that I have had the pleasure of voting on behalf of Regina South 
constituents has reduced the tax burden in this province. 
 
And yet, and yet, the members opposite, and yet the members 
opposite are having a very important choice put before them in 
this budget. And that choice is simply this: do you support the 
status quo or do you support reduced taxes and tax reform? 
 
That’s what this budget is. There’s no other way to argue it. By 
voting against this budget, the members opposite will vote 
against the largest tax cut in Saskatchewan history. There’s no 
other way to look at it. 
 
The members opposite chirp up and they ask about the 
numbers. The fact is this year there’s still $40 million worth of 
tax relief — $40 million in tax reduction. It’s called net — a net 
reduction of 40 million. 
 
Now the member for Kelvington-Wadena is not known for her 
business acumen, so let’s add it up for her. The fact is that it 
will provide real tax relief for Saskatchewan families now, in 
the year 2000. 
 
People when they go home and are doing their taxes, as we’re 
getting ready for the tax filing deadline, need only take a look at 
line 9 of the Saskatchewan income tax form. That’s where the 
flat tax is. A tax introduced by the previous right-wing 
government that was in this province. 
 
Effective this year, you can knock 25 per cent off of that — a 

25 per cent reduction in the flat tax. And this budget lays the 
foundation to eliminate it all together from January 1; January 
1, the flat tax is gone. Come January 1, the debt reduction is 
gone. Come January 1, the high income surtax is gone. That’s 
what this budget does. It reduces income taxes. 
 
(1500) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast on her feet? 
 
Ms. Lorje: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I thank all 
my colleagues on both sides of the House for giving me 
permission to introduce a former colleague of mine and of 
many of ours. I am referring of course to Dale Flavel, a former 
MLA for Last Mountain-Touchwood, and a very successful 
farmer, I might add. Someone who very much enjoys living in 
Saskatchewan, and I understand is here for a long time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask all members of this House to join 
with me in welcoming Mr. Dale Flavel. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Cline, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 
Romanow that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. It’s always a pleasure to 
welcome previous members back to this Assembly, and it is a 
. . . now you see, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . and it’s too bad that 
the people on television can’t hear this. But the member for 
Estevan, ever so politely, makes rude comments as we are 
introducing former members — makes rude comments saying, 
you know, pointing out the fact that they were defeated. We 
know they were defeated. We got that message. We got that 
message. 
 
And yet when these members come back to the Assembly, what 
do the members opposite do? They deride them, and they’re 
rude. This is exactly what we have seen since this session 
started in December. There is an arrogance that permeates the 
members opposite. 
 
Listen to it. You’ve got the member for Weyburn who stands up 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 403 

in the House yesterday, or Friday, and throws a temper tantrum 
and rips up the phone book. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I am sure that the hon. 
member would wish to tie this into the budget debate, and I’m 
very much looking forward to the tying of that together. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I do 
welcome the opportunity to make the point, because the point 
is, is that there is an arrogance on the part of the members 
opposite. And there is a duplicity in the way that they want to 
be respected, and the way that they respect others. And we can 
see it in a duplicity in their arguments in the budget. That’s the 
way that this ties in, because it permeates the entire set of 
arguments from the members opposite. Campaign on one hand 
saying they want tax reduction. First opportunity they have, 
they vote against it. 
 
Campaign saying, well of course we’ll protect medicare. First 
opportunity they have, what do they want to do? Privatize it. 
That’s what the members opposite stand for. That’s the problem 
and that is the side of these people that Saskatchewan voters 
will come to see over the next four years because there is an 
arrogance, there is a hatred, and there is a meanness on that side 
of the Assembly. And we can see it in the way that they deal 
with their arguments. 
 
What is their argument for not voting for the budget? I’ve 
brought the copy of The Leader-Post which says that the 
minister launched historic tax reform but the opposition says the 
savings are too far down the road. Too far down the road. This 
year in the year 2000, tax cuts — real tax cuts. In the year 2001 
more tax cuts. In the year 2002 more tax cuts. In the year 2003 
more tax cuts, and yet the members opposite are going to vote 
against that. 
 
Why? Because they campaign on one thing and when they get 
into the House it becomes pure politics. Are they going to vote 
against the budget because it’s bad for Saskatchewan people? 
No, they’re going to vote against the budget because it’s bad for 
the Saskatchewan Party. That’s what they’re going to do. And I 
think that we need to remember that. 
 
The fact is that these income tax cuts will benefit real 
Saskatchewan families. Let’s just highlight again what the tax 
cuts are. 
 
Starting now, year 2000, the flat tax cut by a quarter. A 25 per 
cent reduction in flat tax. Come next year, flat tax, debt tax, 
high-income surtax eliminated; abolished. When was the last 
time a government abolished a tax? I don’t know, it’s a good 
question. I guess I should know the answer before I raise the 
question. But when was the last time a government abolished a 
tax? We will abolish three of them. Three of them come January 
1. 
 
And on top of it, we will de-link our system so that the taxes are 
levied not on what the federal government sets for the base but 
will be taxed on what Saskatchewan people earn in a fair, 
simple, responsive way because that’s what people said they 
wanted. Even the members opposite said that that’s what they 
wanted. The member opposite, the Leader of the Opposition, 
said that if he were here he would . . . he likes the tax cut plan 

but of course he won’t vote for it. 
 
Well I think that the real test of members of this Assembly who, 
in December, stood in this House on the opposition side and 
said that they were going to salute those things that they thought 
were good. This is the real first test of it, this is the real first test 
of it — to see whether members opposite will support the tax 
cuts that they campaigned on. 
 
And the fact is, the fact is that they didn’t. There are more tax 
cuts than there are tax increases. There are more tax cuts than 
there are tax increases in this budget — a net benefit to 
taxpayers of $40 million in the year 2000. A $40 million tax cut 
now. That’s what this budget delivers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget also delivers hope, it delivers 
opportunity, and it delivers optimism for Saskatchewan people. 
 
As I have been around my constituency over the last week since 
the budget’s been down, people tell me that they are happy that 
we listened to what they had to say on the Jack Vicq report. 
That they are happy that we have decided to narrow the base 
from what was initially proposed. 
 
We did that not because we were philosophically hidebound or 
ideologically hidebound to it; we did it because that’s what 
people told us they wanted. We identified those items and 
reduced it. 
 
And I think that we need to make sure the people understand on 
the . . . that people in the party opposite understand this. Good 
government is about listening. It’s about responding. It’s about 
good public policy. And that’s what we’re delivering in this 
budget. 
 
The four-year fiscal plan, which is attached, is a document 
which we are all very proud of — NDP and Liberal members 
alike on this side — because we’ve all spent a lot of time 
working on it. It is a plan which reduces the debt — the debt 
that you might remember was built up long before we came into 
office. 
 
The debt that the members opposite would like to add to. The 
debt that they have no plan to cut. 
 
The debt which eats $677 million a year out of the provincial 
budget. It’s a huge amount of money if you think about it — 
$677 million is what we pay on interest still today to service the 
debt built up by the previous government. 
 
Money that . . . money that could have been used to further 
reduce taxes and increase social spending which is what we 
believe in on this side. 
 
I used to think that the party opposite, I used to think that they 
could be trusted to carry through what they believed in, which 
was simply tax cuts at all expense. But as it turns out, they don’t 
even believe in tax cuts at all. Because where is it? They won’t 
support it — $430 million worth of income tax cuts that this 
fiscal plan lays forward on an annualized basis, once 
implemented. 
 
But are they going to support it? No. Why? Because they claim 



404 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

that it does not — what does the headline say? — the savings 
are too far down the road. So the fact that on July 1 the flat tax 
is cut is too far down the road. They’ve got the blinders on for a 
three-month focused window, and that’s it. Three months. Six 
months. A year. The fact that this budget lays out tax cuts for 
the next three years, it’s just too far down the road. 
 
But you know one thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we could 
count on, is if we had simply given a snapshot and said, we’re 
making the tax cut this year, they’d say, oh well we can’t 
support the budget because it doesn’t provide a long-term plan 
for tax cuts. 
 
Well this is the argument that they put forward. You can just 
hear them. Except they’re obviously silenced now because they 
are starting to understand that we are on to them. We’ve figured 
it out. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Boring stupor. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Well the members opposite may be bored 
into stupor, but I think that we all know that there is some truth 
in what we’re saying on this side, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The fact is that this budget and this financial plan delivers tax 
cuts today, tomorrow, the year after, the year after, and the year 
after. And every year that this coalition government sits on 
these benches there will be tax cuts as laid out by the Minister 
of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — But the members opposite, the members 
opposite have done their fair share to make things difficult. 
Remember at Christmas as they were spinning up the sense of 
concern that people felt in the rural communities, rightfully, 
spinning up that concern about the farm situation — demanding 
more and more money, breaking from the historic coalition of 
farm groups, demanding Saskatchewan ante up money. 
 
This budget delivers a large amount of money for farmers. The 
farm fuel exemption this year is worth $123 million. If you read 
in the back of the budget tables, 123 million is the farm fuel 
exemption . . . or is the fuel exemption, sorry, the fuel tax 
exemption — it’s not all for farmers. But the fuel tax exemption 
is $123 million. Not a word about that. There’s not a word 
about that. 
 
Some of the members were at least honest enough to sit here 
and applaud the minister when he made the announcement. And 
I think we appreciate that. 
 
It’s interesting that one of the members was the member for 
Kindersley who I know in the past has broken from party ranks 
to support good budgets that deliver tax cuts. I know that when 
we cut the sales tax from 9 per cent to 7 per cent, the member 
for Kindersley broke from his party and supported it. 
 
And I hope that other members opposite, even though that that 
member is no longer the leader of his party, I hope other 
members will look at that lead and will vote for measures which 
truly restore hope, optimism, and opportunity in Saskatchewan 
as this tax cut does, and, incidentally, as the members opposite 

campaigned on. 
 
This is a test on more than simply the future and the next four 
years. This is a test about the credibility of the members 
opposite. This is to see whether the campaign promises they 
made, when implemented, albeit not by their ministers, but 
when the vast majority of it is being implemented by 
agreement, whether they’ll support it or whether they’ll find a 
cheap political reason not to. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I repeat it again, we know 
that the members opposite will vote against this budget not 
because it’s bad for Saskatchewan people, but because it’s bad 
for the Saskatchewan Party. And I think that they know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget provides 
spending on a balanced approach. It provides a plan for debt 
reduction; it provides more money for our schools; it provides 
more money for our hospitals; it provides more money for 
ordinary working families; it provides more money and better 
tax fairness for farmers. And yet we hear nothing positive from 
the members opposite. 
 
What we hear is the member for Weyburn say that she wants to 
get yet another diatribe against medicare. We hear her say that 
there is deceit in the budget. I don’t even think that’s 
parliamentary. Not that the members opposite care about it as 
we’ve seen in their displays. The fact that twice when the 
member for Weyburn speaks she referred to members on this 
side by name. A complete disrespect for the rules. A complete 
disrespect for their platform. A complete disrespect for what 
their constituents believe in. That’s what the Saskatchewan 
Party stands for. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, people told me during the provincial 
election campaign that we needed to do a better job of listening. 
People told me that we needed to hear what they were saying, 
which was tax cuts needed to come and it needed to happen in a 
big way. 
 
(1515) 
 
With all of the spending priorities and all of the pressures that 
we have, that the members opposite always rightfully identify 
more money for medicare, more for education, more for 
highways, more for farmers, for all of that. We hear those 
concerns too. And we have tried to prevent . . . present a 
balanced approach, an approach which cuts income taxes by 
$430 million when fully implemented, an approach which 
provides modest expansion of the sales tax to a base which is 
still narrower than that of most other provinces. 
 
We will still have the second lowest sales tax in the nation 
including Alberta. Lower than Manitoba. So those who 
represent ridings on the east side of the province, remember that 
by voting against this budget you are voting against measures 
which still make . . . which will help make businesses and 
consumers in your ridings more competitive than Manitoba. 
Remember that. 
 
I say to the members who represent seats along the western side 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 405 

of the province: remember that this budget will allow 70 per 
cent of people, 70 per cent of Saskatchewan people, when fully 
implemented, to pay Alberta taxes, income taxes — 70 per cent. 
 
But that’s not good enough. Because the members opposite, the 
pieces that they want from Alberta — they don’t want us to 
have 70 per cent of Saskatchewan people paying Alberta’s 
taxes. Why? Because it’s bad for the Saskatchewan people? No. 
Because it’s bad for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Do they not want people to be more competitive and have a 
narrower base than Manitoba? Why? Not because it’s bad for 
Saskatchewan people but because it’s bad for the Saskatchewan 
Party and for the Saskatchewan Party’s hopes. 
 
They want to hog-tie this government. They want to hog-tie this 
government’s spending priorities in order to prevent us from 
keeping medicare alive. That’s what these members opposite 
want to do. We won’t let that happen. 
 
Medicare was invented and implemented in this Chamber. It’s 
something all of us should be proud of, and it’s something 
people on this side of the Assembly certainly are proud of. The 
fact that we have a coalition of progressive electors, a coalition 
of two parties that can see through the politics to implement 
change that really works for Saskatchewan families is what this 
government’s about. 
 
But the members opposite have a chance, a very real chance, to 
join this coalition, and they have a real chance to do so by 
voting in favour of this budget, a budget which implements the 
vast majority of what they campaigned on. 
 
The question is this: will they vote in favour of their 
constituents; will they vote to protect medicare; will they vote 
so the 70 per cent of Saskatchewan people can pay Alberta’s tax 
. . . income taxes; will they vote to maintain the lowest sales tax 
in the nation next to Alberta? Or will they vote for 
self-preservation of the Sask Party? 
 
We know what the answer is. We know that they can’t get past 
their agenda of privatization, their hatred for trade unions, their 
dislike of working people, their absolute abhorrence — 
abhorrence — of anything progressive. We know that they can’t 
get past that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the proof will be in the 
vote that we cast on this budget on Wednesday. That is when 
the proof will be. 
 
As members on this side rise to support a coalition budget when 
we vote in favour of a budget which reduces income taxes, 
which provides a record number of health care spending, which 
provides a large amount more for school divisions, when this 
. . . when we vote in favour of a budget that protects programs 
that support the poorest in our province, we will vote with 
pride, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we will vote knowing that this 
budget is hopeful and optimistic. 
 
We know that when the members opposite vote that they will be 
voting opposed to the tax cut, opposed to more money for 
medicare, opposed to more money for education — despite the 
fact that those are the various issues they raise in question 
period saying why aren’t you doing more? 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fact that the members opposite — and 
I’ve heard this several times — they talk about $700 million in 
the liquor and gaming fund being a slush fund. What we have 
done is provide a complete transparency for this fund. What we 
have done is we are reducing the amount of money, which will 
be held in reserve, to keep taxpayers’ shock from changes in 
resource revenue, as this province is known of, to be able to 
maintain the social programs that we sometimes don’t have the 
same amount of control over that we would like in terms of 
federal revenue. 
 
That amount of money will be reduced down to 5 per cent of 
our budget — a fair amount. There’s no slush fund. There’s no 
slush fund. And it won’t rise above that. 
 
Two hundred and fifty-some million dollars this year will be 
spent to . . . be set aside for forest fires, which we know have 
had a huge impact on our budget. I don’t know if the members 
opposite are better about predicting them, but we don’t seem to 
be able to know when there’s . . . how much the forest is going 
to burn because we can’t predict the weather. 
 
The 50 million that is going to be set aside for forest fires will 
ensure that we can protect our natural resources — $50 million 
set aside for forest fire fighting in reserve. 
 
Now, the member opposite . . . my advice to the member 
opposite who says that she wants to talk about Native taxation, 
and we know why she wants to talk about Native taxation, my 
advice to her is stay tuned, stay tuned because there will be an 
excellent speech later on this evening . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The member opposite says that she can’t bother 
coming to the House tonight to listen to the speech. 
 
The good news is that she will be able to tune into television 
and . . . Unfortunately the home shopping network will be 
bumped off. So if you were planning to tune into that, it’ll be 
bumped off in order so that we can listen to speeches by 
members who’ve been elected to come to the Assembly during 
the regular hours and to vote and debate the budget that has 
been set forth. 
 
I invite the member from Kelvington to come join us tonight at 
7 o’clock so she can listen to a speech from the Minister of 
Northern Affairs, who will explain to her why the changes that 
we have made are fair and the reasons we’ve gone about 
making those changes. So I would invite her to come join us 
tonight in her seat which is at the front of the Sask Party’s 
benches — 7 p.m. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was saying about the transparency we 
were building into the liquor and gaming fund by moving the 
profits of those operations directly over, by moving the retained 
earnings directly over, and by setting a ceiling on the amount of 
reserve. 
 
This has long been a concern of people because they don’t 
understand what the liquor and gaming reserve was there for. 
We’ve listened to that concern and we have gotten rid of the 
reserve. The profits will now move over. We’ve got a clear, 
transparent rainy day fund — a stabilization fund is really what 
it is — put in place. 
 



406 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

But I can tell you, regardless of what we may call this fund, I 
will tell you what it is not. It is not a slush fund that the 
members opposite seem to think it is. It’s interesting that when 
the Sask Party members talk, they talk about a slush fund. The 
only party that we have ever seen operate a slush fund is their 
predecessor. 
 
We know full well about the slush funds of the previous 
government. What I fear is that if they ever came back into 
office, these would be become flush funds. Because they’d go 
straight down the drain into some supporter’s pocket. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to tell you that we have put in place 
the mechanisms that will ensure that this fund is transparent; 
that will make sure that expenditures are voted by the 
Assembly; that’ll make sure that the taxpayers are protected; 
that’ll make sure that there is money available to fund our social 
programs. 
 
This is responsible government. This is responsive government. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is good government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — I won’t take up much more time today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, except that I do want to recap why I will be 
casting my vote in favour of the budget proposed by the 
Minister of Finance, on behalf of the residents of Regina South 
that I am pleased to represent again for the second time. 
 
This budget is a plan for growth and opportunity. This budget 
reduces income taxes substantially; provides the single largest 
tax cut in Saskatchewan history. It will provide record funding 
for health care. It will increase the amount of money to our 
schools. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is what I campaigned on. This is what 
we believe in. This is why this coalition government is focused 
on moving forward. We’ve listened, we’ve responded, and we 
are prepared to act in order to make sure that lower taxes, better 
health care, more jobs, and healthier communities are a part of 
Saskatchewan today, tomorrow, to the end of this term. 
 
And I would say, as the first budget of our new century, that 
this budget more than any other deserves the support of all 
members. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a real 
honour today to stand here representing the people from 
Kelvington-Wadena in response to the first budget in the new 
millennium. It’s also the first budget from the combination 
socialist and want-to-be socialist conglomeration over there. 
 
I’m thankful for the opportunity. I had to go home to my 
constituency this weekend and speak to the people I represent 
before replying to this budget speech. Sometimes we forget that 
it’s not what we think that matters in this House, it’s what the 
people that we represent think. And that’s why we’re here. 
We’re the voice of 15 to 17,000 people out there and it’s their 
voice that’s being heard here in this Assembly. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got to tell you, the people I represent 
are not at all amused by this shell game the government is 
playing. In fact, I think it’s safe to say they’re downright angry. 
 
I met many people at the four different functions I attended this 
weekend and a lot of them gave me their opinion of the budget. 
And some of it can’t be repeated in public but some of them are 
pretty cute, things like the plumber who told me that he was 
PST’d off. 
 
But the very best analogy I heard was from a government 
employee who told me the whole budget was sort of like a 
cartoon he used to watch when he was a kid. The cartoon was 
Popeye the sailor man. Remember Wimpy? His favourite 
saying was I’ll gladly pay you Tuesday for a hamburger today. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s what the Finance minister is saying — 
I’ll gladly pay you some income tax back in four years, if you 
pay PST on everything today. 
 
He stopped short of saying, he stopped short of saying, trust me 
to keep my word. He’s from the government; he’ll keep his 
word. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people from Kelvington-Wadena are not just 
upset because their taxes were increased again after years of 
promising that the light at the end of the tunnel wouldn’t be 
another train. The people from my area are upset because the 
NDP were given a lesson in governance on September 16, 
1999, and the budget proved that they didn’t understand that 
lesson. In fact, they just failed the test. 
 
Try as they may, this government doesn’t understand what 
people need and want, even when the answer is so simple and 
seems to be so obvious. Just like saying, you just can’t miss it. 
Some people can just miss the obvious, and the budget is a 
prime example. People wanted and people needed tax relief. 
They didn’t want a promise of a tax relief; they wanted tax 
relief. They wanted the real thing, and they wanted it now. 
 
In spite of what the member from Regina Dewdney suggested 
during his speech, the people from Kelvington-Wadena know 
what’s happening in Alberta. In fact they know what’s 
happening in other parts of the world where individuals, not 
governments, are getting ahead. 
 
I don’t have to tell my children, and I don’t have to tell people 
in my constituency about the good things that are happening in 
the other parts of the world. They find that out for themselves. 
In fact, in homes and constituencies where socialism isn’t the 
only reading and learning material in the house, people tend to 
figure things out pretty quickly. And they choose to go where 
life offers opportunity along with challenges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government and the Finance minister just 
don’t understand that you have to have faith in people and their 
ability to make decisions, to make investments, and even make 
money. Individuals will then make good things happen in life. 
Things that this government and their bureaucracy know is 
missing in this province, but they haven’t figured out that 
government cannot give. It’s not even their job to give it. We 
need government to get out of our life and we can make the 
economy grow, and good things will begin to happen. 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 407 

So often in the past four years, I’ve wondered why these 
socialists don’t understand what’s going on, what’s wrong in 
this province. And I think I’ve finally figured it out. The whole 
concept of business is so absolutely foreign that you just can’t 
understand it. 
 
Try to explain entrepreneurial spirit to a socialist is like trying 
to teach a robot how to fall in love. You just can’t do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have waited long 
enough for tax relief. They waited when this government came 
to power in 1991 and were told if they tightened their belts and 
worked hard, life would get better. So being the kind, gentle, 
and hard-working people they are, Saskatchewanians did just 
that. They worked harder; they paid more taxes; they 
complained very little, and they had faith that the government 
would solve the big problems and then look after them as 
individuals, but it never happened. 
 
What did happen is this government allowed themselves 
another 8 per cent increase in spending this year. I believe the 
teachers, and the nurses, and the government employees, and 
farmers, and everybody in this province would enjoy an 8 per 
cent increase. But we don’t have the luxury of taking the 
increase away; this government does. 
 
(1530) 
 
When I was home this weekend the talk of the budget centred 
around two issues: expansion of the PST and the admission by 
this government that they were sitting on nearly three-quarters 
of a billion dollars from a liquor and gaming slush fund. For 
nine years they’ve told the people of this province, you’ve just 
got to tighten your belts and hang on till things get better. And 
now we’re finding out that you were hiding $695 million, just 
like it was your own personal money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province have a right to know 
why they were hiding this money when we have an education 
system, a health system, and an infrastructure system falling 
down around people’s ears? We wonder if you’re hiding this 
because you’re ashamed of tainted money that was gotten from 
ruining thousands of people’s lives. You screamed 
sanctimoniously about having to pay millions of dollars in 
interest payments yearly, and now we find out you’ve taken in 
over half of that amount from a special little fund you set up 
where you just take advantage of citizens. 
 
Your government uses this money that’s resulted in broken 
homes and broken lives to balance your budget. Your record of 
seven balanced budgets didn’t come on the backs of every 
Saskatchewan citizen; it came mostly of the backs of people 
whose lives were destroyed in order for you to cling to your 
own shallow victory of financial security. Every one of your 
so-called balanced budgets comes either from selling assets or 
from drawing down your own sin tax money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government should be ashamed of themselves 
for bragging about being fiscally responsible because the end 
does not justify the means. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the Stabler and the Garcea report 
that are spoken about very loudly around the province right now 
is that the forced amalgamation is an issue that’s very important 
to the people in my constituency. Government and their 
bureaucracy realize that there are missed opportunities in rural 
Saskatchewan. They know that economic growth and 
population increases are a rarity in our rural areas, and they also 
know that Saskatchewan is the only province that’s seen a 
decrease in rural areas . . . in rural population in the last five 
years — the only province. 
 
So they hired an economist that thinks in the same box as the 
government to analyze figures and trends. The analysis doesn’t 
quite question why the trends are happening, they just arrive at 
a conclusion and pass on a continuation of the same philosophy. 
If there was a political will or a desire to see a different face on 
the landscape of rural Saskatchewan, government may have 
spent some of the $750,000 earmarked to work with what is 
considered the inevitable . . . (inaudible) . . . turnaround. 
 
But that doesn’t appear to be an option. We have a government 
dog and pony show running around the province saying things 
will only get better for towns and municipalities if they get 
bigger. The government’s answer to every problem is, it must 
be too small. We’ve got to make this bigger. The government 
says I know amalgamation won’t save you any money and I 
know you’ll have less local control, but perhaps you’ll have 
more economic potential. That’s what the analysis says. So if 
that’s what the professionals say, you guys believe it’s got to be 
true. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, forced amalgamation is not the answer. The 
answer is getting the government to do their job — provide 
health care, schools, and an infrastructure, then get rid of the 
mountains of red tape and regulations that they promised to do 
five years ago, cut taxes, and then sit back and watch it happen. 
The people in the province can make it happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe everyone in this province is tired of 
hearing politicians talk about the rural-urban split. I’m willing 
to bet there are fewer than 5 per cent of the people in the 
province who don’t have family or close friends on the other 
side of what is considered to be the split. I also believe those 
same 95 per cent of the people can tell you how this 
government has set about to divide and conquer and ensure that 
there is a split — closing 52, now 54, rural hospitals. Guess 
what? That’s one of the reasons why shopping patterns change. 
It’s a fact. If you close hospitals and you close schools, people 
have to go to a larger centre; it’s inevitable. 
 
Cut funding to agriculture, cut funding to municipal 
government, cut funding to highways, cut funding to regional 
parks, cut funding to education, and pretty soon there’s going to 
be an urban-rural split. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are two departments that were obviously 
treated unfairly in this budget — probably more, but two that 
I’ve looked at closely. The first was the Department of 
Education. Both of the NDP parties across from us talked about 
the importance of education in the budget. Both the Premier and 
the Co-Premier talked about the tax revolt issues and they 
sympathize with the plight of the farmers saying that the issue 
would be addressed in the budget. 



408 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the total amount of increase in this budget 
for the Department of Education was 5.8 per cent. Out of that 
there has to be teachers’ salary increases paid for and the 
government’s plan to conquer and divide making sure that they 
can pit the SSTA against the Teachers’ Federation isn’t 
working. Every one of those people that I’ve talked to know 
very well that the children are the important issue, that there 
isn’t enough tax dollars available to pay the teachers and that 
the SSTA are doing their very best to ensure that the teachers 
can stay in this province, but the government is not fulfilling 
their part of the responsibility. 
 
We also have the department . . . the SSTA having to fund 
out-of-scope workers. They have increased costs for bussing. 
And one school division alone, it’s going to cost an additional 
$6,000 a month for bussing because of increased fuel costs, and 
that issue was not addressed at all in this budget. 
 
We also have an increase in utility rates. We have an increase in 
the number of special needs children, and the list goes on. 
These issues have not been addressed and they’re going to be a 
real burden for the local school boards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister bragged about the extra $5 million 
put into capital expenditures for education. My question to him 
is: why didn’t you just put that money into the capital budget in 
the Department of Education? Why did you have to start 
another fund, the CCF (centenary capital fund) fund, so that you 
could pick and choose who’s going to actually get that money? 
 
Why is it hidden in yet another one of the fancy programs that 
just hires bureaucrats and increases paperwork? What are the 
guidelines for actually getting the money out of these 
departments? Will the decisions be made by a politically 
appointed board so they can again reward their few followers 
this government still has? 
 
What’s the point of making the board go through another pile of 
paperwork and filling out another whole new set of forms so 
that they can apply for a program or capital expenditures when 
we already have a Department of Education that has capital 
expenditures and they’re filling out forms there? Put the money 
into the budget the way it should be — as a line item — and let 
the process work the way it’s supposed to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of the money in this fund is still taxpayers’ 
dollars, not government dollars. The people are saying, stop 
playing games with our money and start doing the work you 
were elected to do. This government put . . . they hid $695 
million into the General Revenue Fund and then transfer 405 
million back to start their own fancy slush fund. 
 
And how was that number chosen, Mr. Speaker? The people in 
this province have a right to know how hard the Minister of 
Education fought to put another 15 or $20 million into 
education so that we can actually keep that. Saskatchewan is 
ranked 59 out of 63 jurisdictions on education funding for 
students Is that this government’s commitment to education? 
Right at the bottom of the list. 
 
The other department that was treated unfairly in this budget 
was the Department of Economic Development. That 
department showed an increase of 18 per cent. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s truly amazing. The government increasing 
its own efforts at business and forgetting their real 
responsibility. The government’s job is not to decide which 
areas of the province are viable, whatever viable may mean in 
your mind. The government should not try to be the engine of 
this economy; they are only the fuel to keep the engine going. 
And they cannot get inside the minds of the 31 rather ordinary 
people sitting on the other side of the House that are going to 
decide which businesses should prosper and which ones will 
fail. 
 
Members on the other side of the House cannot see the 
opportunities that are waiting around every corner in this 
province. Their misplaced priorities underline the fact that this 
government does not understand their job and they don’t 
understand the message that was sent to them in September 
1999. Even more serious is the fact that they have no vision for 
the future but instead rely on fearmongering about the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would love to explain how the budget affects the 
people of Kelvington-Wadena in the other areas — areas of 
agriculture and health care and highways. But I am sure that 
there are other of my colleagues who would like to make 
comments on the budget. 
 
But I must say before I close that the biggest hypocrisy in this 
budget was the government’s about-turn on the issue of taxing 
Aboriginals. I would love to read some of the quotes, Mr. 
Speaker, from the members across the floor when the Sask 
Party first brought up the subject. Mr. Speaker, the rants from 
every one of those hypocritical members ranged from Sask 
Party people being called insensitive to being called racist. 
 
I would like to encourage the Minister of Intergovernmental 
Affairs to read his own comments on our platform issue 
regarding Natives. 
 
We have said, as have over 80 per cent of the people in this 
province, that in order to achieve equality, people must be 
treated equally; that in order to achieve fairness, people must be 
treated fair; and in order to achieve opportunity, doors must be 
opened to allow that opportunity. 
 
Today I read in the paper that a columnist who was very 
outspoken about taxing Natives off reserve, now sees the 
hidden opportunity in the ruling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it may be just easier if the government would just 
realize that everything the Sask Party members say reflect 
what’s happening in this province, and they could just disband 
most of their task force and adopt our policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot support a budget that imposes a tax 
increase on the citizens of Saskatchewan, and I will be 
supporting the amendment that will give a small amount of tax 
relief through lessening the fuel tax for the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m very thankful for 
the opportunity to rise and speak today in support of this 
budget. 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

This is a foundational budget. A budget upon which we will 
build a future of promise and hope for this province of 
Saskatchewan. This is a budget with the necessary substance for 
today and with substantial promise and hope for the future. 
 
Unfortunately it seems, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the members 
opposite just don’t seem to be able to get it. Is it that their vision 
doesn’t extend beyond today? Listening to their comments, I’m 
convinced that they have very, very little vision for the future. 
 
They would follow the “spend it all and then some” practices of 
their predecessors, the former PC (Progressive Conservative) 
government. They would sell off the future. They would plunge 
us deeper into debt. They would mortgage the future of our 
children and our children’s children. They would do this in a 
vain attempt to buy power in good times, just for today. They 
would mortgage the future of our children and our children’s 
children, not for Saskatchewan, but for the Sask Party. 
 
To be fair, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I must admit though that they 
do show some vision. The problem is that that vision is 
primarily a vision of Alberta. Every time they gripe, every time 
they criticize, they look at Alberta with unbelievable envy. If 
only we were like Alberta, they say, then everything would be 
wonderful. 
 
In contrast, Mr. Speaker, this government does not suffer from 
Alberta envy. We appreciate who and what we are, and we 
work with that. Saskatchewan has a unique character — we are 
not Alberta. We have so much to offer, so many resources and 
so many opportunities to be developed. 
 
Our government has a bright vision for the future of 
Saskatchewan. A vision where development continues at a 
steady and a sustainable pace as it has over these last years, 
leading the country in economic development. 
 
We see a future where our children and our children’s children 
will have good jobs right here in Saskatchewan, jobs with a 
future — not just short-term, low-paying jobs, but jobs with 
potential, jobs with a future, jobs that pay well. Working 
together with the people of this province we are building the 
future of Saskatchewan on a solid foundation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we wish that the members opposite could share 
this vision — this vision of a uniquely, uniquely Saskatchewan 
future. We wish they could simply understand that we don’t 
have to be like Alberta in order to be successful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am convinced it is how you develop and use 
what you have that brings such tremendously positive and 
satisfying results. 
 
The official opposition don’t seem to have a clear vision of how 
to effectively develop this province. As their leader was quoted 
in the Moosomin Herald or the Moosomin Spectator when they 
were looking at health care, well we can see the problems, but 
we just don’t have any solutions. 
 
I think that may be typical, Mr. Speaker. They can see problems 
but they don’t have any positive solutions to offer other than 
look at Alberta. 
 

But we are not Alberta. We don’t want to be Alberta and we 
never will be Alberta. We have a different context, we have a 
different economy. And in this different economy, we are able 
to reduce our taxes and we are able to develop at a steady, 
positive rate. We are able to build a future on a solid 
foundation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Wartman: — I love this province, and I don’t want it to 
become just like Alberta. I have relatives that live in Alberta 
and they’d move back here in a minute. They have to pay their 
health costs, Mr. Speaker, 800-and-some dollars a year per 
person for this. 
 
We’re going to charge a PST that is nowhere near that amount 
for the average person. They don’t tax? They tax for health. 
Alberta is so, so expensive to live in. Their cost for vehicle 
insurance is way out of line, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, Alberta may have a bigger economy than 
Saskatchewan’s. They may be flashier in some ways and it may 
be more attractive to many. But with this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
with the continuing sound financial management, we are on the 
way to making Saskatchewan one of the most effective, 
growing, solid, and desirable economies not only in Canada but 
in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, this budget presents a solid 
plan for growth, for the growth of our economy, and more 
importantly, for the growth of our society. 
 
To quote a wise Saskatchewan Finance minister: 
 

By taking bold, thoughtful, forward-looking action today, 
we will achieve our vision for the future. A vision of 
Saskatchewan: where people choose to live and work, 
based on strong bonds of family and community; where 
responsive, effective public services support and enhance 
each person’s ability to live a meaningful, satisfying life; 
where our young people find real opportunities to develop 
their talents to contribute to and benefit from a dynamic, 
growing economy. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to growing an economy and a 
society which not only produces and educates some of the best 
young people in the world, but is a place where they can build a 
future for themselves and for their children for generations to 
come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province will not just be a source of leaders 
for tomorrow, which it is already today. We have in fact, yes, 
exported leaders all around this country and around the world, 
people who have been educated here and have done this 
province proud. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, with our building economy, those leaders of 
tomorrow will stay here and they will build, and this province 
will thrive. This foundational budget lays the plan for that, Mr. 



410 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

Speaker. 
 
This province is viewed by many throughout the world as one 
of the best places to live. Isn’t it ironic, isn’t it ironic that that 
view is not shared by the Saskatchewan Party. One of the most 
wonderful places in the world to live. That’s what they say all 
around this world. Not Alberta, not Ontario — Saskatchewan. 
And that vision is not shared. Unbelievable. Unbelievable. With 
all their Alberta envy, perhaps they would be happier and more 
accurately named the Alberta party of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, economic development is not the enemy of social 
development. In fact, good economic development is the very 
foundation of good, solid social development. With this budget, 
as with the previous seven balanced budgets, we will continue 
to build an economy and the social fabric of this province so 
that it will not crash; so that it will not be blown apart by the 
powerful shifting winds of an unstable world economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past if the kind of agricultural income crisis 
that hit us this past year, if it was to hit us in the past it would 
have devastated our economy. But by the way that this 
economy has been built on solid ground, when that income 
crisis hit this past year we were able to continue moving ahead, 
and even promise and even come forward with tax cuts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to help those members opposite get a 
handle on what it is that we’re doing. And I think maybe a story 
that my parents — it is a story that my parents told when I was 
younger, and it’s a story that I think has a lot of truth. And I’d 
like to share it with you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once upon a time there were three little pigs. 
Those little pigs were pursued by a big bad wolf. Mr. Speaker, 
those pigs ran to a new place, and they began to build their 
houses. The first little pig saw that there was plenty of straw 
around and began to build a house with that straw. It was cheap; 
it was easy; it was fast. And that little pig, that little pig, Mr. 
Speaker, wanted to have time to get out and play around. So he 
built that up. And he used the available grants to put in 
carpeting in the basement and a hot tub and a deck. And he built 
a beautiful straw house, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, the second little pig saw that there were 
lots of twigs and sticks around, and he built this little house out 
of twigs and sticks. It was a big house, not a little house, Mr. 
Speaker. A big house built out of twigs and sticks — all the 
frills. It was an amazingly big, fancy, wooden house. 
 
The third little pig, the third little pig, Mr. Speaker, decided that 
he would take the rocks that were there. He would take some 
cement, and he would get some bricks, and he would begin to 
build a solid foundation. And he worked away at that solid 
foundation, and then brick upon brick, he began to build a nice, 
comfortable little house. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one day the other two little pigs were all 
finished their houses, and they came along to see how their 
brother was doing. He still was building away, brick upon brick. 
And they said, why don’t you build it with straw, Mr. Speaker, 
build it with straw. That’s what they said. He said no, I’ll build 
that, I’ll build that house with brick — one brick at a time. But 
you could come and play with us if you built it with straw, said 

the little pig. No, no, he was going to build it with brick. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, the day came when the big wolf found 
that territory. The big bad wolf came along, Mr. Speaker, and 
that first little pig ran for his straw house, and he slammed the 
door. And the big bad wolf came along. And he huffed, and he 
puffed, and he said little pig, little pig, let me in, let me in. And 
that little pig stood behind the door in his straw house, and he 
said, not by the hair of my chinny chin chin. And the big bad 
wolf huffed, and the big bad wolf puffed, and he blew that 
straw house down. 
 
The second little pig was there in his wooden house, and along 
came his brother and they ran into the house as the wolf came 
up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the wolf said, little pig, little pig, let me in. The 
little pig said, not by the hair of my chinny chin chin. You know 
the story, don’t you? And that big bad wolf came along and he 
huffed and he puffed, and he blew that wooden house down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party would build straw houses that they 
could get up and make look fancy real quick. They’d build 
wooden houses that they could put up out of twigs and sticks. 
But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, if that’s the way they built the 
economy, it would not stand the test of time. 
 
When the big bad wolf came along to that brick house that was 
built stone after stone, brick after brick, on a solid foundation, 
Mr. Speaker, when that big bad wolf came along and blew at 
that house, it was just like the economy that this New Democrat 
coalition government, Liberal coalition government is building 
here. 
 
When that economy . . . When that big bad wolf comes along 
and blows at that brick house, it will not go down. He’ll huff 
and he’ll puff and it will not go down. That’s the kind of 
economy that we’re building — a solid foundational economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my hope that the truth of 
that story — it’s not a true story; I need to maybe make that 
clear — but the truth of that story will come through and they’ll 
understand how vitally important it is to build an economy on a 
solid foundation. 
 
And just in case it’s not clear, I’d also like to refer to the Gospel 
of Matthew, chapter 7, where Jesus was talking to the people 
and he was saying to them how important it was that they be 
aware of what’s being said around them. That they take care 
and they pay attention and they think discerningly. 
 
Because the problem is, Mr. Speaker, there are many wolves 
that come in sheep’s clothing. They make a good story; they 
present themselves as meek and mild. But, Mr. Speaker, they 
are wolves in sheep’s clothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jesus went on to say that you will know a good 
tree by its fruit. The fruit that this budget produces for the 
people of Saskatchewan will be good, will be nourishing, will 
keep them going. 
 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 411 

Mr. Speaker, when Jesus was talking to those people, he said to 
them, you must listen to all the words that come from my 
mouth. 
 
And then he went to say: 
 

Everyone who hears these words (everyone who hears 
these words) of mine and acts on them will be like the wise 
man who built his house on rock. And when the winds and 
floods came they bashed against that house and it stood 
firm. And those who do not listen to these words will be 
like the foolish ones who built their house on sand. And 
when the floods came, and when the winds came, that 
house crashed. And what a mighty crash it was. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen a house like that crash. We have 
seen the economy devastated with an incredible debt that their 
predecessors gave to us, $16 billion. And we have from the time 
that we took office built stone by stone, brick by brick, a house 
on a solid foundation, an economy that will not be washed away 
by the winds of economic beggary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are building a house for the future, a house that 
will stand the test of time. The Saskatchewan economy can and 
will be strong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, using the best of our ability, 
working with what we have, taking advice on taxation from the 
Vicq commission, consulting with the people of this province, 
this government has developed a foundational budget which 
will enable us to build a strong and healthy province, a province 
with a future. 
 
Our Finance minister has pointed out that the key areas of this 
plan for growth and opportunity are fiscal responsibility and 
good government. We are building a sustainable health care 
system, 63 million new dollars for base funding, and 150 
million new dollars for one-time spending to help facilitate 
changes that are needed to make this health care system the 
most effective in the country. 
 
Economic growth and jobs, developments in technology that 
will have profound effects on the years to come; petroleum 
technology research; the Synchrotron; developments in 
agricultural biotechnology; and many, many other 
developments. They are too numerous to mention. But I do 
want to mention one more, Mr. Speaker, because it’s one that 
gives me lots of hope for the future. 
 
I think about the money that is put into this budget to help with 
the development of ethanol, a alternative fuel that will help 
reduce greenhouse emissions, that will help stabilize our farm 
economy that will use grain to produce a fuel that will be good 
for the province and will help build our economy. 
 
I am proud of the foresight that has gone into the development 
of this budget, Mr. Speaker. And I think of the tax reform. With 
prudent management, this budget enables us to put money into 
those sectors where it is most needed and where that money will 
have the most positive effect. 
 

There will be significant and meaningful cuts to income tax 
which will leave more money in the hands of taxpayers. 
Fifty-five thousand — 55,000 — low-income Saskatchewan 
residents will be taken from the tax roll. Seniors, poor people no 
longer have to pay taxes. 
 
Higher basic deductions will provide increased income for 
people — $8,000 for basic, $8,000 for spousal or spousal 
equivalent, $2,500 for each dependent child. And, Mr. Speaker, 
for seniors, in addition to their basic credit, there will be an 
additional supplemental $1,000 — $9,000 for seniors, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
On top of the tax cuts and benefits, there are increasing amounts 
going into health, into education, into transportation and 
highways. New financial support for our farmers and for 
agriculture. This budget will bear good fruit for the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, this is a foundational budget. A 
budget that is built brick upon brick. A budget that will provide 
a future for the people of Saskatchewan, for our children, and 
for our children’s children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is a clear example of good economics, 
good public policy, and good government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to speak in favour of this budget and 
against the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The previous speaker, 
Mr. Speaker, was referring to some fairy tales in his speech, and 
I suppose we could all sort of condescend to do the same thing. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, once upon a time there was a regime, Mr. 
Speaker, that favoured very, very high taxes. Mr. Speaker, it 
was headed up by a black-hearted king, Mr. Speaker. And he 
was aided by the sheriff of Nottingham. And you can draw you 
own analogies, Mr. Speaker, but suffice it to say that during that 
regime of high taxes there was a group of people clad in green 
and yellow who made it their point to try to relieve people 
during this time of hardship until the day came that another 
King would be restored to the throne — King Richard — and 
that regime would disappear from government in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is an honour to participate in this my first 
budget debate. These first six months as an elected 
representative, Mr. Speaker, for the great constituency of Swift 
Current have been both challenging and rewarding and I’m 
grateful for the opportunity to enter this debate. 
 
I couldn’t help but notice, Mr. Speaker, the look in the eyes of 
the Minister of Finance last week as he was defending his 
budget. I was trying to place where I had seen that look before 
and it finally came to me on the weekend when I went back 
home, Mr. Speaker. 



412 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

If you’re familiar with the city of Swift Current, it’s a city of 
one-ways, and the look on the Minister of Finance’s face is 
exactly the look that we see in the face of drivers just before 
they realize that they have turned the wrong way down a 
one-way street, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Helpful and well-meaning motorists and people 
on the sidewalk are generally waving, trying to get the attention 
of these drivers who have turned the wrong way down a 
one-way street. They’re hollering at him, some are flashing 
their lights to try to get them to turn around, but in this case, 
Mr. Speaker, the driver hasn’t heard a thing. The windows are 
rolled up and he’s busy listening to his favourite eight-tracks 
from the early 1980s and he can’t hear the message from the 
people that are trying to help him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I first had the chance to take a close look at 
the budget, I tried to do so from the perspective of my 
constituents. Throughout the recent campaign and since I have 
made an effort to pay close attention to what is on their minds 
as I judge this government and its actions. And so I tried to 
apply those same values as I read the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My constituents after all have an expectation, and rightfully so, 
that I will work towards and vote for those things that are good 
for them and their families. But equally they want me to fight 
against and vote against those measures that will be a hardship 
on the families and the businesses in the constituency of Swift 
Current. 
 
And there are some things in the budget, Mr. Speaker, that are 
positive for my constituents. A few specific measures that rang 
very familiar when I read the budget. They sounded familiar of 
course because these few specific measures seem to almost 
come verbatim from the platform of the Saskatchewan Party, 
Mr. Speaker. They rang familiar because I discussed them at 
length during the recent election campaign. In fact I had to 
defend the very things that now appear in the NDP-Liberal 
budget from the NDP and the Liberals during the election 
campaign. Back then, Mr. Speaker, our ideas were wild. They 
were irresponsible. They were unachievable. They made for 
good politics, but not for good public policy is what the NDP 
and the Liberals said. 
 
And interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, these are the same 
comments we now hear from the Minister of Finance of our 
recent fuel tax proposal that would garner a $120 million worth 
of tax relief for Saskatchewan motorists and families for half 
the cost. That’s a two-for-one deal, Mr. Speaker. For less than 
10 per cent, less than 10 per cent of what’s in the NDP’s slush 
fund, we could deliver that kind of tax relief for Saskatchewan 
people. But more about that later. 
 
In a matter of months, Mr. Speaker, some of the ideas we 
proposed prior to and during the election went from being 
hare-brained schemes in the eyes of members opposite to, as 
they call it, a plan for growth and opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Friday the member from Regina Dewdney in 
his praise for himself and his colleagues, referred to that group 
over there as straight A students, Mr. Speaker. Well, you and I 

both know that there are two ways to become a straight A 
student. You can work hard and get A’s on your own merit or 
you can copy off your neighbour, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I am certain that when the Minister of Finance was crafting 
his budget he was looking for a few good ideas — he knew he 
had to include at least a few good ideas in the budget — and so 
he looked pretty long and hard to find some of those good ideas. 
 
He looked around at this colleagues; he may have even looked 
at the member from Regina Dewdney. He looked at his own 
party’s platform, Mr. Speaker, and stifling his laughter, he even 
picked up a copy of the Liberal platform and tried to find a few 
good ideas there, Mr. Speaker — stifling his laughter. The 
Liberal platform which is the political equivalent of a Curious 
George reader, so there were no good ideas in there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so perhaps a little bit depressed, the Minister of Finance 
finally reached for The Way Up, Mr. Speaker. The platform 
document of the Saskatchewan Party that made political history 
in the province of Saskatchewan on September 16. 
 
In that document he found a few good ideas that will indeed 
benefit my constituents and people across the province. And I 
do want to commend the minister, I do want to commend the 
minister for those things. They include some positive tax 
reform, possibly some future income tax cuts if we’re able to 
hold this government to its word. They’ll be tragically late, but 
they’ll be good if they happen nonetheless: changes to the flat 
tax, high income surtax, and debt reduction tax, the farm fuel 
tax rebate changes and some property tax changes. He even saw 
the merit of our stance against expanding the PST to utility 
bills, and to restaurant meals and children’s clothing. 
 
But sadly, Mr. Speaker, he stopped taking our advice against 
expansion at those items and is just now realizing the price for 
making that mistake. And had he heeded more of our advice, I 
would seriously have to consider using the free vote that only 
our party has the courage to afford its members, to support the 
budget. 
 
But the budget doesn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. The 6 per cent 
tax hike that this minister had levied on items previously 
untaxed will hurt the entire province — a $160 million tax grab 
that took effect last week, brought to us by the tax and spend 
New Democrats. They just couldn’t resist, Mr. Speaker. And it 
will be a major burden to an already tax-fatigued economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a $160 million sales tax grab is particularly 
harmful to Swift Current and area. We are far too close to 
sales-tax-free and soon to be income-tax-free Alberta for me to 
in good conscience support this budget. 
 
And at this point . . . when I was drafting this speech on 
Saturday, Mr. Speaker, I received a call from a constituent — it 
was about 10 o’clock at night on Saturday night. He apologized 
for calling at home, and I assured him that was no problem. We 
all signed on for that. 
 
And he asked me to settle a bet he had had with a fellow in a 
coffee shop, earlier that day in Swift Current. He said his friend 
knew that he was trying to sell his pick-up truck privately. And 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 413 

his friend assured him that now as a result of this budget, he 
will have to collect, on behalf of the Minister of Finance, and 
remit PST on the sale of his 1996 Chevy truck. I had to inform 
the gentlemen who called that that would exactly be the case 
with this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of great concern to my constituency and any area of the 
province that has a significant oil and gas industry, is the tax 
grab that will impede the ability of our oil and gas industry 
entrepreneurs to compete with their Alberta counterparts who 
make a living out of working in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The oil and gas industry is already finding it very difficult on an 
uneven playing field. I cannot tell you how many oil and gas 
related businesses, men and women, who have contacted our 
office to register concerns about this government’s 
unwillingness or inability to enforce the same regulations that 
our contractors have to deal with on their out-of-province 
competition. 
 
And now this budget seeks to increase the taxes that our oil and 
gas businesses will have to pay and that Alberta firms will not 
be paying — especially if the government doesn’t enforce its 
own regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the information bulletin that was provided 
by the minister’s department on the oil and gas industry. And I 
just want to briefly highlight some of the things in this bulletin 
that underscore, that underscore the difficulty this budget will 
place on, on southwest Saskatchewan oil and gas firms trying to 
compete with their Alberta counterparts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on equipment rentals, this is a new addition. A 
rental company may provide a supervisor or a service 
technician to install and maintain equipment. These rental 
charges and the charge for the technicians are now subject to 
the tax. 
 
New, rebuilt, or remanufactured equipment including pumps, 
motors, re-tipped drill bits, clutches, and the list goes on — if 
the customer’s equipment is rebuilt and no exchange takes 
place, the repair, labour, parts, materials, and shop supplies are 
subject to the tax. Labour charges for the installation, assembly, 
or repair of equipment are now subject to the tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The tax under Saskatchewan purchases — the tax on all 
equipment, tools, materials, supplies, repair parts, repair labour 
purchased in Saskatchewan, must be paid to the vendor. All 
used goods are subject to the tax. 
 
These are very, very important issues in the oil patch which, as 
the minister will know, is a major engine of economic and job 
creation here in Saskatchewan. This particular budget takes 
another swipe at that industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Under the sale of used business assets, businesses are required 
to collect tax now on the sale of used assets such as vehicles 
and equipment. They’ve turned them from being entrepreneurs, 
Mr. Speaker, into being tax collectors. That’s what this minister 
has done to the small businesses that are involved in the oil and 
gas business. There is now a tax on equipment, tools, materials, 
supplies, repair parts, and labour purchased in Saskatchewan as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 

Those are just some of the list of the things that this minister 
has done to the oil and gas industry in our province. 
 
Then as it relates to a local perspective on the budget, from 
Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, there’s the issue of our hospital in 
Swift Current. Last week and in the coming days, I will be 
standing to present petitions signed by the people of Swift 
Current and area; the petition seeks an additional $2 million in 
capital funding to our hospital, over and above what has already 
been committed. 
 
What has been committed will simply bring our hospital up to 
current building and safety codes, Mr. Speaker, and will 
virtually do nothing to make the Swift Current hospital a truly 
regional hospital. Something, I might add, that the Minister of 
Health has called on the Swift Current hospital to become. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier last week the Swift Current Health District 
sent a letter to the minister . . . or rather to officials in the 
Department of Health that clearly outlines an affordable plan 
for the regeneration of the Swift Current hospital and 
underscores the request that they have made and that I have 
made to this Health minister for an additional $2 million to 
make the regeneration of the Swift Current hospital a reality. 
 
They talk about the existing 1946 portion of the hospital as 
being expired in terms of usefulness. The letter goes on to say 
the district will have to spend $8 million on the existing facility 
in the next three years to address problems with the failed 
facility. The result would be no operational efficiencies and no 
extension of the useful life of the existing building. 
 
The operational savings annually, from investing in the option 
they proposed, would include: $250,000 in savings to repairs 
and maintenance costs; $196,000 in savings to required 
maintenance and staff time; and 496,000 in reduction in nursing 
staff time in pediatrics, women’s surgery, and maternity 
because of the efficiencies of this proposal. 
 
Swift Current has developed a plan and is willing to fundraise, 
Mr. Speaker, for their basic, for their share of the hospital 
regeneration. They want to build a new patient wing. And all it 
would take to achieve this goal is that additional $2 million that 
they have asked for, and that I have asked for, of the minister. 
The community is prepared to raise their share. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Swift Current hospital has not seen a 
meaningful capital improvement since the early 1970s. And 
despite the local work on this funding request and my letters 
and petitions, it is still very unclear in the budget as to whether 
the Swift Current hospital is a part of this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact we contacted the Department of Health last week and 
their answer was that they didn’t know, that they had to wait for 
some details. So we’re very hopeful for that, Mr. Speaker, and I 
will be continuing to push this government and this minister to 
approve the funding request that has come from the local 
district. 
 
From the perspective of my Justice critic duties, Mr. Speaker, 
there are also some concerns in the budget, not the least of 



414 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

which of course is the surprise announcement, without any 
consultation, of the closure of three court houses in the province 
of Saskatchewan — in Assiniboia, in Humboldt, and in 
Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that a lawyer in Weyburn 
questioned, and I quote, questioned whether this government 
was perverse or not, at the announcement that the Weyburn 
court house would close down. And one can hardly blame him 
for asking the question. 
 
There appears to be $500,000 in the Justice department budget 
for increased administration, increased salaries of the minister’s 
advisers and staff, and yet not enough to keep court houses 
open in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
During the election campaign, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of the 
province, with much fanfare, announced that there would be 
200 new police officer positions in the province of 
Saskatchewan. In this budget — and we had to pry it out of the 
government because they buried it as well in the budget — you 
couldn’t find any reference to this major campaign promise that 
the Premier announced under a lot of fanfare during the 
election. You couldn’t find one word in the budget about the 
police officers. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, though, finally — because of questions 
from the opposition in the media — the minister confirmed that, 
well there might be 20, 25 new police officers this year; and just 
trust us, that the other 175 will occur over the next three years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this government has done nothing but give 
people ample reason to not trust them about their word for 
future relief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the main concerns, one of the main 
concerns that I have fielded as the Justice critic for the official 
opposition is concerns about the maintenance enforcement area 
of the Department of Justice, Mr. Speaker. I can’t tell you how 
many single parents have contacted my office and frankly the 
offices of my colleagues, very, very concerned about the lack of 
enforcement that’s out there. 
 
These single parents, single moms, are trying to raise their 
children, and the staff in the department, frankly, do not have 
the resources they need to enforce the maintenance orders of 
our courts. And so I wanted to see what this budget held for that 
area — for maintenance enforcement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well there’s a 4 per cent increase in the maintenance budget. 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s a 15 per cent increase for the wages 
and the administration costs that I talked about earlier. Mr. 
Speaker, it is a matter of priorities. It’s a matter of putting 
single parents ahead of the top bureaucracy in the Department 
of Justice and the minister’s own staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also tried to look at this budget from the 
perspective of its impact on the overall economy. Mr. Speaker, 
during the election campaign you heard from both of the parties 
involved in the coalition government. We heard from them 
during the election that they believed that small business was 
the most important engine of the economy. 
 

And so I remembered that from the election, Mr. Speaker, and 
went through the budget hoping against hope to see if they were 
going to put their money where their mouth was with respect to 
small business, Mr. Speaker. But there is nothing there. There is 
nothing there for small business in this budget. They could have 
taken one more suggestion from the Saskatchewan Party — in 
addition to the ones they did with respect to the small business 
tax — and they failed to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is my belief that the voters are very seldom wrong in this 
province. And in the last election they sent a message that this 
province needs some immediate tax relief, some tax relief now. 
We cannot wait three or four years, especially when the waiting 
period will be characterized by a $160 million tax increase. A 
tax hike, Mr. Speaker, can you believe it. 
 
If there was any question, if there was any question as to 
whether this NDP government would get the message in the last 
election, that they maybe had learned their lessons, learned 
from the mistakes of the past, the answer came at midnight last 
Wednesday. The answer came when single moms went to their 
pharmacy on Thursday morning to purchase some Children’s 
Tylenol for their kids. The answer came with all of the sales tax 
bulletins that were mailed and faxed across the province to 
small businessmen and women telling them that they must now 
become tax collectors for the government instead of job creators 
for their community. 
 
Small businessmen got the answer loud and clear as they read 
those bulletins, Mr. Speaker, realizing that the government’s 
so-called tax increase . . . tax decrease would hurt their 
businesses and their efforts to make a living for their families. 
And most importantly, Mr. Speaker, to create jobs, the jobs that 
we so desperately need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as an economic developer for the past five years, it 
was my job to try to be in tune with the existing Swift Current 
businesses and prospective new ones who were looking to 
either expand or perhaps look for a new location for their 
operation. The list of those things is long, Mr. Speaker. But I 
can assure you what they aren’t looking for. They are not 
looking to expand or locate in a jurisdiction whose idea of job 
creation is to set up another tax rebate office in the Department 
of Finance. They are not interested in a location whose 
government characterizes a $160 million sales tax increase and 
a future promise of tax relief as a historic tax cut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House have tried to avoid 
criticism for the sake of criticism. We have provided 
alternatives. The most recent example of a viable and an 
affordable alternative to deliver some tax relief for 
Saskatchewan people came last week. 
 
We recognize that we couldn’t offer . . . we couldn’t afford 
irresponsible tax relief, Mr. Speaker, and our proposal in fact 
drew on a federal offer to basically match tax relief offered by 
the province. Our alternative would have provided some 
much-needed, if only temporary, tax relief at the pumps for 
Saskatchewan families and small businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the election and through into Christmas, 
members of this Legislative Assembly, the Premier, the Deputy 
Premier, members of this side of the House, and farm groups, 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 415 

struggled and scratched and absolutely left nothing in the bag in 
an effort to try to get some federal money in Saskatchewan. 
And seemingly overnight last week, Mr. Speaker, after the 
budget the federal Minister of Finance offers this government 
and taxpayers in our province up to $60 million in tax relief 
right now -- right now. 
 
And so we made a proposal, Mr. Speaker, that would see this 
government immediately cut 5 cents a litre off the fuel tax. It 
would be matched by a federal tax cut as well of 5 cents a litre 
and would offer $120 million in tax relief for $60 million, Mr. 
Speaker. Even by NDP math, that’s a good offer to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
It would admittedly be a temporary cut, and we said as much, 
Mr. Speaker, last week. We said that when the prices at the 
pumps come down — as the analysts say they will in six 
months — then the tax would be back on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would be a great improvement to a budget that 
is in desperate need for some help, Mr. Speaker. And what was 
the minister’s response to our proposal? Well, to be truthful, 
I’m not convinced he heard it, Mr. Speaker. I’m not convinced 
he heard it because all he can talk about is the 1980s. I was in 
grade 11 at the time, Mr. Speaker, and I frankly don’t care; I am 
interested in today. We’re interested in today and the future, and 
that’s the kind of proposals that we’ve been presenting to this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of all of that, I will be . . . on behalf of 
the people of the constituency of Swift Current, I’ll be 
supporting the amendment of the Leader of the Opposition. And 
barring any major improvements, as I have outlined, I simply 
will not be able to vote for the budget. To do anything else, to 
do anything else would be to betray the trust of the people of 
the Swift Current constituency. That’s something I’m not 
prepared to do. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, it’s definitely my pleasure to 
rise today and participate in this budget debate. But just before I 
do, I’d like to take a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, and get a few 
thank yous and introductions in that I didn’t have a chance to do 
during the Throne Speech debate. 
 
My colleagues had so much to say about the Throne Speech and 
in the debate on that, that there were a few of us that did not 
have a chance to get up and participate in that debate. So I hope, 
Mr. Speaker, that you might bear with me, and my colleagues 
opposite, to get a few thank yous and other necessities out of 
the way before I enter into the debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I first of all want to thank very much the residents, 
my residents and constituents of Regina Sherwood for 
re-electing me in this past election last fall. Although the 
margin of victory was a little bit less than I got — I think I got 
63 per cent in 1995 and 52 per cent this time — it was still a 
very good victory and I want to express my thanks to all the 
residents and voters of Regina Sherwood. 
 
I especially want to add thanks to my family — my wife 
Barbara, my son Dan, and my son Jay — all of whom worked 

very, very hard during the campaign on my behalf. I owe them 
a lot and I want to publicly thank them for their work. 
 
I also want to thank the members of my election planning 
committee and all the volunteers that worked in our campaign. 
We had a very good campaign and I just want to thank all of 
those that worked on that campaign. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to add my congratulations as well 
formally to all members on this side and members opposite on 
their elections and welcome them all to this legislature. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, last but by no means least, I think I’d like 
to add my congratulations to yourself, Mr. Speaker, on your 
election as Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, as you are aware — and 
you and I have talked before — we both come from Polish 
background. And your parents come from a community called 
Rzeszów, mine from . . . my grandparents come from Nowy 
Sacz and Buczacz. All these communities were in the former 
Austro-Hungarian Province of Galicia. This is a part of Poland 
. . . or a part of Europe that became Polish after World War I, 
and the eastern portion of this area — the area actually where 
my relatives are from — became part of the Ukraine after the 
Second World War. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve done some additional research though, and 
I’d like to share some of this research with you. I have found 
out for instance, to the best of my abilities in doing this 
research, that yourself and myself, sir, were the 9th and 10th . . . 
are the 9th and 10th deputies of Polish background who have 
been elected to this legislature when we were elected in 1995. 
 
For your information, Mr. Speaker, our predecessors were 
Walter Smishek, who served in this legislature from 1964 to 
’82; Adolph Matsalla from 1967 to 1982; Ed Tchorzewski from 
1971 to ’82, and again from 1985 to 1999; Murray Koskie from 
1975 to 1995; Bernard Poniatowski from 1978 till 1982; Russ 
Sutor from 1982 to ’85; Jack Klein whose mother was 
Kotowicz, from 1982 to 1991; and Ken Kluz, 1991 to 1995. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess I should add too that where there was an 
11th deputy of Polish background that was added in the fall 
election, and we should welcome the hon. member from Carrot 
River Valley who joins this distinguished list of people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also point out, and I’m sure that you are 
aware, that you’re not the only Speaker of Polish background in 
Canada. The Hon. Ken Kowalski, the Speaker of the Alberta 
legislature, also comes from Polish background, and his home 
village is very much in the same area as ours is from as well. 
 
I should also point out, Mr. Speaker, that the father of the 
Premier, who also came over about the same time your parents 
and my grandparents came over, is also from the same general 
area as we come from as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m certain I speak on behalf of all Saskatchewan 
residents of Polish backgrounds when I say how proud we are 
to have you elected as a member to this legislature, and a proud 
member of our Polish heritage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



416 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like, if you don’t mind as 
well, and with the indulgence of members, maybe express a 
little bit of these sentiments in Polish. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Polish.) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, colleagues. Thank you for 
bearing with me on that. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, before I get into the next phase of the 
Throne Speech, Throne Speech debate, I’d like to talk a little bit 
and inform members of my constituency of Regina Sherwood. 
 
Regina Sherwood is a constituency on the west and northern 
part of the city. It consists of 11 community . . . or sorry, 7 
community association areas, which are the Dieppe area, 
Prairieview, Normanview West, Normanview, Walsh Acres, 
and a portion of the area of McCarthy Park, and also a portion 
of Rosemont, Mount Royal. 
 
Mr. Speaker. I was very proud earlier . . . A couple of months 
ago the mayor of the city of Regina, during his state of the city 
address, singled out in my area the community association of 
Normanview West who was participating in a pilot in this city 
with the Regina Police Service, which is a neighbourhood speed 
zone alert program which I think typically represents the 
volunteer spirit and community spirit of associations in my area 
of Regina Sherwood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about . . . a little bit more 
about Regina Sherwood. And I’d like to point out, I think it was 
. . . Many of us are aware a couple of months ago when one of 
our national newspapers wrote a number of articles or three or 
four articles which were somewhat disparaging on 
Saskatchewan, its people, and its economy. And I know at that 
time I was giving a member’s statement . . . or, sorry, an MLA 
address on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio, 
and which came out about that same time. 
 
And during this address I talked . . . we came very much to the 
defence of Saskatchewan people, its economy. And I received, 
Mr. Speaker, a number of phone calls from people not only 
from my constituency of Regina Sherwood, not only from 
Regina actually — from across Saskatchewan — 
complimenting me for taking such a proactive and strong stance 
in sticking up for Saskatchewan people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this prompted myself and my constituency 
assistant in my office to do a lot of research to ascertain what 
makes us such a good place to live in the world and why, as 
we’ve talked about before, why we continually get cited by the 
United Nations as being the best place in the world to live. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we did a lot of research and we came up 
with a lot of interesting facts not only about Regina, but the 
province in general. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the only 
province that reduced child poverty between 1989 and 1997. 
 
As I said earlier, the United Nations has ranked Canada as the 

best country to live in. When the same criteria has been applied 
to the provinces, Saskatchewan is ranked as the best province in 
Canada to live in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Between 1993 and 1998, Mr. Speaker, 
personal income growth in Saskatchewan was 16 per cent 
higher than the national average. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s that? Say it again. 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Personal income growth in Saskatchewan 
was 25 per cent than the national . . . 25 per cent higher than the 
national average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from 1993 to 1998, Saskatchewan’s real economic 
growth averaged 19 per cent higher than the average Canadian 
growth during that time. In the 1990s, Saskatchewan’s personal 
disposable income per capita grew at a rate 28 per cent higher 
than the national average. In the 1990s, housing starts in 
Saskatchewan grew by 9.5 per cent compared to a national 
decline of 2.1 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, diversification is working in this province. 
Manufacturing shipment growth in Saskatchewan increased by 
9.5 per cent last year — 20 per cent higher than the national 
rate. 
 
Saskatchewan in the 1990s has 31,600 net new jobs than in 
1992. Net full-time jobs have increased by over 39,000. In 1999 
there were 480,100 people working in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Just about 47 per cent of the entire population in 
Saskatchewan has a job. The highest level of employment of 
any province in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in paying down the debt, we are able to stop the 
extraction of $157.6 million in annual interest payments from 
the pockets of Saskatchewan people to international banking 
centres. 
 
And as we continue to pay down the debt even more, more 
money will be available to Saskatchewan people in the form of 
tax cuts and program service enhancements. 
 
Regina, Mr. Speaker, has the second lowest unemployment rate 
in the country at 5.2 per cent; 107,900 jobs are held for the 
population of our city of 193,000. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, KPMG conducted a study of G-7 nations 
which stated that Regina has the lowest business costs in the 
North American west region and the sixth lowest in all of the 
G-7 countries. You don’t hear very much about this information 
coming from the other side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, almost 81,000 people in Regina have 
post-secondary education. And of the 25 largest cities in 
Canada, Regina has the fifth highest total number of computer 
information technology research professionals in Canada. 
Regina ranks higher than Edmonton, Winnipeg, Vancouver, 
Montreal, Hamilton, and any other cities of similar or larger 
size. 
 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 417 

Mr. Speaker, in doing this research, we also consulted a lot of 
real estate publications and StatsCanada sources and we came 
up with some interesting statistics around the category of home 
ownership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the average income of a person in Regina — and I 
will apply that to Regina Sherwood — is $25,918. The average 
sale price of a house in Regina Sherwood in the last year, 1999, 
was $83,700 which is about 3,000 lower than the average 
throughout the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, based on a 5 per cent down payment, a mortgage 
. . . a young couple or a young family taking out a mortgage in 
Saskatchewan, or in Regina Sherwood, would have a monthly 
payment on an average house price sale of $653 a month — 
very affordable. Slightly lower than the 703 for other people in 
the city of Regina. 
 
But let me go . . . Where it’s $650 a month for an average house 
in Regina Sherwood, in the Greater Vancouver area to buy their 
average house it would be $2,194 a month. In Toronto, $1,782 a 
month; in Calgary, $1,296 a month — just under $1,300. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the lifetime of a mortgage, a family paying a 
mortgage over 25 years in Regina Sherwood would pay a total 
of 200,000 . . . sorry, pay just go to the interest, they pay 
116,000 in interest. That same family in Vancouver would pay 
$400,000 over the life of that mortgage in interest. A difference 
of $285,000. That, Mr. Speaker, would buy a lot of RRSPs 
(Registered Retirement Savings Plan) for anybody’s retirement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when doing this research we also came across 
another important area of cost for families in Saskatchewan — 
car insurance. And this is one of the more, I think house 
insurance — or sorry, house mortgages are a big item. Car 
insurance. We came across some interesting facts in this area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for many of my constituents who would be 
driving a 1991 Chevrolet Caprice— that’s a good full-size car 
— the insurance in Regina is $795 per year. That same 
insurance in Vancouver is $1,460; in Calgary, it’s $1,550. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much in Calgary. 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Fifteen sixty —$750 more. Almost 100 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker, almost 100 per cent. 
 
That’s Chevrolet figure — I’m singling them out. I should also 
for a Toyota, 1995 Toyota Celica, in Regina, $1,043 annual 
premiums; in Calgary, $1,963. Almost another 100 per cent . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Every year. 
 
And I’ll maybe go — I’m on a bit of a roll here — we’ll go 
with one more comparison. There’s many more but we’ll go 
with . . . there’s one more. A 1995 Dodge Caravan minivan — 
in the city of Regina or province of Saskatchewan, $657; in 
Calgary, $1,556. In almost every case, Mr. Speaker, twice as 
much. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, my point being that I think that our 
government in the last nine years . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about medicare premiums? 

Mr. Kasperski: — And no medicare premiums. I’m glad 
somebody pointed that out. We have no medicare premiums 
here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province has come a long way from the dark 
days of the 1991 economy that we faced. And this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, that was presented by our Minister of Finance last 
week is taking us a long ways more to getting out from under 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take maybe a couple of minutes to talk 
about some other general highlights and economic development 
activities that have taken place here in the city of Regina. Mr. 
Speaker, it was my pleasure to serve in the last two years before 
the previous election, actually up until last month, as chairman 
of Regina caucus, a group of us that are all NDP members that 
represent the city of Regina. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as a Regina caucus, we get together on a 
periodic basis with our city council colleagues here in the city 
of Regina, with members of the Regina Regional Development 
Authority, and with members of Tourism Regina. And I’d like 
to just share with you, Mr. Speaker, and with my colleagues 
some of the 1999 highlights of the Regina Regional Economic 
Development Authority. 
 
In the area of new developments, there was a new Staples store 
opening on Albert Street North, for $3.5 million, a new 18,000 
square foot facility. IGA opened a second 37,600 square foot 
location. Chapters and Starbucks each opened a 26,000 square 
foot location. Tony Roma’s opened their first Saskatchewan 
location in Regina. 
 
The University of Regina received almost $800,000 from the 
strategic initiatives fund and the Canada Foundation for 
Innovation for an environmental quality analysis laboratory out 
at the U of R (University of Regina). UniTech International 
controls corporation out of Burnaby, BC (British Columbia) has 
established an oil and gas technology division here in the city of 
Regina. 
 
A & B Sound opened Saskatchewan’s first location in Regina 
and Days Inn opened their new $5 million 97-room facility. The 
Gap opened their first Regina location. Quality . . . sorry, Queen 
Victoria Estates officially opened their 114-suite seniors’ 
complex and the Quality Hotel in downtown Regina reopened 
after an extensive renovation. Agrevo, Mr. Speaker, became the 
Canadian head office of Aventis CropScience. 
 
Under expansions, Mr. Speaker, the Normanview Shopping 
Centre in my area underwent an expansion which included 
increasing the floor space of the Zellers store, a new SLGA 
(Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) store, and 
expansion of the Brewsters Pub. Partner Technologies of 
Regina, a Regina-based manufacturer of transformers and 
electronic components, expanded operations with a 100,000 
square foot facility. Redhead Equipment expanded their facility. 
Sears underwent a $1 million expansion. Brandt Tractor opened 
a new 31,000 square foot facility and The Bay announced plans 
to relocate to the Cornwall Centre. 
 
(1645) 
 



418 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, those are a snapshot of what took place during 
1999. In the area of future developments taking place in this 
year 2000, the following announcements and activities are 
taking place. Farm Gro Organic Foods will construct an $11.3 
million organic flour mill and grain processing facility just 
southeast of the city here in the Regina region. Construction is 
almost complete on the Petroleum Technology Research Centre 
and the Information Technology Building at research park on 
the campus of the U of R. 
 
First Professional Management announced a proposal to 
develop a 400,000 square foot mall in east Regina, a project, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s valued at $40 million. Lewis Dreyfuss, an 
international grain company announced it will be constructing a 
20,000 tonne facility between Regina and White City. And also 
Regina’s research park, Mr. Speaker, will be home to the 
international test centre for carbon dioxide capture. This $3.3 
million plant, Mr. Speaker, in Regina . . . or a plant in Regina 
and Boundary dam will be used for the purposes of the carbon, 
carbon dioxide pipeline project coming into the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker. just on the general economic trends of the past 
year, the city of Regina has reaffirmed the commitment to 
eliminate the business tax here in the city, with another 40 per 
cent reduction. The business tax will be eliminated completely 
in this year 2000 here in the city, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Employment was down slightly in 1999 compared to the record 
employment growth of 5.6 per cent in 1998. However, GDP 
(gross domestic product) grew by 1.4 per cent, coming in with a 
robust growth of 5.4 from the year before. Housing starts were 
up 5 per cent in 1999; building permits valued at . . . building 
permits, sorry, will be increasing by 16 per cent. Retail sales, 
Mr. Speaker, were up 3.7 per cent. Mr. Speaker, these are stats 
that are active in other places across the province as well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to maybe take a couple minutes 
and talk about some activities that are undertaken by . . . and the 
high points of Tourism Regina. During 1999, Mr. Speaker, 
Tourism Regina received a grant from the Millennium Bureau of 
Canada to begin the development of a flag park at the tourist 
information centre on the east part of the city. 
 
Marketing blitzes took place in various locations such as Minot, 
Calgary, Ottawa, Saskatoon, and in southeast Saskatchewan. 
Tourism Regina, Mr. Speaker, increased information . . . had an 
increase of information requests of over 4,000 from the year 
before. Mr. Speaker, the Tourism Regina continues to publish its 
meeting and event planner’s guide. It also had a successful Rave 
on Regina campaign which won the Tourism Award of 
Excellence in the promotion and marketing campaign at last 
year’s Tourism Saskatchewan awards banquet. 
 
A successful host-at-home program is also . . . has been 
developed in conjunction with Tourism Saskatoon. And also 
last year was the first year of the successful Bid Regina 
initiative. And Mr. Speaker, I’ll take a couple of minutes to talk 
a little bit about Bid Regina in a few minutes. 
 
Tourism Regina had an increase to 475 members in the past 
year and in the most recent Tourism Saskatchewan awards 
banquet which was held in Saskatoon in the middle of March, 
members of Tourism Regina received the following awards: the 

Rave on Regina campaign, as I said for promotional and 
marketing; the SaskPower Festival of Lights, Mr. Speaker, for 
promotion and marketing for their Christmas light display; also, 
Mr. Ron Clark, who is the Memorial Cup Bid Committee 
chairperson, was recognized for an above-and-beyond-service 
award category. 
 
Victor Sawa of the Regina Symphony Orchestra was a recipient 
of the Fred Hill Friend of Tourism Award and Kerry Anne 
Kuntz of the Hotel Saskatchewan Radisson Plaza was the 
recipient of the Saskatchewan Welcome Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I talked a little bit about Bid Regina and Bid 
Regina is a committee, it’s a subcommittee of Tourism Regina. 
It’s a committee which myself and the Deputy Premier have 
had an honour to participate in over the last year and a half. 
 
And Bid Regina — many might say, what is Bid Regina? Well 
it began as a concept, Mr. Speaker, that has now developed into 
an organization that takes a proactive approach in combining 
the strengths of all stakeholders and resources in our 
community for the purpose of attracting new events and 
conferences to our city. With the right blend of events, Regina 
businesses and residents will feel they have a positive impact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bid Regina committee has had a number of 
successes since its inception. It had the Syncro Swim 
Invitational Competition between February 4 and 6 of this year. 
It will host the Syncro Swim Tri-provincials in May of this 
year. 
 
In January of next year, 2001, the National Squash Senior 
Men’s Championships will be hosted in Regina. Also in April 
of 2001, the Western Canadian Gymnastics competition will 
take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of our most successful prizes was the 2001 
Memorial Cup which will take place in May of 2001. The 
Canadian Ringette Championships will be hosted here in 
Regina in 2002 and the Canadian Olympic Association Annual 
General Meeting and Congress will take place here in 2005, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Currently, Bid Regina is in the final running or preparing a very 
serious bid for the University of Regina hosting the 2003 
Congress of Social Sciences and Humanities, an event which 
could attract from 3 to 5,000 people from around the globe here 
to our city. 
 
We are going after the 2001 National Junior Racquetball 
Championships, the 2002 International Snowmobile Congress, 
and the 2005 Canada Summer Games. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a couple of minutes and maybe 
acknowledge the people on Tourism Regina and especially the 
Bid Committee that the Deputy Premier and I have been 
involved in for the work and tremendous effort they do. And 
it’s what makes our community what it is here in this city. And 
I just want to publicly thank those people and those committees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess I would be remiss if I didn’t talk a little bit 
more directly about the budget, although I think the viewers 
who are watching and my colleagues and certainly the members 



April 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

opposite will get the gist that we have an economy that is, 
although with problems, is moving along very, very well. 
Certainly much better than members opposite would give us 
credit for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget brought down by the Finance minister 
could broadly be described as falling into four parts. It dealt 
with fiscal responsibility and good government. It dealt with a 
sustainable health system. It talked about economic growth and 
jobs. And above all else, Mr. Speaker, it talked about tax reform 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Just in the area of fiscal responsibility, Mr. Speaker, not to bore 
the members opposite, but I think it cannot be said enough that 
this is the seventh balanced budget of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — More than any other provincial government, 
more than any other province in Canada since this current area 
of balanced budgets started. 
 
Our responsible balanced approach has supported, Mr. Speaker, 
the longest period of sustained economic growth here in our 
province. It has allowed the government to invest in important 
public services and reduce taxes each and every year since the 
budget was first balanced in 1994-95 fiscal year. 
 
It has allowed Saskatchewan’s debt to fall from 70 per cent of 
gross domestic product to less than 38 per cent today. And, Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of this four-year projection of this budget, 
the ratio of debt-to-gross domestic product is projected to be 31 
per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a new Fiscal Stabilization Fund will strengthen the 
capacity of the government to respond to unpredictable 
financial pressures on the province’s finances. The goal will be 
to place 5 per cent of our annual revenues aside in this fund so 
that when drops in revenues do occur, as they inevitably will in 
economies . . . resource-based economies like ours, we will not 
have to raise taxes, cut services, or return to deficits, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The target level for this fund, Mr. Speaker, will be clear and the 
use of funds here totally transparent. In addition, Mr. Speaker, 
our government is creating a new accountability framework 
which will provide information about goals, objectives, and 
measured performance of government departments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this budget and the . . . what the budget 
outlines in this area is above and beyond reproach and certainly 
areas that we have become noted for as a government. And with 
the help of the people of our province we take . . . with the help 
and support of our citizens we have taken great pride in this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the area of sustainable health, this budget will 
do the following . . . And I should point out first, Mr. Speaker, 
that the federal government pays only 13 cents of every health 
dollar that’s expended here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the future of our health system is in 
our hands if this is to continue. Over the last two years, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve increased health spending by 17 per cent. This 
year our government will provide $63 million in increases in 

base funding for the operation of our health system. 
 
In addition, we are establishing a $150 million transition fund to 
provide one-time support for change. Mr. Speaker, we are 
setting aside these resources needed to help ensure that these 
changes can be made while achieving our vision of ensuring 
people have access to quality health. And I know, Mr. Speaker, 
I want to join, as I’m sure many of my colleagues do, in 
applauding our Minister of Health and our Premier for the work 
they’re doing in trying to bring these . . . the health agenda to 
the top of the line . . . or the top of the heap when it comes to 
negotiations with the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the area of economic growth and jobs, I think I 
can . . . Earlier in my remarks I talked a great deal about the 
effects of our programs and what they have been doing, the 
effects they’ve had on our economy, the positive effects. Mr. 
Speaker, under this budget we will continue to provide the type 
of leadership and direction and atmosphere that our economy 
needs to further diversify, to further develop, and to grow even 
further. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, in the area of tax reform. Mr. Speaker, as 
many of my colleagues have stated before and before I arose, 
tax reform is one of the single biggest features that we faced in 
going into this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I . . . during the campaign when I appeared 
on the open line show with my opponents in the last provincial 
election, I was somewhat surprised when my two opponents 
that were there at the open line show indicated that other issues 
besides tax reductions were the number one issue to people in 
Regina Sherwood. I indicated very strongly that I had felt that 
taxes — reductions in tax cuts — were our number one issue. 
 
And I think what happened, the election has proven that out — 
certainly in Regina Sherwood. Tax reductions were something 
that meant a lot to my constituents. It was, in my conversations 
with them — and I had a chance to knock on most of the doors 
in my constituency during the elections — this was a 
top-of-mind issue. 
 
I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Finance and 
our government have managed to deliver on this very, very 
important area of our economy, and this very, very important 
area of our province in terms of the reform we have. 
 
I have a number of things I’d like to say about tax reform before 
I maybe sit down and take my place. But I see that it’s being 
close to the hour of recess, I would ask . . . Mr. Speaker, I 
would move that we recess. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m. this House stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................387 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................387 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................387 
  Peters ...................................................................................................................................................................................................387 
  Eagles...................................................................................................................................................................................................387 
  Wall......................................................................................................................................................................................................387 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................387 
  McMorris ............................................................................................................................................................................................387 
  Weekes.................................................................................................................................................................................................388 
  Brkich ..................................................................................................................................................................................................388 
  Harpauer .............................................................................................................................................................................................388 
  Allchurch.............................................................................................................................................................................................388 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................388 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall..............................................................................................................................................................................................388, 398 
  Weekes.................................................................................................................................................................................................388 
  Hillson..................................................................................................................................................................................................395 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................395 
  Goulet ..................................................................................................................................................................................................395 
  Lorje ....................................................................................................................................................................................................402 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
  Prebble.................................................................................................................................................................................................388 
 Courageous Youngster from Hafford 
  Weekes.................................................................................................................................................................................................389 
 Meadow Lake Spartanettes Win Provincial High School Championship 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................389 
 Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................389 
 Rendezvous 2000 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................390 
 Canadian Bible College and Theological Seminary Moving to Alberta 
  Hart......................................................................................................................................................................................................390 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Provincial Sales Tax 
  Hermanson..........................................................................................................................................................................................390 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................391 
 Funding for Health Care 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................392 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................392 
 The Partnerships Program 
  Hart......................................................................................................................................................................................................393 
  Hagel ....................................................................................................................................................................................................393 
 Funding for Education 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................394 
  Melenchuk...........................................................................................................................................................................................394 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 13 — The Education Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  Melenchuk...........................................................................................................................................................................................395 
 Bill No. 14 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2000 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................396 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Use of Props and Exhibits in the Assembly 
  Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................396 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................396 
 
 
 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Yates .................................................................................................................................................................................................... 396 
  Bakken......................................................................................................................................................................................... 397, 399 
  Thomson.............................................................................................................................................................................................. 399 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................406 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................408 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................411 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................415 
 


