















































Hansard: March 30, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 257 
 March 30, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Petitions of citizens of the of province petitioning the Assembly 
on the following matters: 
 

Asking the government to take action to ensure current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia; 
 
Asking the government to not implement centralization of 
ambulance services; 
 
Asking the government to consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 14 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what are the details of all 
programs and services in your department that were 
eliminated or reduced as a result of the 2001-2002 
provincial budget. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll also be tabling a number of other questions 
related to every department, of a similar nature. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too give notice 
that I shall on day 14 ask the government the following 
questions: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what are the rate increases, 
service fee increases, and all other increases and charges to 
public and business for services rendered, implemented by 
your department for the 2001-2002 fiscal year; what is the 
projected increase or decrease in project revenue taken in 
by your department for these fees and charges for the fiscal 
year of 2001-2002; and third, for each fee or charge your 
department levies against the public or business for the 
provisions of a certain service what is the projected amount 
to be taken in during the 2001-2002 fiscal year by your 
department, and what is the projected cost to your 
department that these services provide. 

 
I have a number of questions for the different departments that 
I’ll table all at once. The statement was made last session, if 
you don’t ask, you don’t have to tell. We’re asking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on day no. 14 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs and Housing: what 
are the names of all the organizations that received funding 
from the Associated Entities Fund in the 2000-2001 fiscal 
year; and which of these organizations failed to raise the 
required 75 per cent of their funding that entitles them to 
receive a grant under the cultural facilities grant program. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Good morning. I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to our guests and the 
members of this House, a group that has come probably further 
and in larger numbers than anybody else for the budget today. 
Unfortunately, due to the road conditions they weren’t able to 
get into the gallery where we had arranged seating so they’re in 
the overflow. But I don’t think that should prohibit an 
introduction this morning. 
 
This group is 11 grade 12 students from the school in Abbey, 
Saskatchewan. They probably travelled 350 kilometres to get 
here. They left early this morning, and as you can appreciate, 
travelled in some pretty difficult conditions. 
 
This group of students is accompanied by their teacher and 
driver, Mr. Alan Colpitts. And they are particularly interested in 
being here today because of the course of studies that they are 
pursuing. They’re grade 12 students as I mentioned. They’re 
taking a Canadian Studies unit and dealing particularly with 
economic decision-making. Hence their appearance here today. 
 
So I would ask you and all members of this House to welcome 
the students. They’re in room 212 of overflow seating this 
morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I certainly want to welcome all guests to the 
legislature today. And I would also ask all guests to not 
participate in the proceedings of the floor in any way 
throughout the proceedings this morning. We certainly do 
welcome your being here to observe the proceedings. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Humboldt Celebrates City Status 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, on April 1 there will be a big party in 
Humboldt as they celebrate city status. 
 
Humboldt became a city on November 7, 2000, however April 
1 has been chosen as the celebration date because Humboldt 
became a town on that same date back in 1907. 
 
Humboldt started as a telegraph station with the first official 
message sent in 1878. During the Metis resistance led by Louis 
Riel in 1885, Humboldt became an important communication 
link between Prime Minister John A. Macdonald and his forces 
in the West. General Middleton established a garrison at the 
post and used it as a base for scouting operations. He arrived in 



258 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2001 

 

1885 with some 950 soldiers. 
 
Later settlers began homesteading in the area. In 1903, 
Benedictine Monks arrived and established St. Peter’s Colony 
in Muenster some six miles away. 
 
In 1904 the Canadian Northern Railway arrived and businesses 
were established, and in 1905 Humboldt became a village. Two 
years later Humboldt became a town. 
 
Humboldt has continued to grow and develop over the years. 
The population has grown to 5,500 people and Humboldt has all 
the amenities required for good living and is a great community, 
however its biggest asset is its people. They are friendly, 
industrious, and very progressive. 
 
The city celebrations will also include the grand opening of the 
new telegraph exhibit at the Humboldt and District Museum 
and Gallery. This seems fitting as Humboldt got its start as a 
telegraph station. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to celebrating this special event 
with all Humboldt constituents, the mayor of Humboldt, Mr. 
Dennis Korte, and I look forward to being there April 1. 
 
Congratulations, Humboldt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Increased Funding for Student Summer Employment 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, students in our province need good summer jobs so 
they can save for their post-secondary studies and so that they 
can gain valuable work experience. 
 
That’s why I’m particularly pleased that in this budget our 
government is tripling funding for student summer 
employment. We are establishing the centennial student 
summer employment initiative which will result in 2,200 
summer jobs being available for young people 16 years of age 
and older in our province. 
 
This translates into 1,500 brand new summer jobs focused in 
areas such as post-secondary institutions, urban parks, regional 
parks, and community-based organizations. 
 
These jobs will be in addition to the 700 student summer jobs in 
executive government and in Crown corporations. Wages will 
be subsidized at 75 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and will be up to 
$4,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is concrete support for our young people and 
for our community organizations. And I might also say, Mr. 
Speaker, that our commitment to this program is a five-year 
commitment, and over that five years we’re going to be creating 
more than 10,000 jobs for our young people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m pleased to be part of a government that is working for the 
students of our province, and the students of my constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to the Whitewood Bantam Elks 
Hockey Team 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
evening the Whitewood Bantam Elks hockey team travelled to 
Hudson Bay for the second of a two-game, total point, SAHA 
(Saskatchewan Amateur Hockey Association), Provincial 
Bantam B championship. While the Whitewood Elks bantam 
team bowed to the Hudson Bay Bantams 2 to 1 in last night’s 
game, Mr. Speaker, the Whitewood Bantam Elks captured the 
Provincial B title on the strength of their first game 9 to 3 
victory. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Whitewood Bantam Elks team is made up of 
players from the communities of Whitewood, Broadview, 
Kipling, and Kennedy, and while the players and families have 
faced many hours of travel to practices and games, this 
provincial championship is certainly a fine reward for all the 
hard work, dedication, and commitment to the team, and the 
game of hockey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Whitewood Bantam Elks are coached by Gary 
Carson, assistant coaches Brent Thompson and Guy Paquin, 
and trainer Robert Wilkinson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like this morning to extend a special thank 
you to the Whitewood Elks for their sponsorship of minor 
hockey in the community, and special congratulations to the 
players, coaches, and families, and fans of the Whitewood 
Bantam Elks for a job well done in achieving the goal of 
Provincial B Bantam Champions for the year 2001. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Employment Numbers Remain Strong 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a given fact that 
sound financial management and wise budgeting are major 
factors in creating a vibrant economy. And the reverse is true as 
well. 
 
I think it fair to say that in Saskatchewan, given where we 
started in 1991, the strong economic numbers we are seeing 
today in our provincial economy have their genesis in the wise 
budgets of our three excellent Finance ministers, Ed 
Tchorzewski, the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld, and our 
current minister. 
 
Other perhaps more objective observers agree with me, Mr. 
Speaker. For instance, the March/April edition of Business 
Unlimited magazine says: “Employment numbers remain 
strong.” It says the Saskatchewan labour market performed, 
quote: “extremely well in 2000.” 
 
It goes on to say that full-time jobs continue to increase, as does 
the number of youth jobs — those youth that the opposition 
says are leaving the province. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, this article, and ones like it in this week’s 
local papers, predict real GDP (gross domestic product) growth 
of 2.4 per cent in 2001, after leading the country with an annual 
average rate of 3.4 per cent between ’92 and ’99. 
 



March 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 259 

 

Saskatchewan appears to be chugging along quite nicely, Mr. 
Speaker. And in a few minutes, the Minister of Finance will be 
giving us news that will keep our economy humming. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hockey Team Advances to League Final 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
congratulate the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League Weyburn 
Red Wings on their victory over the Lebret Eagles last night in 
Weyburn. The Wings now advance to the league final against 
the Nipawin Hawks. 
 
Weyburn has been in the league final for six out of the last eight 
years, so hats off to Dwight MacMillan and his staff for year 
after year continuing to make winning teams in Weyburn. 
 
Now it’s on to Nipawin and then the Centennial Cup. So I’d 
once again like to congratulate them and wish them good luck. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Economy 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
are preparing to listen to the Finance minister present his budget 
— the eighth consecutive balanced budget this government has 
brought down. Something the former right-wing Devine Tory 
government could not do in nine tries. 
 
We have heard the member from Saskatoon Meewasin give us 
hard evidence of how well our economy is doing, in no small 
part because of the excellent budgets that have been brought 
down by our Finance ministers. 
 
We have heard the member from Saskatoon Greystone remind 
us of the excellent program for students which our prudent 
financial management has enabled. All good news, with more to 
come in a minute. 
 
I want to point out one other piece of good news, Mr. Speaker, 
as reported recently by the Saskatchewan Monitor, edited by 
Doug Elliot. He says that many small towns in rural 
Saskatchewan with populations between 1 and 3,000 are 
growing. They are creating jobs in manufacturing, in 
construction, in mining and petroleum, and in services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the member from Saskatoon Meewasin said, we 
have confidence in Saskatchewan — and I might add — in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Oom-glay and oom-day are not in our vocabulary. We have 
great hope, Mr. Speaker, our optimism and confidence are well 
supported by independent and reliable evidence. 
 
Saskatchewan will prosper. Saskatchewan will grow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 

Congratulations to Ethel Sigurdson 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
become better acquainted with the people of 
Kelvington-Wadena constituency, I realize they have an 
abundance of artistic talents. 
 
Today I would like to take the opportunity to congratulate Ethel 
Sigurdson of Wadena for her recent appointment by the 
Saskatoon Writer’s Club as co-editor-in-chief of a book which 
will soon be published to showcase a number of 
Saskatchewan-written poems, poems depicting the trials and 
tribulations of life on the prairies. 
 
Mrs. Sigurdson has had a long-time passion for writing poetry 
as a form of entertainment and as a great stress reliever. This 
latest experience will expand her writing skills into the field of 
editing and providing her with an opportunity to get a 
bird’s-eye view of how others perceive life on the prairies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to encourage my 
colleagues to join with me in offering congratulations to Mrs. 
Sigurdson on her appointment to the position of co-editor of 
this book, and I look forward to reading the final product when 
it’s finished. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Tax Provisions in Budget 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Finance Minister. Well the people of southern 
Saskatchewan woke up this morning to the first of two snow 
jobs they’re going to get. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Still, Mr. Speaker, everyone is anxious to 
see what the NDP has in store for them in this year’s budget. 
But if it’s anything like the last few NDP budgets, what we 
should be getting from the Finance Minister is an apology. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — The NDP said they would cut taxes last 
year. Then they raised taxes instead. They said they would 
create thousands of jobs. But according to Statistics Canada, 
Saskatchewan actually lost 13,000 jobs over the last 12 months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister please tell us, will Saskatchewan 
families finally see some tax relief this year or will the NDP 
increases in energy and power rates swallow up any tax cut? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
government, I implore the Leader of the Opposition to have just 
a few more minutes’ patience and he will find the answers to 
many of his questions. And then he will stand in his place and 
congratulate this government for the budget that will be . . . 
 



260 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition talks about snow jobs. I tell you, with the hot air 
coming from there, the snow is not going to last long. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, talks about last year’s budget — last year’s budget. 
Well he seems to have a short memory because, I think it was 
just yesterday, the Minister of Finance explained to him that in 
last year’s budget the people of Saskatchewan were handed the 
largest tax decrease in this province’s history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The largest tax decrease in this 
province’s history plus new resources for health, new resources 
for highways, and a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the new 
Premier is trying to bail out his Finance minister but he couldn’t 
explain why we lost 13,000 jobs. 
 
The NDP’s (New Democratic Party) mid-year financial report 
shows that the government is sitting on hundreds of millions in 
windfall oil and gas revenues. Meanwhile, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan families are being sucked dry by the NDP’s 
power and energy rate increases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is so basic that even the Finance 
minister or the Premier should be able to understand it. The 
NDP has jacked up SaskEnergy rates, the NDP has jacked up 
SaskPower rates, and the NDP says that energy rates are going 
up again in the near future by as much as 40 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Finance minister be cutting taxes in this 
budget by more than the increase in utility rates or will families 
be paying more again this year, just like they did last year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will tell the House and 
those who watch these proceedings that this province enjoys the 
lowest energy rates in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And I’ll tell you, I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that as a result of this current fiscal year’s budget that 
we’re in, this . . . the people of this province have saved $317 
million in taxes. 
 
Now I hear the Leader of the Opposition today in the House 
saying that what this government should do is to take the 
savings account and spend it. That’s the plan — take the 
savings account and spend it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this movie, we’ve seen this 
movie before, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen a movie, which says 

you can somehow mismanage the province and still balance the 
books. We’ve heard that movie before. We’ve seen a 
government, Mr. Speaker, that ran deficit budgets, that sold off 
assets, and nearly destroyed the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is not the plan of this government. The plan of this 
government is to provide a solid fiscal foundation and to 
connect this province to a bright future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would say to 
the Premier that the horror flick that he has imposed on the 
people of Saskatchewan has scared 6,700 people out of the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — It’s not surprising that the Finance 
minister and the Premier aren’t listening to our questions. His 
government hasn’t been listening to the people of Saskatchewan 
for years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question that we ask is simple. They’ve jacked 
up power rates. They’ve jacked up energy rates. Last year they 
jacked up taxes for Saskatchewan families again. So we just 
want to know: will the minister be announcing new income tax 
cuts in the budget? Will the minister be announcing a cut in the 
PST (provincial sales tax)? Or will the NDP’s massive power 
and energy utility rate increases mean the family will be paying 
more this year to the NDP government rather than less? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition talks about listening to the people of Saskatchewan. 
We are listening to the people of Saskatchewan, who believe in 
this province, who believe in its future. We look to the future 
with hope and optimism and not with the doom and the gloom 
that perpetually is coming from that side of the House. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition talks about 
listening to the people of Saskatchewan. Well that’s just what 
we’ve been doing. I’d like to know what he’s been doing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I have here a very interesting document. It is an invitation, Mr. 
Speaker, an invitation to a dinner, an expensive dinner, if I may 
say — $250 a seat — a dinner in Calgary, Alberta. And, Mr. 
Speaker, you know what the headline of this is? It says here, 
“The Saskatchewan Party Calgary Dinner.” The Saskatchewan 
Party Calgary Dinner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re listening to the people of Saskatchewan. 
We’re not listening to the people of Calgary and Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Size of Government 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is also for the Premier. 
 



March 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 261 

 

The NDP government has been gouging families and businesses 
with high taxes for years. At the same time the NDP is saying to 
all of us to tighten our belts. Well, Mr. Speaker, families and 
businesses in this province have been tightening their belts and 
they have buried by NDP taxes. So we all want to know, Mr. 
Speaker, in this year’s budget, will the NDP tighten its own 
belt? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier confirm the NDP government is 
going to tighten its own belt by shrinking the size of the 
government’s bureaucracy? Or will the NDP continue its habit 
of keeping government big and taxing families out of this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on a daily basis, members 
of the opposition stand in this House and say we need to do 
more to fix the highways, we need more health care workers, 
we need more . . . better educational facilities for our children. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the highways do not fix themselves. More 
Highway workers fix highways. 
 
I’ll tell you health care is not delivered by freezing the budget 
for health care, Mr. Speaker. Health care is delivered by janitors 
and housekeepers and cooks and nurses and doctors and 
neurosurgeons — that’s how health care is delivered. 
 
And education is not improved except that we have teachers in 
those classrooms, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now our idea, Mr. Speaker, is to provide solid tax cuts for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Solid public services to the people of 
Saskatchewan in a balanced fashion. This is not an idea that we 
picked up at a dinner in Calgary, Mr. Speaker. This is an idea 
that comes from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, there were more people at that dinner in Calgary from 
the city of Moose Jaw than anywhere else in all of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, another question for the 
Premier. It looks like the Premier has been hanging around with 
the Minister of Finance for too long. Neither one of them are 
interested in listening to the concerns of people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has spent the last 10 years downloading 
millions in costs to municipalities and school divisions. And it’s 
the same old story — while the NDP is forcing municipalities 
and school divisions to raise property taxes, they’ve also been 
telling those local governments to tighten their belts. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the NDP to swallow some of its 
own medicine. Will the Premier be cutting the size of his 
government’s bureaucracy in this budget or will we continue to 
see the size of government grow while families and businesses 
suffer? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we have come through a 
very difficult fiscal decade in this province; a fiscal decade that 
did require the tightening of belts all over this province, Mr. 
Speaker. There are many of us who remember well the cause of 
the need to do that kind of belt tightening. It came straight from 
that group of men and women when they were in government. 
And we don’t forget that. 
 
Now he wants to talk about the dinner in Calgary, who was in 
attendance at the dinner in Calgary. Well, I wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, if the Leader of the Opposition recognizes some of the 
names on his committee that plan these dinners. 
 
I see one Mr. Jim Dinning. Now would he not be the same Jim 
Dinning who was treasurer of the Conservative Government of 
Alberta? I see on the list of committee here, a Mr. Paul 
Schoenhals. That’s a recognizable name. A gentlemen that I 
believe sat in this side of the House when they were in 
government, Mr. Speaker. It’s a result of that kind of 
government that we’ve had the belt tightened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re building today on the fiscal foundation that 
has been built by the former ministers of Finance and the 
current Minister of Finance and we’re going to be connecting to 
a great future in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Revenue-sharing Grants for Municipal Government 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the Minister of Municipal Affairs. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, this is a big day for that Liberal minister because 
this is the day he demonstrates to Saskatchewan people just 
what kind of influence he has with his new buddies in the NDP 
cabinet. And this is the day, Mr. Speaker, when we find out just 
how much influence that is — the minister and his Liberal 
colleague have had on the NDP’s budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after 10 years of NDP downloading on the 
municipalities, will the minister confirm for us that he’s been 
able to use his Liberal influence to secure an increase in 
revenue-sharing grants for municipalities in this year’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of government, 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Premier will start over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well it is interesting, Mr. Speaker, they 
like to ask the questions but they apparently do not want to hear 
the answers. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said, Mr. Speaker, this province has 
been through a very difficult fiscal decade. We have put the 
fiscal foundations of this province right and now we have the 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to build on those foundations to 
connect this province to a very bright, hopeful, and prosperous 
future. 



262 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2001 

 

Like many in this province, our municipal governments had to 
bear some of that burden as many did in this province. But you 
will note, Mr. Speaker, in most recent budgets, we have 
committed to infrastructure programs in partnerships with our 
municipalities; we have engaged in a Centenary Fund to build 
the infrastructure of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are committing today to the biggest highway project that 
this Saskatchewan people have ever seen, Mr. Speaker. And 
we’re doing it, Mr. Speaker, we’re doing it not by — not by — 
selling off assets, not by running deficits but by good solid 
fiscal planning, the kind you get in Saskatchewan and not in 
Calgary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
what we’re trying to find out today is this Liberals on that side, 
both of them, had any influence in the today’s budget. Have 
they got any more money for municipalities who have been 
downloaded on for the past 10 years? 
 
(10:30) 
 
So again, I ask a question to the minister of municipal 
government. Mr. Speaker, the gang’s all here today — the 
mayor of Regina is here; the mayor of Saskatoon is here; the 
presidents of SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) are here. Mayors and reeves from all over this 
province are watching on television, and they all have the same 
question. Just how much power and influence has the Liberal 
minister of municipal government had on this NDP’s budget. 
They’re all wondering after 10 years of downloading on 
municipalities just how much pull this Liberal minister has on 
the NDP cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister be able to deliver one new dollar 
in revenue-sharing grants for urban and rural municipalities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again I ask the members, a 
little patience. We’re now just but moments from when the 
Minister of Finance will stand in his place and deliver the best 
budget that this province has seen in many, many years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Just a little patience. He asks, Mr. 
Speaker, about the coalition and the coalition government. I’ll 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, this coalition is strong and we’re working 
well together to provide the people of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
You know in this invitation, Mr. Speaker, that they sent out to 
Calgary to come to the Saskatchewan Party Calgary dinner — 
they said in this invitation, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, get this . . . 
He says in the letter here that the coalition is on very shaky 
ground, he says. He says that it’s on very shaky ground. Well 
I’ll tell you the shaky ground we’re on, Mr. Speaker. This 
coalition government went to the constituency of Elphinstone 
and we won. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Study on the Impact of Gaming 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister Responsible for Gaming. 
 
Under the NDP, the Government of Saskatchewan has become 
addicted to gambling revenue. This year the NDP will make 
hundreds of millions of dollars from their massive gambling 
expansion. Mr. Speaker, the NDP has been using gambling 
profits to balance its budget every year since 1995. And every 
year since 1995, the NDP has been promising a study on the 
impact large-scale gambling is having on communities and 
families in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has been promising a gambling 
impact study for six years. Will she table that study today or 
admit it was just another broken NDP promise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I am very happy to report 
to the House and to the member today that the study that she 
desires is underway — it is underway. We’re looking forward, 
we’re looking forward to the results of that important baseline 
study later this year, Mr. Speaker. And while that is underway, 
we have placed into programs to assist those who find 
themselves in difficulty through gaming in record numbers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I’m pleased to be able to report to the House today that the 
study that the member asked for is now underway. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
must say it’s about time. And, Mr. Speaker, I also want to read 
something an opponent of gambling said about gambling 
expansion. He said, and I quote: 
 

If they’re going to begin funding vital public services like 
health and education on the whims of the gambling public, 
I think they’re treading on very dangerous ground. 

 
He went on to say: 
 

Everyone admits the slot machine level of gambling brings 
with it certain negative consequences in terms of the impact 
on family life, increase in crime rate, prostitution, drugs, 
and so on. 

 
Do you know who said those words, Mr. Speaker? The current 
Premier did back in 1989. I guess he’s changed his tune since 
then. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now that the Premier’s in charge of a government 
that is funding health and education on the whims of the 
gambling public, I hope he will at least follow through with his 
government’s promise to complete a full social impact study on 
the effects of his government’s gambling addiction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I was pleased some years 



March 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 263 

 

ago to stand in this House as associate and then minister of 
Health, to develop what was Canada’s leading treatment and 
prevention program for gambling addictions. And I do not 
change my view of the necessity for that kind of programming 
and that kind of help. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, what’s happened in Saskatchewan 
is a partnership, a partnership between communities, a 
partnership between First Nations people and Aboriginal 
people, a partnership between government with strict regulation 
on gaming in our province, with profits accruing to 
communities, Mr. Speaker, and in partnership — not in conflict 
— with the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve 
seen the economic results of that for First Nations people. 
 
Now I ask the members opposite, is it their plan therefore, is it 
their plan to eliminate the opportunities of gaming in the 
province? Is that their plan? Do they have a plan in such a 
regard, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Potato Growing Industry 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Valley Potato Corporation. Mr. Speaker, last year the minister 
said the government was getting out of the direct involvement 
in the potato industry. Instead they’d be working to encourage 
the development of the industry through private sector potato 
growers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now it seems the government is moving back in 
the other direction. They’ve bought a number of tractors, potato 
planting equipment from Arch Equipment in Outlook, and they 
are attempting to lease land in the Outlook area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP trying to get back into the 
potato-growing business? Didn’t they learn anything from the 
millions, from the millions of dollars they lost through 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company)? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the opposition has 
criticized us continually over the last few days about the roles 
that the Crown corporations pay . . . play in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. Last session that member criticized us for what we 
were doing in Sask Water with SPUDCO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we did is we took, we took SPUDCO, Mr. 
Speaker, and we put it into Crown Investments Corporation, put 
it more at arm’s-length from government, and yet they criticize 
us. 
 
Believe me, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a growing, strong 
industry in the potato sector. Right now, as an example, Prince 
Edward Island buys potatoes from Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan has a strong industry in potatoes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, not only did the government lose 
millions of dollars last time around, they almost 
single-handedly destroyed the potato industry in this province. 
It’s only now getting back on track and the NDP is intent on 
wrecking it again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the government buying equipment? Why 
are they leasing land? And why are they going into direct 
competition with private potato growers who are just recovering 
from the last NDP potato disaster? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the mandate of the Saskatchewan Valley 
Potato Corporation is what we want to know? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, that member will know, if 
he spends some time up there talking to the growers in that area, 
Mr. Speaker, and I believe he does, but I don’t think he’s 
listening, Mr. Speaker, because if he’s listening he will know 
that the growers in that area will want us to do exactly what 
we’re doing, Mr. Speaker — that’s to assist the growers in 
growing the potato industry. 
 
And again I remind that member and members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, that all across Canada in many jurisdictions they look 
to Saskatchewan to see what we’re doing in that industry. Right 
now we have one of the best seed potato industries in all of 
Canada, Mr. Speaker, and we’re proud of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, there’s different ways to help the 
potato industry — not by taking it completely over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another question for the minister on Sask 
Valley Potato Corp. Mr. Speaker, we understand that Sask 
Valley recently shipped 30 intermodal shipping containers by 
CN (Canadian National) Rail to the Cavendish Farms in PEI 
(Prince Edward Island). Apparently when the potatoes got to 
Moncton, it was discovered they were frozen so the entire 
shipment was sent back to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why this happened? And 
how much money did this government lose on this shipment of 
frozen potatoes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I say that if the 
member has been paying attention to what the growers in that 
area have been telling us, they want us to assist them in the best 
way we possibly can. 
 
We started . . . We assisted the growers to start the industry. We 
helped them, Mr. Speaker, in getting the industry growing and 
going, Mr. Speaker, and it is our intention to continue to do that 
until we’re able to turn it back over to the private sector. 
There’s been no secret about our mandate with respect to 
potatoes, Mr. Speaker. We think we have a strong, viable 
industry in the potato sector and we’re proud of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



264 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2001 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s certain ways 
you can help and I’ve talked to potato producers over there. 
They say to provide cheap rental on the potato storage sheds; 
provide so they can lease equipment — not to own the land. 
I’ve talked to them and that’s what they’ve told me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have one final question for the minister. How 
much money has the Sask Valley Potato Corp lost in the past 
year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
talks about frozen potatoes. I’ll tell you what that member and 
those opposition members wanted to freeze, Mr. Speaker. They 
wanted to freeze health care; they want to freeze education, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what they want to freeze, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
what they want to freeze. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our intent is to continue to assist where we can, 
and we’ve always said . . . And it’s been no secret about our 
mandate with respect to potatoes, Mr. Speaker. Our mandate is 
to assist the growers in that area and when we can we will turn 
it back over to the private sector, Mr. Speaker, where it belongs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, my question again — and answer. 
I would like an answer and so, I think, all these people with me. 
How much money have you lost through SPUDCO? We know 
it’s millions. And how much has the Sask Valley Potato Corp 
lost in the past year and with that shipment of frozen potatoes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — While I’m on the subject of freezing, 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing we froze, Mr. Speaker, is we froze 
power rates, Mr. Speaker, for five consecutive years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Five consecutive years, and with the 
rebate it’ll amount to six years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the more important thing is, is as I’ve said, we 
intend — and this has always been our mandate — to start an 
industry. The people over there, the members opposite, they 
want us to assist and create jobs in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s our intent. We assisted with the growers out there to get 
the industry growing and we believe, Mr. Speaker, that that’s 
what we’ve done. 
 
When we have the opportunity to, it is our intention, Mr. 
Speaker, to turn that back over to the private sector where it 
belongs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
government, I’m pleased to stand and table the answers to 

written questions 2, 3, and 4. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The answers to questions 2, 3, and 4 are 
tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 
ESTIMATES 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At this point I 
have received a message from the Lieutenant Governor. And 
it’s my pleasure to submit the estimates and supplementary 
estimates accompanied by a message from Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — All rise for the message from the Lieutenant 
Governor. The message is as follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 
sums required for the service of the province for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2002, and supplementary 
estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 
province for 12 months, ending March 31, 2001, and 
recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
(Signed), Lynda Haverstock, Lieutenant Governor, 
province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Please be seated. 
 
(10:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the Premier: 
 

That Her Honour’s message, the estimates, and 
supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee of 
Finance. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I begin 
my substantive remarks this morning I’d like to, if I may be 
permitted, introduce among the very many special people here 
with us today a few special people in my life who are joining us 
here today. And I’d ask members to hold their applause till I’ve 
introduced them all. 
 
First I’d like to introduce my wife, Pauline Melis. Seated with 
her are my sisters, Grace Hansen and Marg Cline, and my 
niece, Jenny Coxon. And I’d ask all members to welcome them 
to the Assembly and thank them for being here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a great privilege for me to 
present my fourth budget to the people of Saskatchewan. Under 



March 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 265 

 

the leadership of the former premier, our province made 
tremendous strides forward. Together the people of 
Saskatchewan restored the province’s fiscal health. Together we 
began the process of rebuilding and renewing our important 
public services. And together we created a solid foundation for 
growth and opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year I stood in this House and said that it was 
time to reach beyond our limitations. Time to build on over a 
decade’s work to create new growth, opportunity, and 
prosperity for Saskatchewan people. 
 
I made the commitment that the budget would put us on a firm 
course to achieve opportunity and growth for all, and that our 
government would do what was fair and what made sense for 
our province and our people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that commitment has been kept. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, it must be said, and it cannot 
be said enough, that Saskatchewan is a great place to live and 
Saskatchewan has a tremendous future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And today’s budget, Mr. Speaker, marks 
another major step forward. Under the leadership of a new 
Premier, this government will move in an exciting new 
direction, a direction that will connect Saskatchewan to the 
future. Connect our people to the future by making major 
investments in education, transportation, and technology. 
Connect Saskatchewan to a prosperous future by giving people 
the tools they need to succeed in a growing diversified 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has delivered on its commitment 
to provide a simple, fair, and competitive tax system, building 
the solid foundation we need for a thriving economy and 
opening new opportunities for economic growth and prosperity. 
 
In 2001, Saskatchewan people will pay $317 million less in 
provincial income tax than they did before tax reform, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our tax system is competitive. In 1993, the 
average Saskatchewan family had the second highest provincial 
taxes in Canada. In 2001, they’re the fourth lowest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And our top marginal rate is now the 
second lowest in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our tax system is fair. It focuses on providing 
significant tax relief for working families. And, Mr. Speaker, 
our tax system is simple. On January 1 of this year we 
eliminated the flat tax — the biggest tax grab in the history of 

our province, Mr. Speaker. We eliminated the high-income 
surtax and we eliminated the debt-reduction surtax. Eliminated. 
Gone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And that’s progress, Mr. Speaker. And the 
budget I’m presenting today builds on that progress. 
 
I’m pleased to announce that building on our new tax system, 
this budget increases the provincial tax credits that recognize 
post-secondary education costs for students, the credits for 
persons with disabilities, and the credits for caregivers. 
 
Our tax reform ensures that Saskatchewan tax credits for CPP 
(Canada Pension Plan) and EI (employment insurance) 
contributions, tuition fees, charitable gifts, and student loan 
interest will match those provided by the federal government. 
And it begins the indexing of our income tax system. 
 
Beginning in 2001, provincial income tax credit amounts for 
seniors, persons with disabilities, caregivers, and medical 
expenses will be fully indexed to inflation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And that’s progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
During this fiscal year as well, effective January 1, 2002, we 
will increase the child tax credit from $1,500 per child to 
$2,000 per child, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We will increase the seniors’ tax credit 
from $500 to $750. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And that’s progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that Saskatchewan is the 
only province with a universal child tax credit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is also committed to supporting 
Saskatchewan’s business community in its effort to thrive and 
compete. Last year Saskatchewan business people told us that 
their number one concern was personal income tax. We 
listened; we responded with the largest cut in personal income 
tax in Saskatchewan’s history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This year businesses asked us to address the issue of 
corporation income tax for small business. And, Mr. Speaker, 
once again we’ve listened. We’re responding to the concerns of 
our small-business community. 
 
This budget includes a business tax package that will improve 
our province’s competitiveness and open new opportunities for 
growth and opportunity. And I’m very pleased to announce, Mr. 
Speaker, that effective July 1, 2001, the small-business 
corporate income tax rate will be cut from 8 per cent to 6 per 
cent. 
 



266 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — When fully implemented, Mr. Speaker, that 
is a 25 per cent reduction. 
 
And effective January 1, 2002, the amount of income eligible to 
be taxed at the small-business rate will rise from $200,000 to 
$300,000. 
 
That’s progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And, Mr. Speaker, this budget recognizes 
the importance of attracting and retaining key personnel in our 
business and professional communities. I am pleased to 
announce that Saskatchewan will now permit all regulated 
professionals to incorporate their practices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, our government is also 
introducing changes that will create jobs and growth in our 
resource sector, with a special focus on the North. With this 
budget we will be offering a new tax credit for mineral 
exploration and development in that region and elsewhere in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, our government will spend an additional 
$920,000 this year on our geoscience program to encourage 
exploration in the province, bringing our total commitment to 
$3.4 million this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, last year we laid a foundation 
for growth and opportunity. We will stand on that solid 
foundation and meet the challenges of today. 
 
Our economy is growing and will continue to grow. Last year 
our province’s economy, more diversified than ever before in 
its history, grew by 3.4 per cent. Even in the face of the 
slowdown in the American and world economies, 
Saskatchewan will continue to grow in the range of about 2 per 
cent — a testament to the energy and confidence of our people. 
And that’s progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — However, we must remain on guard and 
take note of the changing economic climate and realize we still 
face challenges. 
 
The fiscal year just ending has been an exceptional year for 
natural resource revenue. As a result, our total revenue is 
projected to be almost $6.8 billion for the year just ending. 
 
In this new fiscal year, we expect a reduction of revenue of 
more than $750 million. Let me repeat. Our revenues this year 
will drop by three-quarters of a billion dollars. In other times, 
this might have meant we would cut programs, raise taxes, or 
run a deficit. That would have happened had we spent all of our 
revenue last year. We did not. 

Instead, we put $775 million aside. We saved some to protect us 
against future volatility in our revenues — which we’re 
experiencing even now, Mr. Speaker — and we saved some to 
help us build our province in a sustainable way. 
 
There are those who say we should spend all the money we 
might get as soon as we get it. They point to many legitimate 
needs. But their approach would leave the province in the lurch 
when revenue goes down, creating deficits or the need for 
program cuts or tax increases. I want to make it very clear, Mr. 
Speaker, on this side of the House we believe that we must 
always save some part of our resources for the future to avoid 
those consequences. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Our dividend for past prudence is this. 
Today we’re able, even in the face of fiscal pressure, to meet 
the critical needs of the province while ensuring its fiscal 
integrity for the people of today and for our children. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that is why our government today is able to announce 
major commitments to the health care system, our province’s 
farmers, and to Saskatchewan’s children for a better quality of 
life in the future. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to inform this House and the 
people of the province that in order to sustain our publicly 
funded health care system into the future, this budget provides 
$229.5 million more — an increase of 11.6 per cent over last 
year’s budget for health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, this funding will provide the 
stability we need as we work with our partners to review the 
recommendations from the commission on medicare and 
develop and implement our operational plan for health reform. 
 
This budget will maintain quality health services while that 
collaborative process is undertaken. In addition, Mr. Speaker, 
this new funding will go towards a 22 per cent increase for the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, the purchase of a second air 
ambulance, investments to ensure that all Saskatchewan 
children have a healthy start in life, and additional investments 
in other priority areas to enhance services and meet growing 
demands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also addresses the needs of our 
farming community. We’re making a commitment of an 
additional $95 million for a federal/provincial farm income 
program that works for producers. In fact, the budget for the 
Department of Agriculture and Food will increase by 35.5 per 
cent this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This is our commitment to our farmers as 
we proceed to negotiate with the federal government for a fair 
and effective farm income program. 
 
In addition, this budget provides for a new adaptation program 
that will help farmers who wish to establish alternative 
operations. Our government will also invest more than $5 



March 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 267 

 

million in our agri-business sector through the Agri-Food 
Equity Fund. 
 
(11:00) 
 
There will be more agriculture research and development 
funding because of this budget, and a new Saskatchewan 
Conservation Cover Program will give direct payments to farm 
operators converting marginal lands to perennial cover. A 
program helping farmers and improving our environment — 
that’s progress. 
 
A program helping farmers and improving our environment. 
That’s progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our commitment to the environment goes far beyond this as 
well, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan has always shown leadership 
in environmental protection and management. Our government 
is demonstrating this leadership by embracing technologies that 
will help our environment today and tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I am pleased to outline a major initiative in 
wind energy. Our government will purchase a minimum of 10 
gigawatt hours of wind power from SaskPower each year for 10 
years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This represents more than 15 per cent of 
executive government’s total power consumption and it allows 
SaskPower to proceed with construction of 10 wind-generating 
turbines. The development of an alternative energy source for 
Saskatchewan. That’s progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government has taken care to ensure that 
it is doing all it can to be energy efficient. In 2000, the 
Government of Saskatchewan embarked on an energy 
management program aimed at reducing the government’s 
energy costs by 20 per cent and reducing the emission of 
greenhouse gases by 15 per cent over three years. Over the next 
three years, government buildings throughout the province will 
become more efficient in their use of energy saving taxpayers’ 
money and protecting our environment. That’s progress, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And just as we see the environment as a 
critical part of our vision for the future, so too is the role of our 
arts and cultural communities. Their richness and diversity are 
an expression of the Saskatchewan spirit. That’s why this 
government’s commitment to arts and culture is strong. That’s 
why we are committing up to $125,000 a year to the art 
stabilization program. This investment will improve arts 
organizations’ financial management, fundraising and market 
research, and the cultural industry’s development strategy will 
have its funding more than doubled to $450,000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This strategy provides operating funding to the Saskatchewan 
book publishers, the Saskatchewan recording industry and the 
Saskatchewan Craft Council for support and development of 
cultural industries. These investments enrich the cultural life of 
our province, contributing to the high quality of life that we 

enjoy. And that is what this government’s vision is about — 
ensuring that all people in Saskatchewan enjoy a high quality of 
life. 
 
A high quality of life, Mr. Speaker. That vision is what is 
guiding us in our battle to reduce poverty. We know that the 
road out of poverty is through acquiring skills and finding work. 
That is what the building independence program and the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement are all about. 
 
Because of our innovative strategy to reduce poverty, the 
number of people on social assistance has fallen in each of the 
last six years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s progress, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan is the only province to reduce the incidence of 
child hunger — that’s progress, Mr. Speaker. But it is not 
enough. We need to do more as creatively, compassionately, 
and co-operatively as possible to eliminate child hunger and 
give Saskatchewan children the best possible start in life. 
 
We need to do more and we will do more to keep true to our 
values as we reach for our vision of a high quality of life for all 
Saskatchewan people. And no program better exemplifies these 
values and action on behalf of this province’s children than the 
early childhood development strategy. 
 
This strategy brings together the departments of Health, 
Education, and Social Services, and combines their efforts, 
resources, commitment, and energy for one objective — 
ensuring that all Saskatchewan people have a healthy start. We 
know early intervention improves the chances of success. This 
is the principle behind the early childhood strategy that builds 
on the success of our Action Plan for Children. 
 
The early childhood development strategy focuses on special 
services for children with serious health, education, or 
developmental challenges in communities where the need for 
these services is exceptionally high. Helping the children who 
most need the help, putting our values to work — that’s the 
Saskatchewan spirit at work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the early childhood development strategy will 
ensure that all babies born in Saskatchewan hospitals and their 
families will be screened for risk factors that may affect the 
child’s development. It will provide intensive support services 
for high-risk children and families in need. And early childhood 
development developers will be employed across the province 
to aid Saskatchewan’s children in getting a healthy start to life. 
That’s progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Progress, Mr. Speaker, that is improving 
the quality of life for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve outlined how, even given the fiscal 
challenges before us, this government will provide for the most 
pressing needs of our people and communities in the areas of 
health care, agriculture, and programs to improve the quality of 
life for Saskatchewan’s children. 



268 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2001 

 

Our government from its earliest days has been guided by the 
need for prudent, responsible fiscal management. From the 
beginning we have committed ourselves to limiting the future 
obligations we would pass on to our children by eliminating 
deficits and reducing debt. This is the legacy of our former 
premier and the promise of our new Premier. We will not 
saddle future generations with fiscal burdens which we create, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Today, Mr. Speaker, I’m introducing a 
budget that remains true to our strong commitment to fiscal 
prudence. It is our eighth consecutive balanced budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — But this budget is not just about limiting 
future obligations. It is about creating opportunities, Mr. 
Speaker. It is about expanding opportunities for our children 
and our young people by connecting Saskatchewan to the 
future. Connecting to the future is our long-term plan to build 
Saskatchewan’s economy. It is about creating the prosperity this 
province needs to ensure that all our citizens can enjoy a high 
quality of life. 
 
Connecting Saskatchewan to the future is about expanding 
opportunities for our young people to build and live in a 
province of growth and prosperity. It is about providing quality 
public services that matter to people. Connecting to the future 
means building economic capacity in our communities. Giving 
people the tools they need to plug in, participate, communicate, 
and compete. 
 
Above all, connecting to the future means working together in 
the spirit of Saskatchewan to reach our shared vision of a high 
quality of life for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government will ensure that Saskatchewan 
connects to the future by strategic investments in three key 
areas: education, transportation, and technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if Saskatchewan is to continue to prosper, it is 
essential that our province embrace the technology of the future 
and lead Canada and the world. That’s why this budget 
launches an innovative information technology strategy. Our 
strategy will ensure that the people of this province have the 
tools they need to plug in, participate, communicate, and 
compete. And it begins with CommunityNet. 
 
CommunityNet brings together the provincial government, 
SaskTel, and SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network) 
to connect schools, post-secondary institutions and health 
facilities to a high-speed network. 
 
CommunityNet will be Saskatchewan’s on-ramp to the 
information highway, connecting our communities, giving 
people across the province access to government, public, and 
community services on a level not possible before. Offering a 
gateway to Saskatchewan people to take their talents, 
innovations, and ideas to the global marketplace. And, most 
importantly, improving and expanding the educational 
opportunities available to our young people. 

By spring of next year, 30 per cent of Saskatchewan schools 
will be plugged into the future by CommunityNet. Virtually all 
schools will have improved access by 2005, giving 
Saskatchewan children in schools the tools they need to 
succeed. 
 
CommunityNet will provide Saskatchewan students, no matter 
where they are located, with instant access to the world of 
learning. CommunityNet will open doors of learning and 
opportunity never before available to our province’s students. 
 
More than anything, CommunityNet is about connecting our 
education system to the future. But, Mr. Speaker, connecting to 
the future isn’t just about connecting our kids and their schools 
and their communities to high-speed wires. It’s about a lot 
more. 
 
It’s about providing them with the tools they need to succeed. 
That’s why we are providing $2 million per year for three years 
to improve in-school connectivity. That’s why we will place 
instructional materials for our K to 12 schools on-line and 
provide $3 million in each of the next three years for schools to 
develop on-line learning resources. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It is clear that the investment we will make 
in CommunityNet and other related technology projects will 
help Saskatchewan people and communities connect in new and 
innovative ways. 
 
And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, we must take care of our 
traditional network of connections. Mr. Speaker, we are going 
to fix the roads. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Connecting to the future is about a safe, 
reliable transportation system that works for people and our 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to announce today an historic 
investment in our highway and transportation system of almost 
$950 million over the next three years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This includes $312 million this year, 25 per 
cent higher than last year’s budget, and the largest single year 
investment ever made in Saskatchewan’s highways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our primary highways will be upgrading to a 20-year life cycle, 
and our regional pavements to a 25-year life cycle. Our largest 
investment ever means the western portion of Highway No. 1 
twinning project will be completed four years ahead of 
schedule. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, we’ll finish the work on the national highway 
even though the federal government continues to avoid 



March 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 269 

 

contributing its fair share and living up to its responsibility. 
And, Mr. Speaker, with or without the federal government 
playing its role, our government will connect this province’s 
transportation system to the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Our largest investment ever in highways 
and transportation will mean that over three years 800 
kilometres of the province’s thin membrane surface highways 
will be upgraded and able to handle heavy traffic. 
 
But we cannot connect Saskatchewan’s transportation system to 
the future without involvement from our communities. Building 
the transportation system of the future demands partnerships. 
Our government will continue working in partnership with rural 
municipalities and area transportation planning committees to 
improve our highways and our roads. 
 
As part of that partnership, our government will be providing a 
$15 million fund for the prairie grain roads funding program, 
increasing our commitment to fix the roads damaged by 
increased heavy hauling. Working together, we will build the 
transportation system that meets our province’s needs and 
connects us to the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have outlined how we will connect to the future 
through the new technologies of the Internet and by investing in 
our traditional network of highways and roads. But now it is 
time to talk about where connecting to the future really begins. 
 
(11:15) 
 
It begins with education. It begins, Mr. Speaker, with the largest 
investment ever in our province’s education, post-secondary 
education, and skills training — more than $1.1 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Because if we’re to connect to the future, 
we must strengthen this most important link to the future. Mr. 
Speaker, because our government did what was right and what 
was fair in the struggle to regain our financial freedom, we are 
now able to focus on Saskatchewan’s children and their future. 
 
Think of it, Mr. Speaker, it was not that long ago that we spent 
more on interest payments than on education. In 1993-94, we 
spent $865 million on education. That same year, interest on the 
debt was our second-highest expenditure of $873 million 
interest costs. Think of it, Mr. Speaker, $8 million more on 
interest than on education. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report to the people of this 
province that this year we will spend almost twice as much on 
education as we will interest payments to the bankers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And that’s progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
K to 12 education funding will increase by 9.9 per cent, the 

largest budget-over-budget increase in many years. We’ll 
provide the highest amount of funding ever for foundation 
operating grants — a 16 per cent increase over the last two 
years. 
 
We know that our future demands nothing less than such a 
commitment today, and that commitment includes innovative 
school programming that works. Community schools put this 
province’s values of compassion, creativity, co-operation, and 
hard work into action. They are about keeping kids in school 
and letting them do what kids do best — learn. 
 
Community schools work in partnerships with families and the 
community to provide educational and social supports for 
success at school and in life. Our commitment today means 
more community schools to help children with their futures. 
The number of community schools has doubled since 1995 and 
as a result of this budget, that number will double again this 
year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Forty-two new community schools, 
including for the first time, high schools and for the first time, 
rural community schools. 
 
This budget will also mean more for Aboriginal education 
programs and it will mean a 20 per cent increase for special 
education for disabled students, more than double the funding 
of four years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, beyond our commitment to improve and enhance 
K to 12 education, our government is committed to providing 
our young people with the technologies and opportunities they 
need to succeed in the new economy. 
 
Job skills training is key to our future. That is why funding is 
being increased for SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology), apprenticeship programs, and 
northern training plans. All told, provincial training plans will 
reach more than 25,000 people this year. 
 
This budget will also mean: on-line access to courses and 
curriculum materials for schools across the province; a virtual 
Saskatchewan campus which will provide one-stop, Web-based 
access to on-line post-secondary courses to students across the 
province; 325 scholarships for first-year students entering 
post-secondary studies in Saskatchewan to keep our best and 
brightest studying here; and significant improvements to our 
student aid program. 
 
New technologies are shaping the future of our education 
system. Our government will invest in the technological tools 
our education system needs. Connecting education to the future 
will shrink the distance between educator and learner, and 
provide access to information from around the world. 
 
Today our government is making a historic investment in 
education and skills training to give our young people the 
knowledge, the skills, and the tools to succeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, connecting to our future isn’t just about making 
our largest-ever investment in education, or the biggest 



270 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2001 

 

financial commitment to our highways and transportation 
system in the province’s history, or about our innovative 
information technology strategy. 
 
Connecting to the future is really about employing our common 
values of creativity, co-operation, compassion, and hard work in 
pursuit of our shared vision of a prosperous Saskatchewan for 
all. 
 
Our values are an expression of the spirit of Saskatchewan and 
its people — a spirit that allowed this province to overcome 
economic and fiscal challenges, and lead Canada in the 
development of progressive public policy. 
 
We have progressed. And the progress we have achieved was 
possible because we had the courage and the conviction to 
regain our financial freedom — the freedom we needed to 
dream again, to dream of our vision of the future. And we will 
continue to progress because we are guided by our vision and 
strengthened by our values. 
 
We will progress by investing in education and job training, by 
creating a better tax system, by preserving our public health 
care, by connecting to the information highway, by rebuilding 
our roads, by fighting poverty. That’s what connecting to the 
future is all about — putting our values to work to build our 
economy and our province and achieve our vision. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is what this budget is about. Our vision 
of a province where all Saskatchewan people enjoy a high 
quality of life, where we seize the future with confidence and a 
spirit of innovation, keeping Saskatchewan the great place it is 
to work, raise a family, and prosper. 
 
That is why, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Premier: 
 

That this Assembly do resolve itself into the Committee of 
Finance. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure to respond to 
the Minister of Finance’s budget on behalf of the official 
opposition. 
 
And I want to acknowledge a number of people that are very 
important to me, Mr. Speaker. I want to acknowledge, sitting in 
the east gallery opposite, my father and my stepmother, Peter 
and Sophie Krawetz, and my stepsister, Yvonne Mackie. Thank 
you very much for being here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I too want to acknowledge the 
Leader of the Opposition and my colleagues for standing in for 
me last year at this time. I was unfortunately unavailable at that 
time and I want to thank them for their support. 
 
I too want to thank the members opposite for your best wishes 
and your remarks during a battle. And let me tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, good health is everything and I’m really glad to be 
back here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, this morning my remarks will 
be brief and I want to indicate to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly that indeed those remarks will be brief so I would 
appreciate them remaining in their chairs — as well as our 
guests. I know that it’s been a long morning and I will try to 
keep my remarks brief to allow you to exit very, very quickly. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when I got up this morning and I saw 
what the weatherman had brought us during the night, I 
couldn’t help but think about last week’s Throne Speech 
pronouncement that it’s springtime in Saskatchewan. That may 
have been just a little premature, Mr. Speaker. And after 
listening to the budget speech this morning, it’s clear to me that 
for the hard-pressed taxpayers of this province, springtime is 
still some time off as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, thanks to the huge increase in 
oil and gas revenues, the Government of Saskatchewan today is 
enjoying a massive windfall. Unfortunately, they’re the only 
ones enjoying it. 
 
As a result of the oil and gas revenue, the government today is 
sitting on $500 million. Some may even call it a half-billion 
dollar election slush fund. And how much of this money will go 
back to Saskatchewan families in terms of tax relief? Not one 
penny, Mr. Speaker. There will be no reduction in the sales tax 
that was massively expanded last year. 
 
There will be no reduction in the gas taxes. 
 
There will be no new cuts in income tax, even though the small 
amount of relief announced last year has been swallowed up by 
huge increases in utility rates. 
 
There will be no reduction in property tax. In fact, property 
taxes are probably on their way up since urban and rural local 
government have been totally ignored in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when high energy costs started to impact the 
bottom line of the family of Crown corporations the 
government took immediate action and raised the rates charged 
to Saskatchewan people. 
 
But what did the families of this province receive to protect 
them from rising energy costs? $25 — $25, Mr. Speaker. So it’s 
$500 million for the government and $25 for Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a clear difference drawn between the 
government and the opposition on this point. The NDP believes 
tax dollars belong to the government. We believe tax dollars 
belong to the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — We believe the government should do 



March 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 271 

 

everything it can to leave more money in the hands of 
Saskatchewan families. Instead, the NDP uses the money for 
one thing — to make government bigger. 
 
This year’s budget incredibly includes spending $50 million to 
hire 550 more government employees — in just one year. That 
50 million is enough to raise the personal income tax exemption 
by $1,000 a person, which would mean a tax saving of $230 a 
family. But no, families will have to do without this year. There 
will be no relief from this government as it continues to sit on 
its $500 million election slush fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people have been curious about the changes 
the new Premier would bring to the face of government. Today 
we’ve seen it. His vision is to keep taxes high and to make 
government bigger. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I will have much more to say 
on this budget next week when we’ll examine each of those 
departments much more closely. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I 
would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Saskatoon Eastview: 
 

That the debate on the motion that this Assembly do now 
resolve itself to the Committee of Finance be resumed on 
Monday, April 2, 2001. 
 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:31. 
 
 


