















































Hansard: March 26, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 107 
 March 26, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of residents of the Cypress 
Hills constituency, and residents actually throughout the 
province who have signed this. 
 
The petition addresses their concerns about the implications of 
the Saskatchewan EMS (emergency medical services) 
development project report. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, was signed by residents of 
Tompkins, Webb, Stewart Valley, Swift Current, Regina, 
Qu’Appelle, and Gull Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish 
to present a petition signed by citizens concerned about 
conversion of paved highways back to gravel. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel; commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments; and to consult with local residents and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Briercrest and Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people in my home community who are concerned about the 
state of the regional hospital there. And the prayer of this 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the good people of 

Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the people of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are concerned about their community-based 
ambulance services, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

I so present on behalf of the good people of Trossachs, 
Bengough, Coronach, and Big Beaver. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petition has been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) it is hereby read and 
received: 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly 
regarding the centralization of ambulance services. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 10 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management): (a) for the year 1999, what was the 
total amount of fish taken from Saskatchewan lakes for 
reasons of personal and commercial fishing; and (b) for the 
year 1999, what was the total amount of restocking of fish 
that took place in Saskatchewan lakes. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have a second question. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 10 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of SERM again: (a) for the year 2000, what 
was the total amount of fish taken from Saskatchewan lakes 
for reasons of personal and commercial fishing; and (b) for 
the year 2000, what was the total amount of restocking of 
fish that took place in Saskatchewan’s lakes. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to introduce to 
you this afternoon and welcome to the Assembly, Chief Mel 
Isnana who is Chief of Standing Buffalo Dakota Nation. He has 
been chief for 19 years. He also informs me that although his 
band has lived in the Fort Qu’Appelle area since 1862, they 
have had historic problems being recognized as Canadians. That 
problem this year has been resolved and the Dakota Nations 



108 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

Standing Buffalo will sign . . . (inaudible) . . . to Treaty Four 
later this year. 
 
So please welcome the Chief Mel Isnana. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
also add my voice to the welcome to Chief Mel Isnana, with 
whom I’ve had some previous discussions, and he lives in the 
Standing Buffalo First Nations, which I might add is a very 
progressive community in my constituency. And I would also 
like to welcome Chief Mel Isnana to the Assembly here this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like add to the welcome that other members of the House have 
put forward to Chief Mel Isnana, Chief of Standing Buffalo 
First Nations. 
 
Welcome to the Assembly. We do hope that you enjoy the 
proceedings today and good luck in your endeavours. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as Minister 
of Aboriginal Affairs, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to 
welcome Chief Mel Isnana to the Legislative Assembly, and I 
look forward to going out and having further meetings 
regarding the Treaty Four and participating in the signing. 
 
And while I’m at it, I would like to introduce another member 
from Standing Buffalo Reserve. Sitting right directly behind the 
Chief in the Speaker’s Gallery is my intermediate ministerial 
assistant, Pearl Yuzicappi, a very proud member of Standing 
Buffalo Reserve and an excellent person who’s teaching me an 
awful lot. And I really appreciate her fine work. 
 
And I hope that everyone in the House will welcome both the 
Chief and Pearl to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
Assembly, a gentleman seated in your gallery, a Mr. Keith 
Brown of Trailtech Industries in Gravelbourg. Trailtech 
employs 80 to 100 people in the town of Gravelbourg, building 
trailers. And I hope all members of this Assembly will welcome 
Mr. Brown here today, one of the great entrepreneurs that 
makes rural Saskatchewan work. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of the House, I’d like to 
introduce a friend of mine, Deborah Bryson-Saraver from 
Humboldt. 
 
She’s in the city to attend the conference that’ll start later on 
today on If Gender Mattered . . . She wrote a paper on domestic 

abuse in rural Saskatchewan. I look forward to hearing her at 
the conference tomorrow. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Junior Achievement of Northern Saskatchewan Awards 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the pleasure 
this past Saturday evening of attending the Junior Achievement 
of Northern Saskatchewan Awards and banquet held in 
Saskatoon. The mission statement of Junior Achievers is to 
inspire and educate young Canadians to value free enterprise, 
understand business and economics, and develop 
entrepreneurial and leadership skills. 
 
This year marks the 24th year that Junior Achievement has 
offered the company program to the students of Saskatoon and 
area. The group also includes dedicated companies from Prince 
Albert and North Battleford. 
 
These young students have spent the last 23 weeks learning the 
fundamentals of business while developing their leadership and 
communication skills. All participants in Junior Achievers have 
certainly demonstrated their growth and proficiency in all these 
areas. 
 
Some of the awards that were handed out were the ESSO 
Teamwork Award, Salesperson of the Year, Most Valued 
President and Vice Presidents, Best First Year Achiever, Spirit 
of Junior Achiever Award, Shareholders Report of the Year, 
Production Excellence, SaskEnergy Educator Award, Most 
Improved Company, Overall Tradeshow Award, Global 
Television Commercial Contest, Professional Leadership 
Award, Canjac Award/Achiever of the Year, and Company of 
the Year. 
 
Company of the year was won by a group that was sponsored 
by the Rotary Club of North Battleford. The company was 
named Grassroots. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, March 
24, Junior Achievement of Northern Saskatchewan, including 
Saskatoon and area, North Battleford, and Prince Albert, held 
its Junior Achievement Business Hall of Fame Award 
ceremony in Saskatoon. A wonderful evening celebrating 
young people who are making a difference and being 
successful, right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
With the support of parents, businesses, volunteers, and 
educators, students have the opportunity to form a business 
corporation, produce and sell a product, keep sales records, 
marketing, and provide an annual report. Based on this work, 19 
outstanding winners were selected, each worthy of recognition. 
 
Our province is richer for the contributions of all those who are 
recognized and nominated. Unfortunately time does not permit 
me to name all of the winners but, Mr. Speaker, they cover 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 109 

 

every aspect of being entrepreneurial — from Salesperson of 
the Year, Brett Bates to company of the year, Grassroots. 
 
We should also salute the many Saskatchewan companies 
whose assistance makes these awards possible. This is quite a 
neighbourhood we live in, Mr. Speaker. My congratulations to 
all of the award winners, their sponsors, and junior 
achievement. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Burstall Hosts Provincial Junior 
Juvenile Curling Championships 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Burstall Curling 
Club was the recent host of the Saskatchewan Provincial Junior 
Juvenile Curling Championships, March 16 to 19 of this year. 
And 16 teams, coaches, parents, and fans from all over 
Saskatchewan came together in Burstall for that championship. 
 
Hosting an event such as this requires many hours of dedicated 
effort to ensure success. Now according to all reports, 
everything went extremely well and members of the host 
committee couldn’t have been happier. Some team members 
even commented about the quality of ice in Burstall, comparing 
it favourably to the ice that they curled on right here in Regina. 
The people of Burstall can take pride in the work carried out by 
their community in order to realize their accomplishments in 
hosting this very successful event. 
 
A little further south, Mr. Speaker, the Fox Valley senior boys 
curling team of Ryan Deis, Brendan Myers, David Bosch, and 
Colin Obritsch won the Southwest Athletic Conference District 
Curling Title in Cabri, earning them the right to represent the 
southwest at the provincial SHSAA (Saskatchewan High 
Schools Athletic Association) curling playdowns here in Regina 
March 1 to 3. The curling team achieved a fourth place finish at 
the provincials, and I would like to congratulate them on their 
achievement. And congratulations too, to their coaches, James 
Deis and Dean Schmitz. 
 
In the athletic realm, Mr. Speaker, Fox Valley continues to 
shine in a variety of sports. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Internet Services in Rural Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) television recently read a 
story on the general difficulty rural people in Canada have of 
getting quality Internet service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any community without access to the Internet 
economy and without the tools to function in that economy will 
eventually be marginalized. However, Mr. Speaker, CBC did 
find good rural Internet service somewhere in the country. Not 
in Alberta, Mr. Speaker; not even in Ontario, Mr. Speaker; but 
in Craik, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the CBC television program I’m talking about 
interviewed Mr. Thad Swidzinski of Craik who said during the 
program, and I quote: 

I think right now that our children, I can honestly say are 
on par with city schools. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is rising to the challenge. SaskTel’s 
99 per cent digitally switched telephone network can provide 
advanced telephoning services to all areas of the province, 
including high speed Internet capability to North Battleford, 
Lloydminster, Weyburn, Estevan, Yorkton, Swift Current, 
Humboldt, Tisdale, Nipawin, Melfort, Kindersley, Meadow 
Lake, Melville, and Moosomin, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our Crown corporation sector reinvests in Saskatchewan. And, 
Mr. Speaker, they don’t have access to service like that of 
SaskTel’s in the states that border along us. Which goes to 
show, Mr. Speaker, that strong Crown corporations make for a 
strong province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Women’s Secretariat Conference 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly today to inform all members of the House 
of a very important conference that is being hosted by the 
Women’s Secretariat. Mr. Speaker, the Women’s Secretariat is 
holding a conference entitled If Gender Mattered . . . Policy and 
Strategies to Advance Women’s Equality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the next couple of days women from all over 
the province will be joining together to discuss ways in which 
women in all walks of life can overcome some of the obstacles 
they face — be it family-related or work-related. 
 
There are a variety of workshops including violence against 
women, housing policies, and cultural equality for Aboriginal 
women, just to name a few. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to attending the conference and 
commend all of the organizers involved for all their hard work 
and dedication in advancing women’s issues. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drop-in Centre for Women Opens 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this Saturday I was 
happy to attend the opening of a new drop-in centre for women 
in Regina. The centre is called Visitation House. 
 
The Archdiocese of Regina has created this centre as a place for 
women where they can go for a visit, talk, have coffee, and find 
people willing to listen and help in whatever way they can. 
 
The name Visitation House is inspired by the account in the 
Gospel of Luke of the visit of Mary to her relative, Elizabeth — 
a story of women coming together out of mutual affection in 
order to provide mutual support. 
 
The centre then will be open for women with special needs: low 
income women, young mothers, women in transition, women 



110 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

who are coping with any number of problems, from violence to 
addiction to loneliness. The centre will be a place of quiet, of 
reflection, and of assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is known for our spirit of 
volunteerism. At least 22 volunteers will be working at the 
centre, working under the very capable direction of Cheryl 
Dudgeon, the executive director, and support worker, Theresa 
Schikowsky. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the Archdiocese of Regina, with 
special thanks to His Grace Archbishop Peter Mallon for his 
interest and support. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

RCMP Training Academy New Graduates 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning I had the special privilege of attending a very special 
swearing-in ceremony at the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) academy here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, graduating today as one of 23 new RCMP 
constables is a very special friend of ours Pat Santo, and the 
significance of today’s ceremony is the fact that just a week ago 
his daughter, Tracy Santo, graduated as an RCMP constable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at a father-daughter . . . last week I 
believe we had a mother and a daughter on the front page of the 
news — what it says is that individuals . . . parents and children 
can certainly work together as they pursue new careers. In this 
case, for Pat Santo he’s leaving the farm and now entered the 
area of police work and is scheduled to go to Chilliwack, BC 
(British Columbia). 
 
I want to extend this morning to both Pat and his daughter, 
Tracy, congratulations on having achieved a very special goal in 
their lives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PanCanadian Petroleum Flood Project in Weyburn 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A PanCanadian 
petroleum flood project in Weyburn has provided the basis of a 
major monitoring project which is designed . . . or pardon me 
. . . a monitoring project on the reduction of greenhouse gases. 
The monitoring project is designed to evaluate the first four 
years of CO2 injection at the enhanced recovery stage of oil. 
 
To date this project has Canadian, industrial, European funding, 
and growing international interest. It is estimated that the CO2 
project will result in an additional 120 million barrels of oil 
recovered, creating an estimated 3,000 additional person-years 
of employment and an estimated hundred million of additional 
royalty tax revenue for the province. 
 
Our obligation to rural Saskatchewan is strong, and with 
projects like this one we will remain on the road to success, Mr. 
Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Maintenance of Highways 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Minister of Highways. 
 
Madam Minister, I was pleased to read in the Throne Speech 
that the government will speed up the twinning of Highway No. 
1 West, the result of an emergency motion which I introduced 
in this legislature last spring. And I was also pleased to see the 
government promised to rebuild rural highways and to improve 
primary and regional road systems to handle heavy traffic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am anxious to see that budget and what kind of 
dollars the government will be allocating to make this all 
happen. 
 
I would like to ask about reference in the Throne Speech to the 
Highways and Transportation amendment Act and a broader 
truck route management strategy. Madam Minister, what is this 
strategy and what are your plans for its implementation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we were extremely 
pleased to receive the news release of the Canadian Auto 
Association complimenting us on the accelerated twinning of 
the No. 1. 
 
And I can assure the member opposite that Friday will come in 
due course. The Minister of Finance will stand up and deliver 
the best news Saskatchewan people have heard in a long time 
when it comes to our highways and transportation system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that the 
members will have absolutely nothing to complain about on 
Friday, Mr. Speaker. Because on Friday we’re going to 
announce that we’re going to fix the highways in the province 
of Saskatchewan; and we’re hopeful, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
hopeful that instead of complaining about potholes, we’re 
hoping that the opposition will be complaining about all the 
road construction that’ll take place this spring and summer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
are highways in the province which have been recently limited 
to an 8-tonne requirement by the Department of Highways, and 
farmers and businessmen who rely on trucking to move their 
products are affected by these restrictions as they have to find 
alternate routes. That costs them time and money. 
 
Now there’s much talk out in rural communities about 
Highways department’s plans to download alternate road 
building and maintenance costs onto the RM (rural 
municipality) with the development of truck routes, 
gravel-truck routes, that will run parallel to existing paved 
highways. 
 
Is that the real plan, Madam Minister? Instead of fixing the 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 111 

 

main paved road, the NDP (New Democratic Party) government 
was going to build another gravel road parallel to the paved 
road just for heavy vehicles? 
 
Madam Minister, is your department threatening RMs with 
gravel reversion of highways if they don’t go along with your 
alternate truck route plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
will know that we have thousands of kilometres of thin 
membrane surface highways in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Those roads were never built for the kind of heavy traffic that 
we’re seeing on our primary and secondary roads in the 
province of Saskatchewan as a result of deregulation and rail 
line abandonment in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we want to do is maintain as many dust-free surfaces in 
the province and we have entered into partnerships with rural 
municipalities for alternative truck routes. These are agreements 
— partnerships — with rural municipalities. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re helping to pay for those municipal roads. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Alternative Trucking Route Proposal 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the Minister of Highways. 
 
There are a number of businesses in the Vanguard-Gravelbourg 
area who are very upset about plans by the Department of 
Highways to build an alternate truck route running parallel to 
Highway 43. They understand the alternate route would be 
gravel while Highway 43 would remain a thin membrane 
surface with an 8-tonne maximum weight restriction. 
 
These businesses feel that it is not an acceptable solution to the 
problems with Highway 43. A gravel road is not an all-weather 
surface, meaning these businesses would not be able to haul 
during wet weather without damage to the road. 
 
On one hand you are going to have existing Highway 43, a thin 
membrane paved road already in really rough shape, and 
running beside it, you will have a grid road that businesses and 
farmers don’t want to use and can’t use in bad weather. 
 
Madam Minister, how do you explain to Saskatchewan people 
that this is efficient use of taxpayers’ dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. How I 
explain it, Mr. Speaker, is that we have seen a tremendous 
increase in the volume of truck traffic in the province of 
Saskatchewan, by over 900 per cent, as a result of the changes 
that have taken place with rail-line abandonment and 
deregulation. 
 
Now our province does not have the fiscal capacity to repair all 
8,000 kilometres of thin membrane surface. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
what we do have the capacity to do, is to keep as many of those 

thin membrane surfaces as dust free as possible so that light 
traffic, school buses, and ambulances can get over those 
surfaces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are entered into partnerships with rural municipalities. We 
are cost sharing those partnerships, and the municipalities are 
given the permission to allow heavier traffic onto those roads if 
the farm property or the business property abuts those roads, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that’s responsible government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Also to the Minister of Highways, Mr. 
Speaker, Trailtech Industries of Gravelbourg is one such 
industry that employees 80 to 100 in the town of Gravelbourg 
that finds your alternate gravel idea unacceptable. Trailtech is a 
manufacturer of trailers. They have to haul their new trailers to 
markets down Highway 43 but would exceed the weight 
restrictions under the new plan. They couldn’t use the new 
gravel truck route either because gravel causes damage to the 
brand new trailers. 
 
Because sections of Highway 43 have already been turned to 
gravel, Trailtech has been choosing to take a longer alternate 
route around by Moose Jaw to hit Highway 1, adding 
considerable transportation expense. 
 
Madam Minister, this idea is not meeting favour with area 
residents and businesses. Will you go back to the drawing board 
and come up with a better solution? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I have said, is that trucks with 
gross weights of over 8,000 kilograms will be directed to use 
alternative routes. But, Mr. Speaker, RMs will be given the 
right to issue permits to those businesses and farms that abut the 
Highway 43, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are trying to save our thin membrane surfaces. 
We’re going to be repairing Highway 43 this summer. We’re 
going to add additional repairs to Highway 43 next year. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re cost-sharing the alternate truck route with 
the RMs located in that area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Just before the member puts his question, I 
would ask him once again to phrase his question, as well as his 
preamble, through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
question also for the Minister of Highways. Mr. Speaker, 
whether you talk to the trucking industry, businesses who rely 
on trucking, or the farming community, you will hear that 
gravel roads and heavy loads don’t mix. 
 
Trailtech Industries sends 70 per cent of their production west. 
If their trucking costs are going to continue to increase 
dramatically because of this government’s back-to-gravel plan, 
then they will just pick up and move closer to their main 



112 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

market. 
 
Bickner Trucking of Vanguard is another local company that 
finds this gravel truck route idea unreasonable as time, fuel 
costs, and vehicle depreciation will increase for them. Farmers 
will see a substantial increase in transportation costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, is building gravel truck routes, 
downloading road responsibilities onto the RMs, and forcing 
businesses to leave rural Saskatchewan your idea of rural 
revitalization? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the opposition 
is the opposition of doom and gloom and negativity and sour 
grapes and as . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . a bunch of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we know that Highway 
43 takes a lot of oil down that road as well as a lot of gravel, 
plus there’s a lot of grain traffic on that road, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Rural residents have told us that they would like to have 
dust-free surfaces in their . . . in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We know that we’ve seen a 900 per cent increase in the volume 
of truck traffic as a result of rail-line abandonment, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’re trying to address that. We will see a historic 
amount of money announced in Friday’s budget to fix the 
highways in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re going to be fixing the highways in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to have so much construction that people 
will be annoyed because of all of the construction. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re hoping that they’re not going to be annoyed 
about all the potholes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 

SaskPower Rates 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
is for the Minister Responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of confusion in the wake of the rate 
review panel’s announcement last Friday, as regards the impact 
of their recommendations on the average Saskatchewan family. 
SaskPower officials, however, are reported to be saying that the 
recommended residential increase for Saskatchewan families 
will be in the range of 5.3 to 6 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you confirm these are the rate hikes you’re 
considered? What residential rate hike will you be 
recommending to your cabinet colleagues? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

First of all, I do want, again, to take the opportunity to thank the 
rate review panel for the good work that they’ve done. 
 
And I want to again remind the members opposite and the 
public of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that SaskPower has had 
their rates frozen since 1996, Mr. Speaker. That’s five years. I 
don’t know what other private utility, Mr. Speaker, has had 
rates frozen for five years. 
 
You can look across the border, Mr. Speaker, into Alberta 
where there’s . . . they’ve seen rate increases in the energy 
sector of up to 250 per cent, Mr. Speaker — 250 per cent. And 
you can look into the United States and to California, Mr. 
Speaker, where rates have been there and they’ve not been able 
to provide a supply of power, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be making recommendations to the 
cabinet and cabinet will making a decision as it pertains to the 
rate review panel’s recommendations shortly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it was a simple question. The 
question was: is this minister proposing to his cabinet 
colleagues an increase to residential customers in the province 
of Saskatchewan of 5.3 to 6 per cent? 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, later this afternoon we understand the 
minister will be announcing his plan for a SaskPower rebate. 
We understand that he plans to announce a one-time $25 rebate 
to SaskTel customers, Mr. Speaker, to go along with the $25 
per person SaskEnergy rebate — from a government, Mr. 
Speaker, that has taken hundreds of millions of dollars in 
windfall energy profits over the last number of months. 
 
Mr. Minister, this isn’t going to provide much relief to 
Saskatchewan families. But will you at least take the 
Saskatchewan Party’s advice and provide this rebate directly to 
SaskPower customers on SaskPower bills? Will you make that 
commitment today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, if the member 
doesn’t understand, the recommendation comes from the 
independent rate review panel, not from myself. So the cabinet 
will make a decision based on the independent panel’s 
recommendation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote, if I could though, from the 
Gazette-Post-News, Carnduff, of Monday, March 19, 2001 in 
which — and I quote from the Leader of the Opposition — 
Hermanson said, he said: 
 

We want to make sure that these companies (referring to 
the Crown corporations) continue to flourish and be a 
significant part of Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I say, Mr. Speaker, in light of that statement from 
the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, is it not reasonable, 
Mr. Speaker, that SaskPower and our utilities should be allowed 
to compete here in Saskatchewan at rates that are reasonably . . . 
that are reasonable compared to almost any other jurisdiction in 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 113 

 

the world, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Liquor and Gaming. Mr. Speaker, last year the Provincial 
Auditor uncovered $1.7 million in gaming revenue that had 
been improperly misspent by SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian 
Gaming Authority). At a news conference in November, the 
minister admitted that the total figure may come to even more 
than 1.7 million once all the examination of past years is 
complete. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, have you completed this 
examination and what is the total amount of gaming revenue 
that was misspent by SIGA? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 
member opposite would point out, the auditor in his November 
15 report of 2000 suggested a number of actions that would be 
taken to fundamentally look at providing open, accountable, 
and transparent measures within the Saskatchewan Indian 
Gaming Authority. 
 
Many actions have been taken and we know that progress is 
good. And, as she would know, we have now SIGA that has the 
Provincial Auditor as their auditor of record. SIGA will publish 
an annual report which includes the financial statements and the 
payee lists. 
 
Liquor and Gaming Authority, in conjunction with the 
Provincial Auditor and SIGA — now with a new board makeup 
and a new acting chief executive officer in place — are looking 
at every receipt possible to be able to bring forward the 
financial reports shortly, Mr. Speaker, and to show exactly what 
the amount that they would be owing to the province of 
Saskatchewan will be. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at that 
same news conference last November the minister vowed to 
recover all the money that was misspent by SIGA. 
 
Madam Minister, what steps have you taken to recover this 
money and how much has been recovered to date? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Before you answer the question, I 
would once again ask the members when they are putting their 
questions to put it through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as the member opposite would know, many measures have been 
put in place. Compliance on all of the directives that the 
Provincial Auditor gave to us have been worked on and are 
being put in place by a new SIGA Board that is now meeting 
and is doing very well and having good progress on these 

issues. 
 
The amount that was mentioned, as we said, was an interim 
amount and that we would have to, in detail, with the auditors, 
with SIGA, look at every receipt and every amount payable to 
the provincial government. It would be made to us. No money 
would be out of pocket from the taxpayers of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
To date, we are now taking that money off the instalments that 
are due to the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 
through the FNF (First Nations Fund) Fund, Mr. Speaker. And 
we will, over that time and once we know the complete picture, 
recover the entire amount, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at that 
same news conference in November, the minister said if 
necessary she would withhold the FSIN’s (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) share of gaming profits until the 
money was all repaid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, the questions are simple: how 
much money have you recovered and how much money have 
you withheld from the FSIN? 
 
The Speaker: — Just before we go . . . proceed members, I 
have asked repeatedly that you address the Chair in questions. 
One of the . . . I think it might be helpful if I explain to 
members that if you ask the Chair the question, as opposed to 
asking somebody on the side opposite the question, or referring 
to somebody on the side opposite the question, that would be 
helpful to the debate. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I 
mentioned before, since the November reporting, much, much 
work has been done: compliance on all the issues the auditor 
presented, the new board in place, and an amount that she 
indicates was then established as the amount owing. 
 
Until we could go through the detailed analysis that is now 
underway and very soon will be completed, the amount that will 
be put back through the withholding of the moneys that are 
owed to the FNF Fund will be, Mr. Speaker, the complete 
amount owing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
casino operating agreement between the government and SIGA 
runs out at the end of this month, Mr. Speaker. Yet it seems the 
government has made very little progress in recovering the $1.7 
million in misspending that the auditor uncovered last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when are you going to recover this money and 
what is the current status of the government’s contract with 
SIGA to operate four casinos in this province? 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you very much for the attempt. I think 
all you had to do was change one pronoun now, from you to 
she, and we will have it perfect. 
 



114 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I may be missing 
something on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, but it seems 
when you ask a question and you get the answer, you should 
change the subsequent questions to reflect the answer that’s 
been given to you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The answer is the full amount is recoverable, Mr. Speaker. We 
are taking from the quarterly payments to First Nations the 
amount owing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I would point out, Mr. Speaker, she is totally neglecting to 
mention all of the work that’s been done since November 15, 
that indicates that good progress is being made: acceptance and 
implementation of the new board structure, with the seven 
member board, its three members from Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming nominees and four from the FSIN; training and 
orientation programs for the board; acceptance and 
implementation of all of the auditor’s reports, our auditor is the 
auditor of record for SIGA. And the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m telling them . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time’s elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Recruitment Of Nurses 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my question is 
for the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, on Friday you 
confirmed what most people in Saskatchewan already know — 
that when it comes to health care, the NDP talks big and then 
delivers nothing. 
 
In the 1999 election platform, the NDP promised to hire 500 
new nurses. But when we asked the minister last Friday how 
many more nurses were practising since the election, he didn’t 
have a clue. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve had the weekend to think about it, your 
department has time to inform you. Can you tell us how many 
more nurses are practising in Saskatchewan today than in 1999? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think last week they were 
having a little bit of trouble with the lemons. I think this week 
it’s the chokecherries. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In 1999 in September we had an election 
campaign where we said we are going to find more health 
providers for our system. That’s just over about a year and a 
half ago. And we’re only into our four-year term, or five-year 
term a year and a half. We’re continuing to work on that 
particular promise. 
 
What we are talking about is health providers in the whole 
system. We have done many things related to nurses. We’re 
looking at all of the various technical jobs. We’ve recruited 

more doctors. We’re working with the communities, with the 
professions, with all of the people so that we can continue to 
build on the best system in Canada. 
 
And what we are doing is not being helped by . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on a 
CBC radio interview on the weekend you said, and I quote: 
 

I’m not sure if we have full details on the numbers. What 
we do know is that there are more nurses that are registered 
with the SRNA. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the answer is not that there’s zero new nurses 
practising in Saskatchewan. According to statistics from the 
SRNA’s (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association) annual 
report, there’s actually 48 fewer nurses practising here right 
now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious that the minister is spending too much 
of his time coming up with very sick little one-liners, and 
instead should be concentrating on the statistics that his 
department should know. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, instead of the little citrus fruit 
jokes that you’ve been kind of practising all summer, why don’t 
you come up with a real plan for how you’re going to meet the 
needs of Saskatchewan health care and the nurses who are 
overworked? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I was going to talk about 
quince, but I’m not sure they understand what that is. 
 
But what I’m going to say today is that in 1999 those members 
opposite came forward with an election platform that said, no 
increase in health spending other than the rate of inflation. 
 
If we had stuck with that amount, we would not be anywhere 
near where we are with the revenues that we have which apply 
to the health system. And so I want the public of Saskatchewan 
to realize what kinds of promises those people made. We do not 
want them anywhere near this side of the House and we will 
make sure that that never happens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 202 — The Holocaust Memorial Day Act 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I move that a Bill to recognize Yom haShoah as Holocaust 
Memorial Day in Saskatchewan be now introduced and read a 
first time. 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 115 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Question of Privilege 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members, yesterday 
there was a question of privilege which was brought to the 
House — on Friday, the day last, there was a question of 
privilege presented to the House. 
 
I have been doing some careful consideration of the question 
and it is my intent to bring down a ruling sometime before 5 
o’clock this afternoon. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Jones, seconded by Mr. McCall, 
and the proposed amendment moved by Mr. Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are a couple 
of items that I would like to attend to before I move further into 
the Throne Speech, and I do want to just backtrack slightly as 
well to remind members of where we were headed. 
 
First of all I want to say that we very often . . . we congratulate 
our own members and we thank them for their work. But every 
morning when I come to this Legislative Building I am 
welcomed by the people at the door, and I think all members in 
the Assembly are welcomed, very kindly and thoughtfully by 
the staff who are at the door. And I want to thank them for their 
bright faces and the way they light up the day and start our days 
as we move in here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was an item around the use of Internet that 
was discussed the other day. And one of the things that I’m 
really happy about in our Throne Speech and the direction that 
we’re going is trying to make more access to the Internet. Mr. 
Speaker, one of the members opposite in one of our recent 
debates was panning and mocking out the whole issue of the 
Internet and talking about coming up, jolt upright in bed, and 
being astounded by the fact that maybe there was going to be 
Internet service while his farm was going bankrupt. 
 
While the mocking out was kind of fun, and I’m sure it was 
done playfully. But, Mr. Speaker, I think I’m a little concerned 
about that member from Kindersley. And I’m wondering, Mr. 
Speaker, if he has read his own document from the Sask Party 
annual meeting where the constituency of Kindersley put in a 
resolution to their party that a Saskatchewan Party government 
would implement policies to encourage the local processing of 
commodities and direct Internet marketing of agriculture 
products. That was carried, Mr. Speaker, at their own 
convention, and the minister from Kindersley should be aware 
of that. I suspect one of these days he’s going to come bolt 

upright in his bed and think, oh my goodness, maybe the leader 
was thinking about Kindersley when he was talking about 
quality candidates needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what century is he living in? We need Internet 
service to give quality marketing ability to our rural province, to 
our rural constituents. And, Mr. Speaker, our government will 
make sure that that access is available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing that I had just started into were the 
developments in Northern Saskatchewan. Some tremendous 
developments there in terms of forestry, in terms of industry. 
Some very exciting support in terms of partnerships with First 
Nations and Metis people. And our government is going to 
continue to work on that whole area and try and build up the 
province in this manner. 
 
There is a tremendous future for this province, Mr. Speaker, and 
I think we catch a glimpse of that in this Throne Speech. And 
I’m sure that even members opposite would see that if they 
would give up their deep and abiding envy for everything 
Albertan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know it’s the SP’s (Saskatchewan Party) job to 
oppose, but I must say that the high level of negativity that I 
keep hearing from the members opposite when they speak about 
Saskatchewan, appalls me. 
 
The member from Lloydminster speculated the other day that 
maybe he made the wrong decision in moving back to 
Saskatchewan. Maybe he did. Maybe his negativity and his lack 
of vision won’t allow him to work with the powerful, 
life-giving spirit of Saskatchewan. Maybe he just can’t see the 
possibilities. Maybe the bright, deregulated, and very, very 
expensive lights of Alberta have blinded him to the beauty and 
the possibility of Saskatchewan. Or maybe he’s just stuck in the 
negative, gloom and doom mentality of his party, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
A few years back, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I read 
a book by . . . a series of books by C. S. Lewis, called The 
Chronicles of Narnia. In the final book of the series entitled The 
Last Battle, the end of the book, some of the people are looking 
around and all they can see is dirt and manure and darkness. But 
there are other people in exactly the same location, who see 
flowers, blue skies, beauty, and other people around them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this story illustrates the difference in 
viewpoints. The members on this side of the House look at 
Saskatchewan and we see possibility. We see a future that is 
bright for all of the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, we listen to the people on the 
other side of the House and what we hear is negativity, we hear 
gloom and doom most of the time. No hope, no possibility, only 
Alberta. It’s hard to believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now I’ve got to say there are exceptions. And I’m very 
thankful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for one of the exceptions we got 
the other day because I like when we hear critical concerns 
raised. 



116 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

And I have to say the member from Indian Head-Milestone had 
a couple of very good criticisms in his speech the other day. 
They were constructive; they were around some of our farm 
support programs. And I think those constructive criticisms can 
be taken into account by our minister when he’s working with 
the department to try and develop good programs. 
 
Now it was a little confusing for some of us on this side who 
care about rural Saskatchewan, but aren’t experts in the field. 
And I think the thing that threw me most was the real fast 
switches between bushels and dollars that was happening over 
there. And I’m sure that if more people could convert bushels 
into dollars the way the member did, they’d be very happy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this side of the House we see a bright 
and prosperous future for this province. The programs that are 
beginning to be outlined, that we’re catching a glimpse of in the 
Throne Speech show that we are living toward a vision of hope 
and possibility. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I support the unamended Throne Speech. I 
am convinced that, moved by the spirit of Saskatchewan, 
working together with the committed people of this province, 
the people who love this province, we will be successful in 
building a wonderful and prosperous future for all the people of 
our beloved province. 
 
And so, therefore, I speak in favour of the Throne Speech, 
unamended. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First 
off, there’s a couple of things I’d like to do. Is my speaker 
working? I just wonder because I notice I still don’t have a 
nameplate, and it’s been nine months today since I was elected. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well I was 
suggesting if it was a cost overrun I would chip in on it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the first order of business is I would like 
to congratulate the Speaker on his election to the Chair, and to 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for your election as Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’m very pleased today to rise and speak and enter the debate on 
the Speech from the Throne. But as this is my first opportunity 
to rise and speak in favour of Wood River and in favour of 
Saskatchewan, I figure I should talk a little bit about how and 
where I got here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I finished high school in 1961. And if you think 
back to those days, there was no jobs. It’s kind of reminiscent 
of today under an NDP socialist government. So I also had to 
leave this province to find a job. And I joined the military. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I first joined the military it was a job; that’s 
what I needed is work. But then I got involved in it and it 
became a career. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I went through 
my career in the military, I became a fighter pilot — and for 
those that don’t understand that, it’s one that flies fighter 
aircraft. 
 
And part of my duties, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a fighter pilot 
was I was part of a defensive structure in the free world to 

defend against the spread of communism. Now isn’t that ironic, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? Here we spend millions of dollars — 
billions worldwide — put lives on the line to stop and arrest the 
spread of communism, and lo and behold, here in Saskatchewan 
we vote in a party that has the same ideologies. It just doesn’t 
make sense to me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my grandparents 
homesteaded in southern Saskatchewan, circa the 1912 time 
frame. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when they arrived then, there 
was no roads, no railroads, no schools, no hospitals. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, 82 years later I retired back to that same area, within 
10 miles, and guess what? The railroad is pulled, the roads are 
in a shambles, the hospital is closed, and the school is closed. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s progress under a socialist system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I get often asked why I entered politics. 
Well part of it is just what I have talked about. But another 
relates back to what I suggested about in the defence of the 
spread of an ideology. And we have an ideology that 
government as a whole should own and control the means of 
production, distribution, and exchange of product. I totally 
disagree with that. An economy controlled by the government 
rather than business, I totally disagree with. 
 
I read a comment . . . I read an article in the paper with the 
leadership campaign for the Leader of the NDP race and the 
quote went something like, “We need to grasp back the 
economy from business and put it back in the hands of 
government.” Mr. Speaker, I totally, totally disagree with that 
philosophy. 
 
All we have to do is look at the record of the government 
handling business. Does NST (NST Network Services of 
Chicago) ring a bell? Guyana? Channel Lake? Spudco 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company)? That’s 
the record of this government being in business. 
 
(14:30) 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s appalling to me when we look at 
members opposite that wish to invest outside of the province. It 
strikes me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that here we have a socialist 
government that doesn’t even want to invest in a socialist 
province. 
 
Another thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I am very much 
against, is when we start losing freedoms. And when I say we 
lose freedoms — forced union membership and monopolies 
they take away a basic right of freedom. 
 
Some years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was a report 
commissioned by the NDP government or NDP-CCF (New 
Democratic Party-Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) of 
the day called the Stabler report. It was a paper on the 
urbanization of rural Saskatchewan, and today I believe that that 
has been used as a manifesto for members opposite. 
 
To me it’s very scary. Because in this you look at the will to 
socialize, centralize, urbanize, and demoralize. If you look at 
the acronym for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s SCUD. And 
we’re all, we’re all familiar from the, from the Middle East war 
the infamous missile the Scud. And not unlike the missile, this 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 117 

 

government is going with no guidance and it’s an irritant but 
not a real threat. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all agree — everyone of us agree — 
the number one resource that we have in this province and in 
fact any province is people. Why are we chasing them out? 
 
Roughly in the late ’20s we had 1 million people in this 
province, and today we have, basically, exactly the same. Zero 
progress, and basically we’re chasing people out. 
 
I’ll give you an example of how and why this . . . not why it’s 
done, but how it’s done. Some of my colleagues have heard me 
use this phrase, this explanation before. We in Saskatchewan 
raise 1.5 million head of feeder cattle, and you raise them to the 
point where they’re shipped off to feedlots for finishing. And 
we ship out 750,000 out of this province. You have to ask 
yourself why. 
 
Now along with shipping out the cattle from this province, 
guess what? We ship out the grain to feed the cattle also outside 
of the province. Now not only that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
who follows the loads of grain outside the province is our 
young men and women to go someplace else to feed those cattle 
the Saskatchewan grain outside of our province. It just doesn’t 
make sense to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now I don’t know, I 
really don’t know, who members opposite can blame that on. 
We hear the blame on anything and everything, and that’s one 
I’m not sure where they can lay the blame. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about my 
constituency of Wood River. There’s an awful lot of history 
down in that Wood River area. A lot of natural beauty and 
unlimited potential if we had the right direction. 
 
The area of Wood Mountain was home to Sitting Bull and his 
treks north to Canada, also over to Willow Bunch — steeped in 
history. The Wood Mountain Rodeo is the longest continuous 
rodeo in the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It started in 1890 and 
is still going strong today. We have a number of fascinating 
items in the constituency — the petroglyphs at St. Victor, the 
Grasslands Park, the Frenchman River Valley. We have a 
diverse area from the oil fields of Shaunavon to the coalfields of 
Coronach. The topography is rolling and it’s got a lot of natural 
beauty. We just have to look at doing something with it and not 
use the SCUD principle as I talked about earlier. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, tourism is a huge part of the economy of 
this province or could be a huge part of the economy. 
 
In the ’50s — and I won’t give you an exact date — but the 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from Fir 
Mountain in those days, he got up in the House and he spoke 
about tourism south of where my home is at Fir Mountain, and 
it’s a hill that’s actually sinking into the ground — thus called 
the sinking hill. He announced it in the House and said this is 
one of the greatest tourist possibilities that we have in southern 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to this day I can use 
the exact same words because nothing has been done — zero. 
Here we have a lot of potential and no will to do anything. 
 
What’s one of the biggest impediments to this? Highways. No 
infrastructure to get to some of these wonderful sights. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition talked 
of tourism the other day and how it’s not just the people that are 
coming to these sites and going back . . . are not going to come 
back, but they’re going home, and they’re telling their friends, 
and telling their friends, and we’re losing just a tremendous 
amount of tourism potential just because one person’s had a bad 
experience. 
 
Highway 18. And we’ve heard an awful lot about Highway 18 
last year, but I personally have witnessed vehicles coming from 
the south and hitting Highway 18 — people with new 
motorhomes, fifth wheels — and they hit Highway 18, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and they turn around and go home. Now these 
are not the only people that we’re missing out on; it’s all of 
their friends, relatives, and to whomever they speak. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can attest to how bad Highway 18 was. I, 
over two elections, had the opportunity to travel that road quite 
extensively. We have heard some rhetoric about it but I’m here 
to tell you that a lot of it is true. One day I was driving and I 
personally witnessed four ducks swimming in a pothole on 
Highway 18. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the embellishment that came out was 
from one of my NDP cohorts in the area. He says yes, but when 
you drove there they flew away, they didn’t dive. And that is 
true. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the opportunity last session to spend 
a couple of days in the House, and I did bring up the fact that it 
was more good news for the NDP government. The good 
people of Val Marie, Bracken, Orkney, and Climax fixed the 
road for the government. And they did one heck of a good job, I 
might add. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s always 
some sad stories with the highways. We talk about the four 
lane, and twinning the four lane, and I applaud that. But one of 
the very sad stories from my hometown is a lady that was killed 
as a direct result of the road. And it was the only daughter of 
Ken and Roberta Fraser. And it was a water-filled pothole in the 
road, and she hit it, lost control of the vehicle, and was fatally 
injured. 
 
That’s a very sad situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, speaking about 
our roads. 
 
Another example that I use is right at my hometown, and it was 
two people from Las Vegas just out on a tour. And they hit a 
pothole and ripped something out on the bottom of their car, 
and their car was a little Saturn. And when the individual 
stopped to give him a hand — which is very common in rural 
Saskatchewan; you always stop and help somebody out — the 
first thing that they said, the very first thing was, where can I 
find a Saturn dealer and where can I get on a good road? Well 
both of them turned out to be in Medicine Hat. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I very much applaud the money that’s 
going into highways that’s been announced, and we’ll see just 
how much on Friday in the budget, I guess. But what’s very 
important to me is where the rubber meets the road — how 



118 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

much is going to go to the surface of the roads? Not for 
administration, not regurgitating the money system back and 
forth and playing games with the dollars — how much is where 
the rubber meets the road? And that’s what I’m waiting to see 
in the budget on Friday. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this concept of the dual roads, the 
heavy-haul road — we spoke about it in question period — I 
find it, I find it just amazing; we don’t have money for so many 
things but we can build a parallel road. 
 
Now there’s two things that I personally see that comes from 
this, is, is it a plan to off-load that onto the RMs? Is it a total 
off-loading scheme? Or — or — is it a plan to give the residents 
of rural Saskatchewan a choice of what road they want to drive 
on with the potholes? That I’m not sure yet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I, like my colleagues on this side and probably all 
colleagues in the House, spend a lot of time in my constituency 
listening to people. And I think that’s one thing that we on this 
side of the House have a very strong propensity for, is listening 
to our people and listening to their views. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, agriculture, again, is one of the 
biggest issues in my constituency. We all have stories about 
AIDA (Agriculture Income Disaster Assistance) and I just have 
to give you a couple of my views on it, or what happened in our 
constituency. 
 
There’s a lot of cheques that have been received, and two weeks 
or three weeks later is another letter saying, pay back your 
money. Not only that, pay interest on the money that we gave 
you. I suggested in consultation with one of my constituents, he 
should write back and say, if you want the money back, you can 
get it from the bank, you can get it from the oil company, you 
can get it from the seed dealer, you can get it from the fertilizer 
dealer. Because that’s where the money. 
 
So maybe it should be the AIDA people in Winnipeg or Ottawa 
getting it back from these companies rather than from the 
individual farmer. 
 
But how foolish some of the aspects of AIDA are. One of my 
constituents had a question from the AIDA office and said, you 
have an error in your AIDA form. Said, why? He said, well on 
page 3 you said you sold no. 3 wheat, but on page 1 you said 
you put no. 1 into the ground. That’s not possible. That’s how 
much the people in AIDA offices know about agriculture. 
 
And another one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I thought was 
extremely odd was one AIDA form was held up because the 
individual did not include death certificates for his calves that 
he had lost in the spring. 
 
And what do we have in the Throne Speech to help out this 
issue? We have the cover crop program, the CCP (Conservation 
Cover Program). I think we should have called it the corporate 
cover crop program, because we saw a lot of hockey sweaters in 
the past with that on, which is CCCP. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the opportunity this weekend to talk 
with an awful lot of my constituents about the cover crop 
program. And for the benefit of members opposite, I would like 

to give them just a few of the comments I received from my 
constituents. These are not my words; these are from my 
constituents, who actually are farmers and ranchers. 
 
A farce, a joke, a slap in the face. One said that absolutely 
nothing would have been better than that. Who was it done for? 
Was it done for the urban people to make voters in urban areas 
make the government look like they’re doing something for 
rural Saskatchewan? Tokenism, in other words. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had one person, one person that I spoke 
to said, it all helps. And I agree with him. It all helps. But he 
also said, I can’t even call it a step in the right direction. He said 
it’s not big enough to be a step in the right direction. He said 
it’s a lean in the right direction, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
think that’s what we should have . . . members opposite should 
be doing more of, is leaning in the right direction. 
 
(14:45) 
 
It’s no wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why rural Saskatchewan 
feels abandoned by the federal and provincial governments. 
Here we have — and we just heard it just recently again — 
Highspeed Internet. The buzzword out there now, Mr. Speaker, 
is, no money for seed but money for speed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to put it in perspective, relate it back to my 
flying days. What the CCP program does for farmers, I’m going 
to equate it with, Mr. Deputy Speaker, flying over the North 
Atlantic in a fighter aircraft, two-seat if somebody wants to 
come with me. And you’re across the North Atlantic, icebergs 
below you — certain death if you have to eject out of the 
airplane or if you crash. And for some reason you have a fuel 
leak. Now you are in trouble, not unlike our farmers. So you’re 
going along and your options are down to nothing. 
 
Now, out of nowhere comes a saviour, and in my case in the 
airplane, the saviour says, we’re going to give you gas. And so 
you’ve got some hope. Fuel gauge is going down, certain death, 
but you’ve got hope. All of a sudden in comes a saviour and, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my airplane he gives me five gallons of 
gas. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, certain death is there but 40 
miles down the road. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what do we get out of members 
opposite? We debated it last week. And what did I hear: we’re 
going to send a strongly worded letter to the Prime Minister of 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, can’t you just see this? I have a visual of 
this. The Prime Minister of Canada just shaking in his boots 
because he received a strongly worded letter from the Premier 
of Saskatchewan. I’m sure he’ll run over to his Finance minister 
and his Ag minister and say, give them what they want because 
I am so afraid of this letter. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, another big concern in my 
constituency, and we hear about it on a daily basis in the media 
and throughout the province, is health. Once the hospitals were 
closed in rural Saskatchewan — 52 — but in my area there was 
a number closed. And it doesn’t seem correct to me. Here we’ve 
closed hospitals; we all agree we have an aging population, and 
yet we’re closing senior care homes. 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 119 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll be speaking more about it later this 
week because I have a meeting Wednesday night, but the 
Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia is slated to be closed. And we’re 
closing beds and yet we have an aging population. 
 
The people I met with the other day said, what are we supposed 
to do with our family that’s in there, our loved ones? The 
answer is: you farm them out. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think most of us when kids played 52 
pickup with a deck of cards. That’s what we’re now doing with 
our seniors. You go zap with a deck of cards, and wherever it 
falls that’s where you send your loved one. I totally disagree 
with that philosophy and I totally disagree with that policy. And 
we’ll be talking more about the Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia 
later. 
 
CCCP. Scud policy. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the EMS report. Here’s something 
that I just can’t comprehend. The citizens of Val Marie, a 
number of years ago, started an ambulance service because they 
had nothing. And an individual that was the strong backer of the 
ambulance — he was one that was injured down in the hills, 
had to be loaded into a back of a car and drove to Swift Current 
— so he was the backer of starting an ambulance. 
 
So the community bought an ambulance, funded the ambulance, 
funded the drivers. The support they get from the provincial 
government is a pittance in the aid of communications. And 
guess what the EMS report recommends? That they take this 
away. I don’t know how anybody could stand up and support 
that taking away a facility that was bought, paid for, and run by 
the local community. But that’s what’s in the report, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
We talk about, we talk about waiting lists. And there’s games 
played with waiting lists, there’s no doubt about it. But until 
you have to deal with a person that’s been on a waiting list for 
two years, it’s just rhetoric. But when you deal with it, that if 
somebody’s been waiting two years, it’s very difficult to 
comprehend in this day and age, in this province for somebody 
would have to wait that long. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s something that’s a bit of a 
mystery to me. We have facilities for some of our senior 
citizens in my constituency whereby if you make a certain 
amount of money, you pay a certain level of fee in the facility; 
if you don’t make as much money, you pay another level. Now 
I think there’s a name for that, Mr. Speaker, and I just can’t 
figure out what that name is. 
 
And also, also, we have people from my constituency that are 
going to North Dakota for MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging) 
because they can afford it. We have people going to Rochester 
because they can afford it. Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think 
there’s a name for that also. If you can afford, you can go; if 
you can’t afford, you stay. I think it’s a number called two-tier 
system. 
 
We’ve been living in this two-tiered system for a number of 
years, trying to be masked and hid over by members opposite. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, another one of the concerns in my 
constituency — and it’s a very strong and very real concern — 
is cell coverage. And I had an opportunity to write to the 
minister requesting a review of cell coverage in the Wood River 
area. The answer I get: it’s a business decision made by 
SaskTel. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I already suggested to you what the 
business dealings of this government are like. I don’t think we 
want to go there. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the more we depopulize rural 
Saskatchewan, the more need there is for good telephone 
coverage, and telephone coverage being cell coverage. We take 
away all of the facilities, we take away infrastructure, now we 
have no way of communicating. And I think that’s absolutely 
deplorable. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I look at the potential in Wood River, and 
there is some. The power plant at Coronach. They estimate 
they’ve got a 200 years supply of coal for generating power. 
What do we do here? We tinker with buying it from Wyoming. 
Even the supporters of that side of the House had to not support 
any longer after they started hauling in coal which was taking 
jobs away from Saskatchewan people right down in the south 
part of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a demand for power all over North 
America. There’s a demand for power in Saskatchewan. I 
understand that we on occasion buy power. And yet we have 
the capability, we have everything in place to provide all the 
power that this province would need. And what do we do? We 
invest out of province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, speaking of power, the minister said 
Friday — and he did say again today — that power rates have 
been frozen since 1996. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would 
hope that he talks to the person that’s billing my power because 
I can assure you that my power bill has not been frozen since 
1996. It has gone up substantially. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another bright spot that we have within 
our constituency. I talked about the cattle leaving the province. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a few entrepreneurial individuals 
got together and started Red Coat Feeders, which I’m very 
happy to say officially opened about two months ago in 
Hazenmore, Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this was done in spite of 
government. And I would like to suggest to everyone in this 
House that the biggest problem they had with the Red Coat 
Feeders all came from government agencies — not the money 
— government agencies. 
 
And I have one that again baffles me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
When the feedlot is on a north-facing slope, at a fairly decent 
angle on a north-facing slope, and part of the criteria from 
SERM is it has to be bermed. So the three sides were bermed 
and the expert come out and said, no I’m sorry, it’s not finished 
because the south side has to be bermed. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I don’t know, maybe I’m missing something but I 
don’t know when water started rolling uphill. 
 



120 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

In other words, there’s no common sense used in any of the 
planning in any of the government departments — absolutely 
no common sense — and that is an impediment to expanding 
any industry in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Throne Speech does absolutely 
nothing for the constituency of Wood River. The Throne 
Speech indicated policies would create a vision for 
Saskatchewan. I suggest the vision is in the rear-view mirror. 
 
But don’t worry rural Saskatchewan, because we’re going to get 
on a bus and come out and save you. It reminds me of the 
country and western song “Get on the Bus and Forget About 
Us.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we hear members 
opposite saying to us, you guys are nothing but doom and 
gloom over there. Well, is it any wonder. There’s lots of 
negativity; there’s lots of negativity out where I live, and 
rightfully so. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the constituents of Wood River do view 
this province with hope. They view it with the hope that we will 
become government and change some of these idiotic policies. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not be supporting the Speech from 
the Throne, but I will be supporting the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I just 
want to first of all take this opportunity on behalf of the 
constituents of Athabasca to commend the two folks that were 
elected this past summer. Of course, I’m talking about the 
Elphinstone and the Riversdale folks that elected two fine 
MLAs. And I want to congratulate them and to assure them that 
not only do we have a seasoned veteran but we have a young 
up-and-comer MLA that I’m sure is going to be a tremendous 
asset for many years to come — both of them, I hope — 
towards the coalition government movement at this stage of the 
game and certainly to the NDP in their future years. 
 
I also want to congratulate the Speaker on his election. I think it 
knows no question that the Speaker has had a lot of experience 
in the Assembly and certainly is aware of all the rules and the 
regulations, and it does take a lot of time to get used to some of 
the demands of the job. But I want to assure him that he has my 
utmost respect and support, and I wish him very well in his new 
capacity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to point out that I listened with great 
interest to some of the comments made by the Wood River 
MLA, and there’s no question that there are many fine people 
like him that have served their country in a number of 
capacities. 
 
My father was also a veteran of World War II, and I have a 
number of people in my community that served in the Korean 
War. And they also had a member who passed away a number 
of years ago that served in the First World War as well. And all 
three of those members in my community are very proud to be 
members of the NDP, and they have fought for freedom of this 
country. They have good ideas on how the country could be 

built. But I’ll say one thing, some of the things that we’re doing 
as a government they’re very, very proud of the 
accomplishments and they’re very proud that they’re Canadian 
as well. 
 
But before I go on any further, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out 
that this is a good government. And that’s why I rise today to 
support the Speech from the Throne. And just to point out as 
well, Mr. Speaker, that I’m going through some clippings I just 
picked up from my desk here — and there’s a fairly big whack 
of clippings here — and here’s some pretty good indications of 
what the economy of Saskatchewan is doing. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And I’ll just go on saying, and I quote from the March 23 
StarPhoenix clippings: “Twine manufacturer sings praises of 
city during Minnesota trade mission.” And that of course is 
talking about Saskatoon’s business advantages. Good news, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Another article here: “Aboriginal business course gets 
enthusiastic response.” And that’s a StarPhoenix article again, 
talking about the Aboriginal business people and the role that 
they play. 
 
I also have a clipping here, Mr. Speaker, it says: “New funds 
earmarked to ensure water quality.” And we’ll speak a bit more 
of that later. 
 
And it says here, Mr. Speaker, another news clipping: “Refinery 
to expand . . . $255 million project.” 
 
And then it talks about another article here, Mr. Speaker: 
“Walkers seek an end to racism.” Again that was from a couple 
days ago, Friday, March 23. 
 
Tuesday, March 13, the Grenfell Sun, quote: “Twinning on 
Highway No. 1 East.” 
 
The Grenfell Sun of Tuesday, March 13: “Wolseley committee 
remains optimistic.” 
 
Then I go to The Estevan Mercury, Wednesday, March 14: 
“New on-line courses available.” 
 
And then I go to Yorkton This Week of Wednesday, March 14: 
“Strawboard plant one step closer to opening.” 
 
And then I go to The Northern Pride of March 13: “Meadow 
Lake housing market steady in 2000.” 
 
And then I go to The Northern Pride again, page 11, March 13: 
“Cash injection for fishing programs.” 
 
The Kindersley Clarion from March 12: “Unity feedlot 
investors hope for a spring construction start.” 
 
And then I go to Yorkton This Week, March 14: “Provincial 
agriculture ministers want more federal dollars.” 
 
And I go down to another article, one of March 23, 2001, Mr. 
Speaker. It says: “Former premier poised to head medicare 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 121 

 

review.” 
 
And once again, Mr. Speaker, our former leader and our former 
premier shows up on the national stage. And I wish that he 
accepts the job because he’ll do a tremendous amount of good 
work and is a credit to the whole exercise of looking at the 
national health care challenges that we have. 
 
And about the only bad news I found in my stack of clippings, 
Mr. Speaker, it says here, quote: “Alliance has double 
standard.” 
 
And the reason why I say that, Mr. Speaker, is the Alliance 
Party, as we all know, has certainly practised some of the views 
and has some of the philosophy of the opposition, the 
Saskatchewan Party. And I know for a fact that there are several 
members really watching what happened during the Alliance 
leadership race. 
 
And you can almost take the centre stage there, right down the 
centre there, and put that bunch with the Leader of the 
Opposition under Manning’s camp, and take that bunch there, 
the member from Kindersley, under Day’s camp. 
 
And the power struggle, Mr. Speaker, the power struggle is very 
apparent here, Mr. Speaker, very apparent. 
 
Unfortunately Mr. Manning lost. Well I should say his 
supporter lost on that side, and the real leader, the member from 
Kindersley, and Mr. Day, of course, won the day and that’s 
where they went. So the problem, Mr. Speaker, with that is that 
they want to, on one hand, they want to capitalize on what they 
call the Alliance surge in the West, but at the same time people 
are asking, who are these guys? Who are the Saskatchewan 
Party? What do they stand for? 
 
And every time they have a microphone in front of their mouth 
they say oh, tax cuts. That’s it. How about health care; how 
about education; how about highways; how about northern 
Saskatchewan; how about the Aboriginal community? What 
plan have they got for agriculture? Mr. Speaker, they have 
nothing. 
 
And my point, my point, Mr. Speaker, my point to the people of 
Saskatchewan. This opposition party right across the way here, 
nobody is showing any attention to their policies. And I suggest 
to you, today, Mr. Speaker, that once they do, that their little 
honeymoon they had last fall is going to be over pretty fast. It’s 
going to be over pretty fast once they begin to see, once they 
begin to see, Mr. Speaker, not only the divisions, the divisions 
within that caucus — it’s going to be very, very apparent; it’s 
coming, it’s coming — but secondly, Mr. Speaker, what’s going 
to happen, is people are going to see the conflict that they have, 
the conflict they have over policy. They’re going to see that. 
 
So my big message today, clearly, to the people of 
Saskatchewan, I say to each and every one of you, is to check 
on those guys and see what they’re about. See where they stand 
on medicare; see where they stand on agriculture; see where 
they stand on a number of issues, whether it’s environment, 
whether it’s education. The list goes on. See where they stand, 
and you will see . . . you take their plan, you take their numbers. 
And you can microwave those numbers; you can boil the 

numbers; you can cook the numbers; you could fry them in the 
sun. Anyway you want to do it, their numbers just don’t add up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Because, Mr. Speaker, because, Mr. 
Speaker, they don’t know how to govern. That’s the problem; 
they don’t know how to govern. And I say to every member of 
the Saskatchewan public, is check them out. Check them out 
and you will see, not only is there a division in those ranks, but 
there’s also confusion as to what they stand. 
 
When you put a microphone in front of their mouth they say oh, 
tax cuts. Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t talk about tax cuts; we 
deliver tax cuts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And that’s the most important thing 
people are going to . . . are going to be watching over the next 
several months. 
 
Now I listened with enthusiasm the other day when the Leader 
of the Opposition . . . talking about northern Saskatchewan. 
And he says and I quote right here, and I quote right here and he 
says, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I was in Ile-a-la-Crosse and I saw the sign on his office. It 
was . . . big . . . guess what the colours were? The colours 
were red and white. Liberal red colours, sort of, you could 
tell that’s what it was. 
 
(And) You know . . . the address that was on this sign, Mr. 
Speaker? It was a sign from my office. It said room 265, 
Legislative Building. This minister hadn’t been to his office 
to even change his sign since the days he was in the official 
opposition as a Liberal. 

 
That’s what the member, the Leader of the Opposition said. 
Well I say to you, sir, if you don’t like that sign, that sign will 
be gone. And the most important thing, the most important 
thing if you talk about northern Saskatchewan . . . and I tell the 
people that are north, most certainly in this great hall of 
democracy you’re allowed to express your opinion. You’re 
elected to do so. 
 
And most certainly I encourage him and all his constituents or 
all the people that are sitting across, his party, his team to visit 
the North more often. And perhaps, and perhaps, ladies and 
gentlemen, he would stop talking about signs and start talking 
about some of the progress that’s being made in northern 
Saskatchewan whether it’s forestry, whether it’s mining, or 
whether it’s tourism. 
 
Now northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, northern 
Saskatchewan — they’re a very proud people and you know 
they have optimism. They want things to happen. And you 
know over the years they’ve faced many challenges like 
overcrowded housing, poor highways, and these challenges 
were apparent for the last 20 years. We’re finally doing 
something about it. 
 
But I’ve always maintained, I’ve always maintained that they 



122 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

certainly had the challenges in front of them. And then when I 
heard the Opposition Leader was going to go visit northern 
Saskatchewan my comment was my goodness, haven’t my 
people suffered enough already. 
 
You know clearly, clearly, Mr. Speaker, the travelling road 
show of the Saskatchewan Party, the doom-and-gloom show. 
You know I say to him that we have challenges in northern 
Saskatchewan. We’re going to work together to work on those 
challenges but please don’t come out there and depress people 
anymore. You know you’re doing that enough in the province 
of Saskatchewan. We don’t need that. 
 
Where is your sense of vision for Saskatchewan? Where is your 
optimism? This is a beautiful province. Celebrate the success of 
Saskatchewan. Celebrate the success of the North and stop 
spreading doom and gloom. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned 
a year and a half ago in this very Assembly, I said there will be 
members in that back row — if not the front — but in that back 
row, that’ll say, this is a good government. And that day is 
going to be coming. 
 
They may be thinking that in the back of their mind, but right 
away, swat it out. Don’t say that. Don’t say that. But I know in 
their hearts and their minds that they’re going to say that this is 
a good government; they’re doing right. And just wait till the 
budget on Friday, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to see a very 
comprehensive budget and a good budget. 
 
And I say it again. And I say it again: Saskatchewan people, 
check out what those guys stand for. See the divisive ways that 
they’re trying to break up Saskatchewan. Stop doing away with 
the . . . Stop promoting the doom-and-gloom show because not 
everybody’s going to be depressed after you’re done with them. 
But most important of all in my humble opinion, that I don’t 
think they know how to govern, Mr. Speaker. They do not 
know how to govern. 
 
Now I know one thing. This coalition government has a lot to 
be proud of, Mr. Speaker. This coalition government has got a 
lot of good values and they certainly have a common direction. 
 
Now you look at the way, look at the history of Saskatchewan, 
and certainly the coalition government’s in the past number of 
months that have been working together, we have had some 
success, Mr. Speaker. The largest income tax cut in the history 
of Saskatchewan — the largest. We have increased the budgets 
in health care, in highways. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also paid 
down debt. Mr. Speaker, we’ve paid down debt. And we’ve 
increased the number of people working last year in the 
province. 
 
So my question is, my question is: where, Mr. Speaker, where is 
the logic of the people of Saskatchewan saying, okay, that’s not 
a bad track record but let’s go look at the Saskatchewan Party to 
see what they’re about? And, Mr. Speaker, that attention is 
coming to the Saskatchewan Party. They’ll come along and 
people will find out on their own what they’re about. 
 

Where do you stand on education? What’s your position on the 
CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program)? Do you have a 
position? How about northern Saskatchewan? Where’s your 
Aboriginal file? How do you divide . . . how do you heal the 
division that you’ve created between rural Saskatchewan and 
urban Saskatchewan? 
 
And I submit to you today, Mr. Speaker, they do not have any 
answers. But you put a microphone in front of them. Oh tax 
cuts. Tax cuts. And I say to the people of Saskatchewan: the 
balanced approach that makes sense is being undertaken on this 
end and certainly from this side and not from that side. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in my humble opinion, coming back from 
northern Saskatchewan, I haven’t had a lot of exposure to the 
agriculture sector. And I know I have a lot of farmer friends but 
that’s about it. And when I come here and I listen and I’m 
sitting here, I’m totally neutral in terms of where we need to go 
with the agricultural file. 
 
And you know what? I sit here and I try and listen to what they 
have to say on agriculture. And they should know agriculture. 
But the divisions and the lack of governing skills on that side 
really is a confused direction that they are trying to do, and 
they’re not sure what they want to do when it comes to 
agriculture. 
 
And I’ll give you a couple of examples to all the people of 
Saskatchewan listening. You look at Stockwell Day. When he 
stops here at the airport, he doesn’t come into the city, he stops 
at the airport. And what does he say, he basically says: farmers 
have enough, farmers have enough. Okay, well, if farmers have 
enough, why are you guys lining up with them? Why are you 
lining up with them? 
 
And you look at . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . exactly, Kerpan 
wants to join the States. And you look at Manning — and a 
whole pile of people went from Saskatchewan to go see 
Manning in Ottawa — and Manning basically said no, there’s 
no more subsidies. 
 
And these guys are closely tied in with them. That’s their 
federal party. So you took Stockwell Day and Preston Manning, 
two of the leaders of the Canadian Alliance, that’s their heroes 
in Ottawa. And they come out here and they tell the farmers and 
they tell them there’s no more money for you guys. The only 
ones defending the farmers are this coalition government, Mr. 
Speaker, not them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Now I asked the question a number of 
times in this Assembly. Why is it that you guys across the way, 
you vote right but you spin left? Make up your mind. Do you 
want income tax cuts or do you want services for all of the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
They are a confused lot, Mr. Speaker. They are trying to be 
everything to everybody. But I suggest to you that certainly the 
microscopes are going to come. They’re going to examine 
where the Saskatchewan Party . . . and their honeymoon is over, 
Mr. Speaker — honeymoon is over. 
 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 123 

 

And I point out as well, Mr. Speaker, I agree and I concur with 
the member from Thunder Creek and the Wood River MLA 
when he talked about half the calves dropped on the ground 
going to Alberta, when he talks about the feed for the calves 
being grown here and shipped to Alberta. Well the reason why 
they’re doing that on a constant basis, Mr. Speaker, is there’s 
nobody defending Saskatchewan and nobody on that side is 
promoting Saskatchewan. The only people promoting 
Saskatchewan — on this side. 
 
My plea to the official opposition is stop your doom and gloom. 
Be proud of the province. Be proud of our agricultural base. Be 
proud of our farmers. Go defend them and stop — and as I 
mention time and time again — stop farming the farmers for 
political support. And that’s exactly what they’re doing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now as you know, as the member from Kindersley disagrees 
with them, with the official opposition leader when he says 
small farms are out. He’s been quoted in papers. So I say to all 
the farmers out there, all the farmers, there’s no question, ladies 
and gentlemen, that agriculture’s training . . . is changing. 
There’s a lot of training needs out there to make sure that we’re 
able to take advantage of some of the opportunities when it 
comes to the world markets. 
 
(15:15) 
 
But I know one thing, is this side is going to be realistic; this 
side is not going to take advantage of the farmers. And I would 
say to every farmer out there, is check on the track record of the 
Canadian Alliance. Check on the track record of their leaders, 
Stockwell Day and certainly Manning, and see the division 
happening over there. These guys don’t know whether they like 
CFIP or AIDA. They’re not sure what they like over there. 
 
Now what I wouldn’t mind hearing as a member of this 
Assembly that has very limited exposure to agriculture, what 
exactly . . . what do those guys stand for, Mr. Speaker? What’s 
their plan? You know what, Mr. Speaker? They don’t have a 
plan. They don’t have a plan. 
 
Now there’s no question on this side we believe in agriculture. 
But we know we have to adapt to agricultural needs in this 
province to be able to survive as a province. This province is 
hurting, and hurting bad. And all we see here in this Assembly 
is more doom and gloom and no plans over there in the 
confusing lot. They have no idea what they’re doing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The question I have for them is, can you get your act together 
and tell us what kind of plan you have, attach some kind of 
reasoning to your plan, put some money into your plan, and 
stop farming the farmers for political gain. That’s all we’re 
asking. Let’s work as a collective in this Assembly. Stop 
playing the cheap theatrics of sending every MLA to Ottawa 
when you know you should send every MLA to a number of 
countries that are subsidizing their farmers. 
 
So my point today, Mr. Speaker, is people back home are going 
to ask me, why are you talking about agriculture? And I say to 
them that I sit in the Assembly and I listen to the opposition rant 
and rave about agriculture when I know they haven’t got a plan. 

All they’re playing with agriculture . . . the only reason they’re 
playing with agriculture is for political purposes, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s it. 
 
So my question, when you talk about focusing on the 
Saskatchewan Party, make up your mind. What are you? Do 
you support subsidies for farmers in your free enterprise 
mantra? You’re supposed to be free enterprisers. Do you 
support subsidies for the farmers — yes or no? Your national 
leaders, Manning and Day, say no. 
 
So my point is, do you support rural Saskatchewan? Do you 
support urban Saskatchewan? Northern Saskatchewan? Yes or 
no? Make up your mind. Where are you guys going to go? 
Where are you going to fit? Are you going to be (a) 
pro-environment, or (b) pro-business? Or are you going to be 
(a) pro-rural Saskatchewan, or (b) pro-urban Saskatchewan? 
 
Well I say to you today that on this side, on this side of the 
Assembly, we have a balanced approach. We’re going to defend 
all interests of Saskatchewan plus we’re going to be positive 
about what Saskatchewan’s all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a list. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve got a list here of all the help that Saskatchewan is 
going to help the farmers get. And the list says how 
Saskatchewan is helping to address the agricultural crisis. 
 
And I was going to say I’m going to send a copy to the official 
opposition. But what I don’t want them to do is to assume this. 
Because all of a sudden all the good things that are being 
planned here, they’ll try and assume it and take credit for it 
when the fact of the matter is they never had a plan for 
agriculture. And it’s to their advantage that the farmers keep 
suffering because it qualifies them politically. And I say enough 
of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, theatrics does not and will never help the farmers. 
And I suggest today to the official opposition is that you should 
stand with the coalition government today and fight together. 
Instead doom and gloom and hoping all hell breaks loose 
tomorrow — excuse my language, Mr. Speaker — but all heck 
breaks loose tomorrow. So all of a sudden they’re standing here 
appearing to be the party’s going to balance everybody’s 
interests when that’s far from the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have to defend the family farm not the 
fertilizer companies. You have to adapt to what the markets pay 
a premium price for and not what the provincial treasury can 
afford. You have to help in emergency aid whether it be in 
direct payout, PST (provincial sales tax) exemptions, the . . . 
(inaudible) . . . Committee, property tax relief, and the list goes 
on. That’s what we’re doing this side. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question — you have to fight for 
the family farm so that your corporate plans to grow food does 
not happen. Consumers have to know that your plan, the 
Saskatchewan Party plan will result in greater food costs 
according to the member from Kindersley. 
 
The reason why you’ve got to fight for family farms, for his 



124 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

information, the reason why we have to fight for family farms, 
Mr. Speaker, is so that we can grow food on this land, this 
blessed land of Saskatchewan, at a price that the people of 
Saskatchewan can afford. 
 
And what is happening there is they’re hoping that the family 
farm goes away and their free enterprise mantra, that we have 
these corporate farms and these corporate farms will dominate 
what they grow and the prices will go up. The prices will go up, 
and you and I, Mr. Speaker, will pay more for that food. That’s 
why we have to defend the family farm on this side. And our 
fights with Ottawa and our fights with all the other countries but 
across the way you say, no, the family farms, the family farms 
are not going to work. Family farms are not going to work. 
 
So my question to them is: are you free enterprise, or do you 
believe in subsidizing the farmers? Are you for rural 
Saskatchewan or are you for urban? Well I say to you on this 
side of the street, we know where our bread is buttered on. We 
are supporting the farmers. We are supporting agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we are trying to find a 
solution, a short-term solution, a medium-term solution, and a 
long-term solution. Something that you do not want to see it 
happens . . . is that they will not want to see that to happen 
because their political agenda will be lost. 
 
So I say to the agricultural community — the agricultural 
community — I say to them do not let the opposition farm you 
for political support. They haven’t got a plan. They’ve never 
had any coherent plan to begin with. Their agenda to come here 
is to come here, create confusion, spread doom and gloom, and 
say the world’s going to end tomorrow. And our side, we say 
not, Mr. Speaker. We say not. 
 
And then I say to you, I say to you a couple of things. You look, 
you look at the options that are available: organic farming, 
pulse crops, ethanol production, the cogeneration possibilities. 
All possibilities exist on this land, Mr. Speaker, but we have to 
change. 
 
No question we have to change, and these guys don’t want to 
see progress. They don’t want to see success, Mr. Speaker. 
They don’t want to see anything good happening over there 
because that’ll displace them. And that’s why there’s a lot of 
doom and gloom. 
 
Well I say to you doom and gloom . . . you know there’s no 
room for doom and gloom in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’ll give you one good example of agroforestery, Mr. 
Speaker — agroforestery. You know we tell folks back there in 
the northern Saskatchewan there’s mills happening, you have an 
opportunity in forestry. And people out there are talking to us 
about the environment. So we say well agroforestery may have 
a good opportunity here. For example, we could tell forestry 
companies that maybe in the next 5, 10 years, that 5, 10, 15, 20 
per cent of their wood supply would come from agroforestery. 
Wouldn’t that help out the agricultural sector? The obvious 
answer is yes. 
 

Two provinces, Mr. Speaker, in this country took advantage of 
that and they said yes, loud and clear. Agroforestery — there’s 
an opportunity for that. One of them was Quebec and the other 
was Saskatchewan. That’s what I call, Mr. Speaker, being 
proactive. 
 
Now the agroforestery file for example, look at it. Not only will 
these companies begin to seek their wood supply from the 
farming sector, from the ag lands, but you would have less 
chemicals going into the ground, Mr. Speaker. There’s other 
crop you can actually grow on the ground below the trees, and 
every year there’s also carbon credits that you can get from 
planting trees, and the list goes on as to the value of 
agroforestery. 
 
However, the other argument as well, Mr. Speaker, is that not 
only will you have a new supply of wood for these mills, but 
you would lower your demand on the natural forest stands in 
northern Saskatchewan thereby achieving the environmental 
balance that we’ve all been looking for. So not only do you 
have a win-win scenario for agriculture and the environment, 
but economically it makes a lot of sense. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, every time you come up with a solution to 
agriculture or a plan of some sort — oh no, no, it’s not going to 
work; no, no, it’s not going to work. You guys don’t know what 
you’re doing. 
 
Well I submit today, they don’t know what they’re doing, Mr. 
Speaker. On this side we do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — So the bottom line, Mr. Speaker, the 
bottom line, the transition has to happen. We have to stand next 
to our farmers. We got to say the ability to grow land . . . to 
grow something on that land is very important; we recognize 
that and you’re the best farmers in the world. But let’s work 
together to have a transition strategy to grow crops or whatever 
product we can on that land that the markets will pay a 
premium price for. 
 
And secondly is let’s have some optimism in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. Where is the optimism? And you come to this 
Assembly, you come to the Assembly looking for optimism, 
what do they get? A big, dark cloud of doom and gloom, you 
know, just hovers around this place. And we got to defend 
Saskatchewan against that doom and gloom. 
 
And every time you hear some bright story out of that end, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s Alberta — Alberta this, Alberta that, Alberta this, 
Alberta that. Well I say to you on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan that if you love Alberta so much, move there. 
 
We got a province, we got a province to defend here. And if 
you’re elected people from this province, you defend 
Saskatchewan — you don’t talk about Alberta, you don’t talk 
about Alberta. Your fight is here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. What are you doing going to Alberta? You 
defend Saskatchewan’s interests. You’re elected by the people 
of Saskatchewan — you defend our interests. You promote our 
province. You don’t try and kill our province. You don’t spread 
doom and gloom. 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 125 

 

Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, across the way, one of these 
days in this Assembly, one of those members is going to get up 
and they’re going to say privately, this is a good government. 
And that day, Mr. Speaker, is going to be this Friday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to close on a 
couple of points. The first point . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The members opposite are cheering. 
But I’m going to make a couple of points, a couple points, a 
couple points. I say to them that as a person from northern 
Saskatchewan, I know that agriculture plays a very important 
part in life even in northern Saskatchewan. But what I’m not 
going to do is come here and play politics with agriculture. 
 
I want to say to the people of Saskatchewan, I don’t know a 
whole lot of agriculture but I know one thing, in this Assembly 
they’re playing on some of the agricultural challenges for 
political gain. No more, no more. 
 
And number two, and number two is this coalition government 
has sat back and listened to the doom and gloom scenario — the 
world’s going to end tomorrow; oh, nothing you guys do is 
good, everything’s bad; oh, Alberta this, Alberta that. Well I tell 
you today, we’re not going to take it any more. We’re going to 
fight for Saskatchewan’s interests and that starts now. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I wish to congratulate Mr. Speaker and Mr. 
Deputy Speaker on their recent elections to their posts. I’m sure 
that you’ll serve this Hon. Assembly with distinction, both of 
you. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m proud to represent the 
hard-working, productive people of Thunder Creek. People who 
work exceptionally hard in their businesses, their professions, 
and occupations and on their farms and ranches. The 
productivity of these people is second to none. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they are very busy, industrious people. 
 
These fine people, however, regard politicians with a certain 
degree of suspicion. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not you. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Not me. 
 
And when I look at this document — this so-called Speech from 
the Throne — I don’t blame them. I would be embarrassed, Mr. 
Speaker, if my constituency knew that all of us here will spend 
a week or so debating this document. This so-called Speech 
from the Throne that contains nothing of any real substance 
whatsoever. 
 
It’s a rehash of old programs previously announced. It’s filled 
with phony economic comparisons, not between Saskatchewan 

and other provinces, Mr. Speaker, but comparisons of the 
dismal economic performance of this province from one 
disappointing year under this administration to another. 
 
The third component of this document can only be described as 
misleading rhetoric about the legislative intentions of this tired 
government. A government apparently completely devoid of 
any new ideas on any subject. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a Throne Speech is supposed to layout a 
blueprint of the legislative intentions of the government. If this 
document is any indication of the intentions of the government 
in this session of the legislature, it is truly a stinging indictment 
on a tired, old, decrepit government with only their own 
self-interested heart in a desperate bid to hold onto power for as 
long as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Stewart: — They talk, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of a thriving 
economy, quoting their own numbers to make their case. But 
the people of Saskatchewan will remember, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that according to undisputed Statistics Canada figures, 
this province lost 13,000 jobs last year, while Manitoba, a 
province far less naturally endowed than Saskatchewan, was 
able to create 7,000 new jobs last year. And in Alberta in the 
same year, last year, 43,000 new jobs were created, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
This government makes no pretense in this document, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, of having any kind of a plan to expand our 
economy. In a province where we lose jobs and businesses and 
farms, and saddest of all our people every day to our 
neighbouring provinces and to other jurisdictions, it is 
absolutely shameful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government 
cannot come up with any kind of a plan for economic 
development in Saskatchewan — this province of such 
outstanding economic potential. 
 
Saskatchewan is truly the last frontier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for 
investment and economic growth. But this weary, old 
government continues to stumble along and miss the 
opportunities that would unleash the economic power that is 
Saskatchewan’s natural gift. 
 
This government reminds me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of a tired, 
old, sick horse — a horse that knows it won’t likely live until 
morning. Like this government, the horse stumbles along in the 
dark, nearly falling from time to time, but the instinct for 
survival keeps the old horse stumbling along in the dark in no 
particular direction long after its only purpose is to simply carry 
on. 
 
This Speech from the Throne, Mr. Deputy Speaker, contains 
absolutely no new tax reduction initiatives. All of our taxes in 
this province are far too high. Combined, these taxes make 
Saskatchewan the second highest tax jurisdiction in North 
America. As a result of our high taxes, investment is stifled. 
And because of the lack of investment, this province has the 
poorest job-creation record in the country. 
 



126 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

All of our taxes — income tax, PST, capital tax, small-business 
tax, property tax, royalty rates, utility rates, and every other 
form of taxation, direct or indirect, must be competitive with 
our neighbouring jurisdictions in order for us to attract 
investment and the accompanying career opportunities that 
would keep our people in this great province. 
 
The sum total of new tax reform initiatives in this document, 
Mr. Speaker, is zero. What the Speech from the Throne does 
contain is a rehash of old initiatives. Old initiatives spun a little 
differently in an attempt to dupe the people of this province into 
believing that they are being offered something new. 
 
The treasury of this province is, or ought to be, bursting with 
hundreds of millions of dollars from oil and gas due to huge 
increases in oil and gas prices not anticipated in the last budget. 
Now is the time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for this government to 
take the plunge and reduce taxes and royalties, targeted 
reductions, to attract investment in this province. This is not the 
time to squander the windfall profits from oil and gas in a wild 
spending spree. 
 
A responsible government would take this opportunity to grow 
the economy, so that increased revenues for the government and 
improved career opportunities for the people of Saskatchewan 
would be the rule in the future, rather than the exception. 
 
Most Saskatchewan people consider health care to be the 
number one issue, province-wide. Shamefully, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this Speech from the Throne is absolutely silent on 
health care. Should we assume from this that with the longest 
surgical waiting list in the country, looming shortages of 
professionals in all disciplines associated with health care, and 
most health districts in severe financial stress, that this 
government has no plan for health care? 
 
The problems in health care are not new, Mr. Speaker. This 
government has had 10 years to grapple with these problems. 
And during this time, each of these problems has worsened 
dramatically. And if this government has any solutions 
whatsoever, I find it odd that they would not bear mentioning in 
this document; this document that purports to be, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, a blueprint for this government’s legislative agenda. 
 
With regard to social services, this Throne Speech dredges up 
previously announced programs going back as far as 1997 and 
attempts to spin them into something that the public will accept 
as new and some sort of a new direction. Also on the social 
side, Mr. Speaker, this sad, old, tired government attempts to 
take credit for the $73 million childhood development program 
aimed at children in high-risk communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, pardon me, the $73 million 
in funding for this program is all federal government money 
announced late last summer by the federal minister in charge. It 
is inexcusable that this government would be involved in such a 
shallow attempt to take credit for such an important and long 
overdue program, apparently just so they would have something 
of substance to put in this document. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the Speech from the Throne this 
government announces its intention to connect with the young. 
They announce their intentions to do this in typical NDP 

fashion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by creating a new Department of 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. The document lays out no 
mandate for this new department, this new bureaucracy if you 
like, other than a few broad generalities about connecting with 
young people. 
 
This exercise in intervention as politics will cost the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan millions of dollars. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I predict that the only young people who will ever be connected 
with . . . through this department will be the young NDP 
political hacks hired by it. 
 
As regards the environment, Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the 
Throne states the government’s intention to ensure that oil and 
gas wells are properly decommissioned and reclaimed. This 
government knows, or ought to know, that the oil and gas 
industry already takes care of that in a very responsible manner 
through the industry’s own Orphaned Wells Fund. The 
government’s only other initiative under the heading of 
environment is a vague statement of their intentions to invest 
taxpayers’ dollars in some airy-fairy wind policy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, agriculture is Saskatchewan’s founding 
industry and still Saskatchewan’s most important industry. 
When the farms and ranches do poorly, the whole economy, 
rural and urban, suffers. In spite of the importance of agriculture 
to this province, the only item of any significance in this 
document regarding agriculture is the announcement of the 
long-awaited Saskatchewan Conservation Cover Program. 
 
This program pays $15 an acre to a maximum of 50 acres, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, for farm operation, for seeding perennial cover 
on only the most marginal of farmland. Fifty acres, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
How silly that sounds to serious commercial agricultural 
producers. Why bother at all? The administration for this 
program is likely to cost as much as any benefit that may flow 
to farmers. 
 
This government has created an office of Rural Revitalization, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, but there’s no indication in the Throne 
Speech of any mandate for this office either. Accordingly, we 
must assume that is just another bureaucracy that will filter and 
muddle the message between rural Saskatchewan and this dying 
government, another bureaucracy to shield the members of this 
government from the wrath of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Incredibly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the responsibility for this 
office has been given to the Minister of Highways, the same 
minister who is charged with implementing this government’s 
policy of turning some of our secondary highways back to 
gravel and reducing weight limits on others so as to make them 
useless for commerce. This deprives dozens of communities — 
many with substantial existing businesses and industries, and 
many more that had plans to build businesses and industries — 
of paved, all-weather truck access that is so crucial to the 
success of almost any business. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it serves to underscore the disconnect that 
exists between this government and rural Saskatchewan that the 
same minister who is literally cutting the lifelines to rural 
Saskatchewan is also responsible for Rural Revitalization. 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 127 

 

This is not just a rural issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know that 
this debate is broadcast into many homes in the major urban 
centres of this province, and those people will understand that 
their jobs and the jobs of their children and grandchildren 
depend directly or indirectly on economic development. In this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, economic development 
generally starts in rural areas, in agricultural value added, in 
manufacturing, in oil and gas, in tourism, mining, and forestry 
industries, and the list goes on and on. 
 
My point is that if this province is to see any real economic 
development, it will begin in rural Saskatchewan. But the 
spinoff will create jobs in our urban centres. 
 
How then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, could any government that is 
minding the store cut the lifeline to economic development in 
rural areas by rendering our highways useless for commerce, 
and not expect the pain to be felt in our urban centres. 
 
Each of us in the official opposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over 
the year and a half since the election, have developed 
comprehensive plans as to how we would proceed in our critic 
areas if we were to become the government. Yes, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we have comprehensive plans as to how we would 
proceed in Agriculture, Highways, Health, Education, Forestry, 
Energy and Mines, Environment, Aboriginal Affairs, and every 
other area of government endeavour. 
 
How that contrasts with this stumbling, old government that 
goes in circles, waffles back and forth and contradicts itself, and 
is generally going nowhere. A government that, according to 
this Speech from the Throne, cannot come up with one solid 
idea that would help to solve some of the problems of this 
province. 
 
Their only solutions are to create new departments and offices 
and bureaucracies, and to spend millions of taxpayers’ dollars 
on wild government ventures that are destined to fail as they 
always do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a blueprint for action by this government, this 
Speech from the Throne fails to address any of the major 
problems that plague this great province. It suggests nothing to 
attract investment, nothing to help agriculture, nothing for 
health or education or social services or Aboriginal people or 
the environment, and does nothing to keep our young people 
and our professionals in this province. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do . . . I will not support 
this Throne Speech and I do support the amendment advanced 
by the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
so pleased to be able to rise today to talk about this year’s 
Speech from the Throne, and all of the accomplishments and 
challenges and positive things that we have to look forward to 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to take this opportunity to personally congratulate the 

Speaker on his election to the Speaker of this Assembly. It’s 
been one week and already we can see how adept and 
professional he is at managing his new position within the 
Assembly. It’s clearly evident that all those years teaching at 
the Carlton Comprehensive High School in Prince Albert have 
now been put to good use. 
 
All of us know how very challenging and daunting this task 
may be from time to time, but I’m confident that with your 
patience, and Mr. Speaker’s patience and wisdom and the 
strong discipline, that you will keep us going in the right 
direction. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also congratulate you, my 
colleague from Regina Sherwood, on your election as Deputy 
Speaker. You will, I know as well, keep everyone and 
everything in proper order when Mr. Speaker is away from his 
chair, as you are doing this afternoon for us in the Assembly. 
 
I would like to extend a warm welcome to a few new people. 
First, the people who manage this Assembly so well, some of 
whom are returning and others who, like Mr. Viktor 
Kaczkowski, would say that probably on many evenings they 
feel like they’re a captive audience. But, Mr. Speaker, they 
certainly do serve us well seated at the Table and keeping us in 
legal order and in good parliamentary proceedings that would 
occur here. 
 
Welcome to the Sergeant-at-Arms and the staff. And also 
welcome to our new pages this year. We already appreciate the 
amount of time and the running and effort that you’ve put in to 
keeping us organized and the work that you do for us here. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to start today by telling members 
of the House why I became involved in Saskatchewan politics 
and why I’m proud to stand here today and speak to this year’s 
Throne Speech. 
 
First, I would like to say a heartfelt thank you to the 
constituents of Regina Wascana Plains for giving me the 
pleasure and the opportunity to represent them for another 
legislative session. It’s with their support and encouragement 
that I will be able to be a part of putting many pieces forward in 
the legislative session and deal with the many issues that this 
government has to face. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank my colleagues who provide 
the support as we look forward to the same positive working 
relationship throughout the year and we look forward to the 
challenges presented by the opposition as they question us. And 
certainly I’m sure they’ll have many complimentary things to 
say about the budget that’s coming forward in this week. 
 
It’s been said, Mr. Speaker, that a government is only as strong 
as the opposition that’s presented, and so I’m looking forward 
to the challenges they would present. Mr. Speaker, I have to tell 
you I haven’t been able to quite look forward to the kinds of 
gloom and doom that they presented so far in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people who are in Saskatchewan and the 
constituents I represent don’t want to hear gloom and doom. 
They live here because they chose to live here. They live here 
because of the quality of life that’s afforded to them and their 



128 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

families. 
 
With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell everyone in the 
Assembly that my constituency is quite unique. It’s one of the 
four urban-rural seats in this province, in taking a portion of the 
southeast corner of Regina and several of the surrounding 
communities. Its boundary starts at the Highway 1 bypass near 
the University of Regina, follows along the east side of Pilot 
Butte creek, east on the Trans-Canada Highway as far north as 
the Grid no. 734, extending east to Balgonie and south to 
Rowatt. 
 
The constituency includes vibrant communities of Balgonie, 
Pilot Butte, White City, Jameson and Richardson to name a 
few. Now Jameson is a unique little community with a few 
people there, but they certainly are people who keep in touch 
with me as do many other constituents within the surrounding 
communities that I’ve mentioned. You would know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that my constituents are civil servants, they’re 
farmers, they’re business people, educators, and labourers, just 
to name a few. 
 
I think it was first, I believe, in 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
I started to pound the pavement in what was then Ward 4 in the 
city of Regina that coincided with the boundaries of my 
constituency in 1991. Today this ward is ably represented by 
Councillor Michael Fougere. 
 
So why would I become involved? Well at the time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I was involved with my family at an early age in their 
development, working through the community association to 
improve the quality of life in our community. There were issues 
that we hear about today, but they were there as well then — 
school bussing, traffic concerns, roadway patterns. 
 
As a matter of fact, one just came up recently when the city had 
announced a roadways plan and some of the same issues that 
were present there came up in this report. And we were able to 
work with those communities and talk through those issues 
once again, because we believe as a community you pull 
together and work through those issues. 
 
I was elected in 1985. The people of the constituency put their 
trust in me and I have tried hard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to live up 
to those expectations and the faith they placed in me to bring 
their concerns and issues not only now to the cabinet table, but 
to all of my colleagues in government caucus. And on the 
occasion to bring up their issues and concerns to the members 
opposite so they’ll better understand that the actions that they 
take here in this Assembly also impact on the future of not only 
rural Saskatchewan but urban Saskatchewan as well. 
 
In my tenure on city council, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I served as 
the Chair of the task force on women’s issues, and it was 
referenced recently in a housing report done by the Government 
of Canada. I was a member of that task force and chaired that 
task force because at the time we saw the impact of many of the 
programs and the policies of then the Tory government that 
were having a detrimental impact on not only women in the 
community but families. 
 
We had a government then so totally out of touch of the reality 
of people who lived in the communities and the stresses that 

impacted on them, particularly of women living in violent 
situations, women living in poverty, and it was time to speak 
out; it was time to see how we could impact a change on an 
uncaring and unfeeling Tory government. Sad to say I see many 
of the same people that supported that government in the 
Assembly facing me opposite today. And I really haven’t heard 
much that tells me that their attitudes to these issues have 
changed dramatically. 
 
I was also a member of the mayor’s board of inquiry into 
hunger and poverty. And I had the privilege at a time to serve as 
the interim mayor of Regina. 
 
The inquiry into poverty and hunger was an interesting one 
because we know that it took many, many years after that for us 
to be able to get into the situation where we could address some 
of the devastation of the years that the Tories provided in the 
’80s and the impact that had on the proliferation of the use of 
the food banks, on people saying — like a former member of 
this Assembly would say — there are no hungry people in 
Saskatchewan. Turning their eyes in a blind way to all of the 
hurting that was happening in urban centres, but also not 
coming to terms with the solutions that would be at hand to 
address those, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Since then we've developed the building to independence 
strategy. Many of those initiatives were completing of the circle 
of the recommendations we made at that time. We knew that 
many of the supports that were in place for people who were on 
social assistance dropped away from those people who were 
trying to make a go in the working world. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, once they came into the workforce, many 
of the help and supports to have them become active members 
of the economy left them immediately, not giving them a 
chance to take their place in the working world and the 
economy of our province. And many of those initiatives today 
address those concerns. 
 
And the results? The results we’re seeing, slow but sure, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in the numbers of people who now have 
moved off the social assistance rolls, and for the second year in 
a row to have negative figures when we’re talking about child 
poverty and hunger in this community of our Saskatchewan. 
 
Progress is being made. It’s not the kind of progress that the 
members opposite would brag about. In fact, they don’t even 
ask us what we’re doing in those areas or what we’re going to 
do to continue that work. And I haven’t heard one thing they 
would do to further these initiatives, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The work that I’m referring to and the positive work I’m talking 
about is highly reflected in this session’s Throne Speech. It tells 
you something when they’re not able to recognize anything 
positive from that speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It tells you something when you advance those goals and those 
initiatives that are going to take us in to the next number of 
years ahead that are going to connect us to the future, and they 
can’t even recognize them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to take a moment, Mr. Speaker, because I hear from 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 129 

 

them that somehow we don’t have the moral authority to be 
governing in this Assembly, and that we’re on a decline and 
they’re sort of an Alberta wannabe government-in-waiting in 
this province. But I would like to remind them, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that we’ve had a wonderful leadership process that has 
been in place in the province throughout the months of 
December and January and has provided us with a Premier that 
we’re all proud to stand behind and support in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I also want to say we have a wonderful 
new member that provides the energy and the ideas that come 
from young people who’ve been out there and supported the 
work that was done by the member from Elphinstone to make 
him the newest member of our Assembly, or second newest 
member; and along with the member from Saskatoon Meewasin 
who very eloquently moved the Speech from the Throne, we 
were able to hear from our member from Regina Elphinstone. 
 
So a first for him, seconding the motion, and I’d like to 
welcome him to the Legislative Assembly and congratulate him 
on his successful bid in representing the members from that 
constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I had the honour from time to time to 
talk with those constituents, young and old. They say, isn’t it 
refreshing to have someone who will come out, be a part of our 
community, work hard for us. And seniors, Mr. Speaker, spoke 
to me about the appreciative efforts that they feel he’s made in 
going out to their doorsteps, in talking with them and working 
with them and settling into that neighbourhood in which he was 
raised and he grew up, Mr. Speaker. So congratulations to that 
member. 
 
Now I’d like to just say a few more words about the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale and welcome him back to this 
Assembly. 
 
He’s indeed been a very busy man these past few months, but 
all of his hard work and the efforts and the determination has 
finally paid off. And I’m pleased and proud to be able to sit in 
this Legislative Assembly with our member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale — our government’s leader and Premier. 
 
And I’m looking forward, through this legislative session with 
him, to be able to put forward the initiatives that were 
announced in the Throne Speech. And I know that all my hon. 
colleagues are looking forward to the months ahead as well as 
we tell the people of Saskatchewan how we can connect to the 
future, get Saskatchewan ready to take advantage of the positive 
initiatives and the positive energies that will take us into the 
future being the best province in this country in which to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — This is a perfect time to start a new 
session and the business of the Speech from the Throne, with 
spring coming. Now today we haven’t quite felt that warm wind 
yet and the warm weather and the sunshine, but it’s coming. It’s 
coming, Mr. Deputy Speaker; it’s officially spring. 

And I’d like to take the time now to highlight a new . . . the new 
and exciting and talented ideas that the people of Saskatchewan 
have put forward to us, we’ve worked with to be able to make 
sure that they come true for them. In short, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to tell you more about the vision for Saskatchewan 
that’s connecting us to the future. 
 
Last week’s Speech from the Throne by our Lieutenant 
Governor was one full of optimism, prosperity, and success, 
contrary to what the members opposite have been saying. 
They’re going to wallow in gloom and doom; they’re going to 
be the Alberta wannabes; they’re the ones trash-talking 
Saskatchewan. But not us, Mr. Speaker. We won’t be doing 
that. 
 
Now if they took the time to talk to their chambers of 
commerce, if they took the time to talk to their constituents, 
they would know that their constituents don’t want them to talk 
down Saskatchewan either. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And if they heard, day in and day out, the kinds of messages 
about everything is a disaster in Saskatchewan, there’s a crisis 
in everything in Saskatchewan, there’s no economic 
development in Saskatchewan, it’s the worst taxed constituency 
in the country is our Saskatchewan, they would be disappointed 
and ashamed that their members are representing that kind of 
trash talk in this Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Speech from the Throne is anything but that. The Speech 
from the Throne tells us that there are many important 
initiatives that we need to take to connect the people to the 
future of our province and to be active contributors to society 
and to our economy. 
 
So, before I comment on that, I would like to have a look 
forward to see . . . instead of looking forward for a moment, I 
just want to remind the members opposite, and give them a 
refresher course on what we have accomplished. Now this may 
take some time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because there’s been 
plenty accomplished in this province. 
 
Let’s start first with the economy. The average annual growth 
rate for the province from 1992 to 1999 was 3.4 per cent. This 
matches the Canadian average and ranks third among all other 
provinces. Figures from the year 2000 show an increase in 
exports, an increase in manufacturing, an increase in oil and gas 
production, an increase in potash and mineral production, an 
increase in retail sales and the sales of motor vehicles. And if I 
may, Mr. Speaker, quote directly from last Thursday’s edition 
of the Regina Leader-Post: 
 

Regina will “buck the trend” by posting a 2.5 per cent 
economic growth in 2001. 

 
On top of all this, the amount of disposable income will also 
rise. Analysts predict that the disposal income among 
Saskatchewan people will climb by 5.1 per cent, primarily due 
to the tax cut measures at both the federal and now the 
provincial level, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In 2000 Saskatchewan created a record number of new jobs. 



130 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

You wouldn’t hear that from the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker — it’s gloom and doom, no jobs in Saskatchewan. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the number of new jobs totalled over 5,000 
in the course of one year. Our unemployment rate in January 
2001 was 5.6 per cent — the third lowest in the entire country 
— and well below the national average of 6.9 per cent. 
 
Employment forecasts also predict a strong showing for the 
year ahead, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This economic development 
was evident in my constituency. The east side of Regina along 
the Trans-Canada Highway has seen tremendous growth in the 
past couple of years with countless businesses — restaurants, 
shops, and retail chain stores — springing up every year. 
 
These stores provide jobs and a place for people in the 
surrounding areas to shop and to come together to talk about the 
positive aspects of developing the economic development of 
our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now in a constituency like mine, both urban and rural, one of 
the important things that’s talked about in all of the coffee 
shops, of course, is taxation. Taxes are very important to my 
constituents, since many of them are within the middle- to 
upper-income brackets in the urban areas and they feel they pay 
high taxes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And many of them are in rural 
Saskatchewan who welcome the tax initiative with the 
education portion of the property but are also saying it’s very, 
very difficult with the kind of economy in some sectors of rural 
Saskatchewan. And so therefore the discussion on taxes and the 
amount they would pay is very important to them as well. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, with this government there is 
always good news regarding tax reform. Every year that we’ve 
been in government we have had a tax measure, a tax initiative, 
that would either spur the economy on in certain sectors or be a 
sustainable reduction in taxes for the average person in our 
province, Mr. Speaker — every year since we’ve been in 
government. And no small accomplishment when you face the 
kind of debt load that the members opposite, many of them the 
faces who peep up from time to time, in the previous Tory 
government now appear behind the desks opposite. 
 
Upon entering office this government was paying for an 
average family . . . You would see the average family when we 
took government, again a Tory legacy, was paying the highest 
income tax in all of Canada. We inherited that. We didn’t create 
that. What do we see now? I guess I could also, at this moment, 
put in we also inherited the second highest debt level in the 
country second only to Newfoundland. That was the legacy we 
inherited and that’s what they’re so proud of, and when they’re 
not proud of it, they try and duck and hide and say, oh no, it 
wasn’t us; we’re some kind of new, new party; we changed our 
name you know, so we must be different. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m happy to tell you that this is no 
longer the case. Our income tax rates have dropped a total of 
four times over the past seven years — dropped four times. Do 
we hear that from the members opposite? No. And you know 
what, Mr. Speaker? Taxes are going to come down again in 
2002 and in 2003. 
 
In 1992 the total tax bill for an average Saskatchewan family 
was the second highest in the country, and by 2000 it was the 

fourth lowest. Mr. Speaker, the fourth lowest. 
 
What do we hear today from the members opposite? We’re the 
highest taxed jurisdiction in the country. Wrong. More gloom 
and doom and painting a picture that just isn’t there. How do we 
compete when we’ve got such ambassadors going out in rural 
Saskatchewan and going across this country talking about 
things like that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, surely they would know that if you want to have a 
positive look at this province, you have to be the ones that give 
the positive view to this province and this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — We’re doing our part, Mr. Speaker, 
and we’ve accomplished much. We’re maintaining balanced 
budgets and we’re maintaining the tax cuts that we’ve 
announced since 1995. Because when we were cutting taxes, 
Mr. Speaker, we were making certain that they would be 
sustainable. Not a we’re cutting this, oh whoops, we don’t mean 
that; we’re not going to cut that because it just doesn’t add up. 
 
And even their own economic analysis group over there will tell 
you that their tax cuts just don’t add up. They are not 
sustainable, Mr. Speaker. And furthermore, they know, because 
they’ve been told, they’ve been told that the tax cuts that they 
contemplate incurring on this province will mean higher 
unemployment and fewer jobs for young people in this 
province. And still they persist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these accomplishments are also consistent 
throughout everything that government is doing. Staff and 
employees of every department or agency have worked 
extremely hard ensuring government services are delivered to 
those many people across this province who need them with an 
efficiency and effectiveness second to none. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the civil service of this 
province and take pride in the work that they do and the face 
that they put forward to the customer on the ground in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — With that, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on 
my feet, I’d like to take a few moments to talk about the 
departments and agencies that I have responsibility for. First, 
the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority is one of those 
departments. Its mission is to distribute, control, and regulate 
liquor and gaming products throughout Saskatchewan in ways 
that promote social responsibility, fairness, and 
cost-effectiveness. 
 
It’s again another area where all we hear from the members 
opposite is gloom and doom. And many of them . . . I’ve heard 
the privatization word, even though we have the experience of 
the Alberta privatization and many other provinces who have 
tried it, and we say that it just does not work for the customer 
service in Saskatchewan as well as the balancing of social 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 131 

 

Authority) owns and operates video lottery terminals located in 
licensed establishments, slot machines in SIGA (Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Authority) casinos, and regulates charity 
gaming and casino activity in the province. 
 
All I’ve heard from the members opposite is let’s take a total 
review. They haven’t told us whether they’ll continue this 
involvement or not, and there are people and agencies out there 
who need to know. 
 
What would you do? What should you do as an Alberta 
government wannabe-in-waiting here in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. I’ve asked members in 
this House to make their remarks through the Chair. I would ask 
the hon. minister in her speeches to do likewise. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 
apologize. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of attending the Hotels 
Association annual convention. And they want to know what 
does government plan to do in the area of gaming, in the area of 
regulating control of beverage products. And I’m sure that 
they’d be very interested to hear from the members opposite 
what kind of support their industry and the hospitality industry 
can look forward to in the future. We’re connecting to the 
future, Mr. Speaker, and they want to know what those 
members say about that. 
 
We all know the year 2000 has been a challenging one for 
SLGA, but it’s also one that held many accomplishments. 
 
New legislation surrounding the liquor industry was passed. 
New guidelines were put in place to maintain the integrity of 
our casino industry. And SLGA continually worked towards 
ways to enhance both delivery and regulation of liquor and 
gaming services to the people of Saskatchewan all the while 
maintaining the operation of liquor and gaming industries to 
provide thousands of jobs to people in Saskatchewan and in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Another department I’m responsible for is Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation. SPMC is a Crown 
corporation that provides accommodation and commercial 
services to other Crown corporations, government departments, 
boards, commissions, and various non-governmental 
organizations as well. 
 
Close to my constituency, Regina Wascana Plains, SPMC 
worked with Post-Secondary Education on the SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
redevelopment project. It’s a wonderful project for 
post-secondary students in this province, Mr. Speaker, and 
accessibility to first-class technical training for many, many 
people from urban and rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Education was one of the very important highlights in the 
Throne Speech and I’m happy to say that SPMC played a 
pivotal role in ensuring the transition in that program ran very 
smoothly and efficiently. 
 

Mr. Speaker, education was a pivotal part of the Speech from 
the Throne — an important part of initiatives that are going 
forward — and did we hear that from the members opposite? 
No. What do we hear from the members opposite? Well they 
would freeze education spending in this province. No new 
programs that I hear that they have in mind. 
 
And they still continue the gloom and doom of talking about 
people who want to be in Saskatchewan and want to stay here 
— our students — and yet can say that they haven’t heard 
anything positive about education in this province. Shame, Mr. 
Speaker. How do you recruit? How do you retain people in this 
province with an attitude like that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, SPMC can also give the people of this province a 
big pat on the back for allowing them the dollars that are 
needed to maintain and preserve an important part of the 
heritage of this province — and we’re standing in it today — 
our Legislative Building. 
 
The upgrading and renovating of a building such as this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, is no small task and we need only look 
around us to see the job well done. SPMC used state-of-the-art 
technology, equipment, and labour to ensure the job was done 
and done right. 
 
They established a Web site so school students and their parents 
across this province could view the progress on the building. 
They involved, whenever possible, the people in this province 
on taking pride in the work that was being done to maintain the 
heritage of this province for future generations. 
 
And one interesting note. A school in my constituency, St. 
Marguerite Bourgeoys, placed a time capsule in a dome in the 
change from the 20th century to the 21st century. It’s kind of 
interesting what they put in there — Pokémon cards, and what’s 
hot and what’s not in Regina. And they were so excited to not 
only see the progress on this building but to be able to hide 
away a time capsule for people in many, many generations to 
come to be able to understand their lives in the 21st century. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Later this spring, Mr. Speaker, I will have a pleasure of 
showing the rest of the world SPM’s greatest achievement. It’s 
being worked on right now and it’s accessibility entrance to this 
building, Mr. Speaker. And I think we will all be proud when 
we have the opportunity to see the completion of that project. 
 
I would also like the other members of the House to join me in 
congratulating SPMC for ensuring that this building is here for 
years to come and for accommodating us all during these 
renovations. No small task, but again a task done well. 
 
SPMC strives to consistently deliver cost-effective service to its 
customers, pursue new and evolving opportunities and maintain 
an innovative and highly skilled group of employees. And 
they’re not employees just in this community, Mr. Speaker, but 
in communities throughout the province. They take pride in the 
buildings that government is housed in and the services that 
they provide to people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
One of SPMC’s many accomplishments is very interesting, Mr. 



132 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

Speaker. We know from the past year that the corporation’s 
maiden voyage is now into the world of e-commerce through 
ShopSPMC. ShopSPMC has proven to be an effective tool to 
provide better service to our customers and this program allows 
SPMC customers to purchase goods and services via the 
Internet saving a considerable amount of time and effort. 
 
And as I mentioned that’s just not within government but some 
of the non-governmental agencies that we serve as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
SPMC’s four cornerstones will ensure it will maintain customer 
focus, financial performance, employee focus and a focus on 
sound public policy. I am confident this organization can 
continue to build on these cornerstones. 
 
Just recently, Mr. Speaker, I was appointed the Minister 
Responsible for the Women’s Secretariat, the Minister 
Responsible for the Status of Women. This secretariat is an 
agency of the provincial government. It works to ensure that 
women’s perspectives and realities are reflected in government 
policies and programs. 
 
The secretariat’s work focuses on three main areas: research, 
policy development and public education. In the past few years 
the secretariat has addressed such issues as violence against 
women, labour standards, and balancing work and family 
options. 
 
This week, Mr. Speaker, the Women’s Secretariat is holding a 
conference entitled If Gender Mattered . . . Policy and 
Strategies to Advance Women’s Equality. It’s a workshop of 
professionals who are going to learn from each other and 
community partners about an issue that is vital to Government 
of Saskatchewan. And I’m honoured to stand today, Mr. 
Speaker, and tell other members what important work this 
department does to promote the status of women in today’s 
world. 
 
Now again, Mr. Speaker, I have to wonder because a member 
opposite stands and talks about the conference, If Gender 
Mattered, Mr. Speaker, and they’re telling us — and I hope it’s 
true — that gender matters to them and they’re interested in the 
conference. Eyes are on them from the community to see if 
they’re going to take seriously the recommendations that flow 
from this conference. 
 
I want to spend a few moments talking about it. First I’m going 
to talk about the mandate of Women’s Secretariat so that they 
know more about that and that our communities know more 
about it — it’s very important in mine. And I’d like to 
congratulate my colleague, the member from Regina Centre, 
who is also the Minister Responsible for Youth, Culture and 
Recreation because it was her idea, with the Women’s 
Secretariat, to bring people together from across this country to 
talk about the policy and research that needs to happen within 
government, to make certain, Mr. Speaker, that gender does 
matter. 
 
The mandate of the Women’s Secretariat is an agency of the 
provincial government. It works to provide strategic leadership 
and policy direction to government on issues affecting the status 
of women. Through the Secretariat, approaches for addressing 

women’s issues are centralized and coordinated. Our goal of 
achieving economic security and independence, safety and 
well-being for Saskatchewan women is done through a broad 
base of work across government and in our communities. 
 
We ensure that the views and perspectives of Saskatchewan 
women are brought to the policy and program agendas of both 
the provincial and federal levels of government. In order to 
represent the issues and concerns relevant to Saskatchewan 
women, we work to maintain a close relationship with 
stakeholders in all the communities of Saskatchewan. 
 
The conference. This conference, as I said, was originally 
conceptualized by my predecessor. Her vision was to conduct 
an evidence-based research symposium that would bring 
together academics and researchers with decision-makers in 
government as well as the community. 
 
With initial parameters in place — If Gender Mattered Policies 
and Strategies to Advance Women’s Equality — it’s going to 
be presented in effective and timely means for the secretariat to 
provide leadership to increase our collective understanding of 
gender-based analysis. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, to understand what it means to 
assess the differential impact of policies, programs, and 
legislation on men and women, and furthermore, to consider 
how we can go about doing that work more effectively. 
 
In the global context, we know we’ve had unprecedented 
change and there’s complexity to the issues that face us. But the 
stage has been set for talking about the need to bridge the gaps 
of culture, race, ethnicity, and gender. To this end, Mr. Speaker, 
important international, national, provincial, and territorial 
commitments have been made that call for the integration of 
gender-inclusive analysis into the decision-making process of 
government. 
 
I’m looking forward to the support of the members opposite to 
make certain this important work continues. They will know 
that it’s critical to many of the things that we’ve talked about in 
all-party committees, particularly the committee that’s looking 
at violence and abuse of women and children in the sex trade in 
this province. 
 
This conference demonstrates a strong linkage with the 
secretariat’s objectives of improving information to support 
policy decisions that impact women, and the increasing 
knowledge and capacity the community has in their efforts to 
address the status of women issues. 
 
So consequently, Mr. Speaker, this conference is designed to 
achieve a balance in the relationship between the many 
challenges that face women in our communities and how we 
can have that eye to the decision-making tables and make 
certain when we make advances that information’s available to 
sustain those advances and progress into the future. 
 
The last area of responsibility, Mr. Speaker, is indeed one that I 
call a glorious responsibility — it’s the Wascana Centre 
Authority. It does border my constituency. 
 
The management and staff of Wascana Centre Authority ensure 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 133 

 

this little oasis on the vast prairie remains green, clean, safe, 
and fun. Mr. Speaker, it’s highly involved with the Capitals 
Commission because it is, indeed, our own little capital 
commission. It’s a very important group of professionals that 
ensure our capital city works with other capital cities in 
preserving our natural and historic heritage. 
 
It’s also an area that highlights and profiles the seat of 
government, and entertains many tourists from not only this 
province, but also schoolchildren who come into the Authority 
to take advantage of the Science Centre, the waterfowl park, 
and many, many things that they’re able to enjoy within the 
Wascana Centre Authority. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as you can see, all of the departments that I 
have a responsibility for oversight and management hold 
tremendous potential. 
 
The potential of this province is also tremendous. And I’m not 
going to even buy in for one moment to the kinds of lack of 
understanding and the lack of potential that the members 
opposite have laid out. 
 
As they say, there’s absolutely nothing that they can connect to 
in the Throne Speech — when what we’re doing is connecting 
with people, connecting with communities, connecting the 
information highway into the future. Connecting to the future, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s clearly laid out in the 2001 Throne Speech. 
It’s there for us to look for, to vision together, and to dream 
about, and it’s there for us to put into strength and to practise, 
Mr. Speaker, so that all people work together with us to see that 
this vision becomes a reality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — We have a thriving economy. We have 
investments in the information highway. We’re ensuring that 
communities throughout this province have access to 
government services, to health and essential services. We have 
the facilities here to connect them, not only to government but 
to information globally. 
 
We have investments in the community. We have investments 
in the community that our department of Rural Revitalization 
can tell you about and more, through the infrastructure 
programs, the Canada/Sask Infrastructure Program. We have 
investments in rural Saskatchewan with increased spending on 
agricultural programs, the development of new programs that 
will help farming families take advantage of other opportunities 
with transition programs. 
 
And they even, you know, laugh at some of the programs that 
will help people to put marginal lands back into some kind of 
pasture production that will assist them in some of the 
diversification that we talked about. Small steps even, but taken 
one at a time are big steps for the future of farming in this 
province and they choose to ignore it totally, Mr. Speaker, or 
pooh pooh or laugh about them. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you know, it’s one thing to laugh, it’s one 
thing to ridicule; it’s another thing as a government in waiting, 
an Alberta government wannabe albeit; it’s one thing to have 
the responsibility to come clean, to tell rural Saskatchewan 

what you would do, and to speak with one voice. Not one voice 
from a leader and another voice from an ag critic and another 
voice from someone who stands up and says he has no answers 
but he still wants to criticize, Mr. Speaker. They have a 
responsibility to rural Saskatchewan and we should hear that. 
 
With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I want to commend our 
member, our Minister of Agriculture, who’s worked very hard 
in his job in advancing the issues that are very important to all 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — He’s worked hard with farm families 
and with our committees to look at programs that we could 
structure to support them. And he’s worked with one voice with 
other provincial leaders to take to the federal government. They 
know not all of the problems facing rural Saskatchewan are the 
result of some things that have happened in our community 
called Saskatchewan. They’re federal pressures, but they’re 
international pressures. 
 
And we need to be able to take a unified voice forward 
consistently, Mr. Speaker — not one voice when they go from 
here and another voice the minute they come home and collapse 
and sing a different song. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’d say we wouldn’t understand farming 
issues, but of course anyone that lives in an urban area is not far 
from the land. We have relatives in rural Saskatchewan. I have 
constituents in rural Saskatchewan. So I really take offence, Mr. 
Speaker, when they tell me I wouldn’t understand the issues of 
rural Saskatchewan because I’m as in touch with my 
constituents as they are with theirs. 
 
And one of the times that I’ve had a chance to get out there and 
talk to people is through the Century Family Farm Awards that 
are given out to rural Saskatchewan. I had the opportunity last 
year to be at one farm in my constituency, the Vetteridge family 
farm, led by Dorothy Vetteridge. And it was a wonderful time 
for family and friends and the rural neighbours in my 
constituency to celebrate the advancements that are made in 
rural Saskatchewan. And they’ve been the same awards that 
I’ve been able to attend with the member from Cannington and 
awards throughout this province as we see many people who 
are receiving the Century Family Farm Awards. 
 
Much has been said about transportation, and our Minister of 
Rural Revitalization and Highways and Transportation should 
be commended for the amount of money that we’re putting 
forward, not only in the last budgets but when we’ve had more 
money available to look forward to a fall program to start early 
on this year’s transportation program. And we’ll look forward 
to hearing more about those initiatives in the budget. 
 
So I commend her on the work that she’s doing to work with 
rural Saskatchewan in revitalization, not in talking about it’s the 
end is near, the sky is falling. She’s out there with a positive 
goal and an initiative. She comes from a rural family, she 
knows those issues, and she’ll bring those forward and talk to 
the members opposite in the months ahead about what we are 
doing, not what can’t be done or should be done by someone 
else, Mr. Speaker — what we will be doing here in this 



134 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

Assembly. 
 
In my constituency there are a few examples that I know of, and 
I’ve heard members talk about in other areas and I’ve heard 
from the Pulse Growers and I’ve heard from others, who talk 
about some very positive things that are happening. 
 
Well, one to me that is very positive is the organic farm 
industry growing. The growth in this industry for the last year 
has been phenomenal and in the past year FarmGro started up 
an organic mill operation in my constituency. And I’d like to 
extend congratulations to them on that occasion of start-up and 
the operation that has continued and the advances they’ll make 
into the future to assist farm families who’re involved in 
organic farm initiatives. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And I’d like to take this opportunity to commend the RM and 
municipalities for working together in the Area Transportation 
Committee on ensuring the best transportation system is 
available to all of us in our areas. We have investments in 
transportation and the largest highway renewal program in the 
history of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on and I don’t want to spend 
too much more time. But I want to very quickly say we’re also 
looking in the areas of health and the early childhood initiatives, 
in the SHIN (Saskatchewan Health Information Network) and 
connecting rural people to specialists and health care. We’re 
looking at the Fyke report. My constituents are very happy — 
they’ve had an opportunity to voice what they know to be ways 
that we could better improve delivery of quality health care in 
this province. 
 
We’re going to increase the number of community schools and 
make significant investment in renovating, expanding, and 
building schools. Mr. Speaker, good news, good news, good 
news, that the others just can’t stand in this Assembly, so they 
have to tear down, tear down. 
 
My educators know good news and they’re also working to 
contribute to being an important part of expanding educational 
opportunities for their students. You would have heard that the 
Buffalo Plains School Division and their neighbouring school 
divisions are going to come together in amalgamation. 
 
We listen to communities, Mr. Speaker, and to the stakeholders 
out there to ensure quality care for everyone in this province. 
We’re committed to working with First Nations and Metis 
representatives to develop Metis and off-reserve strategies. 
 
And I’m confident that the people of this province will endure 
the challenges that face us. They’ll endure them together — as 
we’ve done in the past. They know that the hardships that we 
face strengthen us to be creative and dynamic in looking toward 
the future. We have a vision, we have the ideas and the 
creativity to make these work. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud and pleased to be able to 
stand here and in the days ahead work with my colleagues to 
make the vision outlined in the Throne from the Speech the 
reality. 

In closing, the theme connecting to the future of prosperity 
couldn’t be more fitting for this wonderful province of 
Saskatchewan. I’m proud to represent the constituency of 
Regina Wascana Plains, proud and thankful that you’ve given 
me this opportunity to speak to the Throne Speech today, and 
extremely proud later on this week to support the budget. 
 
I am proud today to rise in support of the Throne from the 
Speech, Mr. Speaker, and reject the amendment that’s been 
placed before us. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Question of Privilege 
 
The Speaker: — At this time, I would like to interrupt the 
debate to bring down the ruling which I referred to earlier this 
afternoon. 
 
During the debate on the Speech from the Throne on Friday, the 
Opposition House Leader raised a question of privilege 
regarding remarks by the member for Cumberland. The Deputy 
Speaker reserved the decision pending review of the verbatim. 
 
This morning I received from the Opposition House Leader a 
formal notice of the question of privilege pursuant to rule 6, for 
which I thank the hon. member. The member’s notice argues 
that the member for Cumberland is in contempt of the 
Assembly for falsely alleging that there are financial and other 
connections between official opposition members and the First 
Nations Party of Saskatchewan, and for comparing these 
connections to illegal election financing activities by the 
Progressive Conservative Party in Manitoba. I have now had an 
opportunity to review the record and consider the matter. 
 
Before making my ruling, I remind all hon. members that it is 
not the role of the Speaker to decide if a breach of privilege or 
contempt of the Assembly has been committed. This is a 
question only the Assembly can decide. It is the Speaker’s role 
to decide whether a prima facie case — which means on first 
sight — has been established. When a prima facie case is 
established, consideration of the question of privilege must then 
take precedence over all other business before the Assembly. 
The House then decides the matter by a vote. 
 
In order for a prima facie case of privilege to be found, the 
actions complained of must amount to an impediment to a 
member’s ability to carry out his or her functions as a member. 
It must be clearly demonstrated that a member has been 
obstructed or interfered with in his or her parliamentary work. 
 
In his privilege notice, the Opposition House Leader quotes 
from Parliamentary Privilege in Canada by Joseph Maingot, 
page 250, regarding reflections on members. Maingot goes on 
to say: “Any reflections of course must relate to the member’s 
parliamentary work.” 
 
In reviewing the Hansard, I find that the statements made by 
the member for Cumberland, while they may be offensive to 
some, deal primarily with political party organizations. The 
statements do not impede the ability of any members of the 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 135 

 

House from carrying out their duties in the Assembly. The main 
purpose of parliamentary privilege is to protect the member’s 
right to free speech in the Assembly. 
 
It follows then that Speakers should be reluctant to apply the 
rules of parliamentary privilege in a way that restricts members’ 
freedom of speech. Accordingly I therefore rule that a prima 
facie case of privilege has not been made. 
 
While the member for Cannington has not established a case for 
breach of privilege, he did underscore a long-standing practice 
of this Assembly. That practice is that members cannot do 
indirectly what cannot be done directly. 
 
In this regard the practice of this Assembly is substantiated by 
the practice of the House of Commons, which is noted on page 
522 of House of Commons Practice and Procedure. 
 
In reviewing Hansard of March 23, 2001, page 95, I find that 
the member for Cumberland did equate the Saskatchewan Party 
to the Tory Party and in turn linked the Tory Party to acts that 
were in contravention of Manitoba’s electoral laws. 
 
The insinuation is that the Saskatchewan Party, through its 
alleged connection to the First Nations Party in this province, 
might be involved in similar illegal acts. 
 
On page 525 of the House of Commons Practice and 
Procedure, it is stated that, quote: 
 

a direct charge or accusation against a Member may be 
made only by way of a substantive motion for which notice 
is required. 
 

I remind members that the proceedings of this Assembly are 
based on a long-standing tradition of respect for the integrity of 
all members. The integrity or motives of members, whether 
individually or collectively, should not be questioned indirectly 
in debate. 
 
This was expressed in a Speaker’s ruling made May 12, 2000, 
when a series of statements made in debate attempted to 
connect members of the opposition with criminal convictions. 
These comments were ruled out of order. 
 
I find the words of the member for Cumberland to be similar in 
spirit, and thus out of order. I ask him to rise and withdraw the 
offending words. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — I withdraw. 
 
The Speaker: — Debate will proceed. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Jones, seconded by Mr. McCall, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I first want to take this 
opportunity to congratulate you on your election to the Chair of 
this Assembly. Sir, in addition to your new, important duties, 
you’re also my mother-in-law’s MLA and so we have 
somewhat of a common bond, Mr. Speaker. We will both be 
dealing with her from time to time, and I think I’ll just leave it 
at that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also through you to the member for Regina Sherwood, I’d also 
like to offer my congratulations to him on his selection as our 
Deputy Speaker. I think we have good reason to be optimistic 
regarding the ability and the fairness of our new officers of this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislature deals with many wavy issues, 
matters of provincial import. We discuss legislation and public 
policy that affects the entire province. And even though this is 
only my second session, it strikes me that one of the most 
important struggles that individual MLAs face is to keep their 
perspective, to be ever mindful of who sent us here, to whom 
we are accountable, and who we represent. 
 
I was reminded of this during last week’s emergency debate on 
the agriculture crisis, Mr. Speaker, as I listened to my 
colleagues weigh in on that particular debate. And I think in 
particular of the members for Watrous, for Kindersley, and 
especially for Last Mountain-Touchwood. Clearly we were 
debating a very important issue that day. 
 
The agricultural crisis is an issue that affects not only rural 
Saskatchewan but urban Saskatchewan. It affects every family; 
it affects every business across the province. It was very evident 
and clear, Mr. Speaker, that all of those three individuals were 
interested in more than a front-page headline in the province’s 
dailies. They were looking for more than the sought after 
15-second clip on a national newscast. 
 
It was clear to me, Mr. Speaker, as I listened to them speak, and 
as I have listened to them in our caucus, that the agriculture 
issue is something very near and dear to them. They were 
speaking on behalf . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Harper: — To ask leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to thank 
the member for Swift Current for allowing me this opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and to all the members 
of the House here, a constituent of mine, Mr. Orlay Sullivan, 
who is sitting up in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
Orlay is not only a constituent of mine and a good friend of 
mine, but he’s also the best storyteller in Saskatchewan as far as 
I’m concerned. So I’ll ask all the members to offer him a very 
warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



136 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Jones, seconded by Mr. McCall, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, during last week’s agriculture crisis 
debate, those members that I mentioned were speaking out on 
behalf of their neighbours, their friends and families. They were 
speaking out on behalf of small businesses and communities in 
the riding. And they were talking about a way of life, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And it was a very timely reminder for me as I began to consider 
what I wanted to offer in the way of my participation in the 
Throne Speech debate. And with those things in mind, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to deal with my comments as regards to the 
Throne Speech from the perspective of the constituents of Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we feel that any number of issues in the office, 
obviously as other members do in their constituency offices, but 
the number one issue that we hear about in Swift Current has to 
do with health care in Swift Current. The number two issue is 
the economy and taxes. 
 
And so with respect to the other issues that they raise, I would 
like to deal in my Throne Speech . . . my address and reply to 
the Throne Speech, with those two issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Swift Current and area used to enjoy making 
headlines in health care. It is after all the centre of health care 
region no. 1. It is the cradle of medicare, Mr. Speaker. The 
place in Canada — much as the revisionists across the way like 
to gloss over — the place in Canada where the notion that 
health care must be made available regardless of the availability 
to pay, first took root. 
 
It’s not quite like what we have now. Granted, there were still 
some fees, Mr. Speaker, and the relative costs of health care 
have skyrocketed since that time. But those surely must have 
been heady days in Swift Current and area as they pioneered a 
brand new system that would one day come to the entire 
country. 
 
And decades later, Mr. Speaker, we are still making health care 
news in Swift Current and area. But the news has changed. Now 
we’re making news in Swift Current because of 14 acute care 
bed closures in our regional hospitals. Now we’re making news 
in Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, because of six long-term care 
bed closures; now we hear rumours of up to eight at the 
hospital. 
 
We make news in Swift Current in health care now, Mr. 
Speaker, because of nursing shortages. We make news now, 
Mr. Speaker, in Swift Current in terms of health care as a result 
of a deteriorating hospital that has not seen a capital 
improvement since 1971. We make news in Swift Current in 

health care now, Mr. Speaker, because of the chronic 
underfunding of that district and that regional hospital by this 
government opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Not long ago, maybe three years ago, there was a town hall 
meeting in Swift Current, and that made news too, Mr. Speaker. 
And it was all about the doctor shortage that we face in Swift 
Current. Thankfully it has been alleviated to some extent — not 
due to anything that this government has done by the way, Mr. 
Speaker, but due to the efforts of the community that came 
together after that town hall meeting, struck a volunteer 
recruitment committee, and went out and found doctors for our 
community. 
 
It had precious little to do with this government and everything 
to do with the people of Swift Current — the same people who 
created health care region no. 1 and medicare, are those asked 
in Swift Current now to fix the medicare mess left by the NDP 
government. 
 
(16:45) 
 
We make news in Swift Current in health care, Mr. Speaker, 
now, because of cancelled surgery, cancelled elective surgeries. 
And, Mr. Speaker, sadly we made news not long ago in Swift 
Current in terms of health care because of the blazing heat 
inside the air-conditioner-deprived, long-term care facilities in 
my community. 
 
And as we have tried to bring these issues to the attention of the 
NDP government, two different NDP ministers of Health have 
also made health care news, and they’ve made a lot of heads 
shake in Swift Current, frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We raised concerns over bed closures with the former minister 
of Health in January, and her response was that it was a nursing 
shortage problem. They asked the district what the root of the 
problem was and the district said it was underfunding. They 
asked the nurses what the problem was; the nurses said it was 
underfunding. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, of two nurses on a personal level who 
came to see me, that actually wanted and applied for full-time 
work in the district. But due to a lack of resources in that 
district provided by this government, they had to go down the 
road. One is working in Regina; I don’t know where the other 
one went. 
 
So how could it be a shortage of nurses, Mr. Speaker? Clearly 
that wasn’t the problem. 
 
Well last month, Mr. Speaker, constituents, patients, and 
doctors themselves spoke out. They were concerned by the 
second response that we got from a minister of this government 
to the crisis that we raised with them about health care in Swift 
Current. We raised a very similar concern about the bed 
closures after doctors reported in our local media that surgeries 
had been cancelled. 
 
And the response we got from the Minister of Health, Mr. 
Speaker, was detailed in the February 23 edition of The Leader 
Post. This is the new minister, Mr. Speaker, the most recent 
Minister of Health, the member for Regina Lakeview — his 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 137 

 

quote, and I’m quoting from the newspaper. First of all the 
headline, Mr. Speaker, and it is a headline, says: “Nilson denies 
health crisis,” and I’m quoting. 
 
Then he goes on in the article and he says: 
 

“I am very disappointed by my colleague from the 
Saskatchewan Party who continues to use examples like 
this (the bed closures and the attendant issues with those) as 
a method of raising the fear of the public. 
 
“What we know in that health district is that over . . . three 
or four years the occupancy rate in the hospital . . . there is 
about (60) . . . per cent. 
 

So basically everything is fine; that’s the upshot of this article. 
The minister said that in the Swift Current district — everything 
is fine. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the hon. 
member for Regina Qu’Appelle says it’s reading between the 
line. The headline speaks for itself — he denies the crisis, he 
denies the crisis in Swift Current. 
 
And what was the response, what was the response of the 
doctors? Mr. Speaker, in our constituency in Swift Current, who 
in the very next edition of The Southwest Booster, our weekly, 
basically the doctor in particular, the doctor that heads up the 
General Practitioners’ Association in Swift Current said in no 
uncertain terms that what the minister was denying was this: he 
was denying the fact that bed closures at the Swift Current 
hospital have resulted in a couple of things in addition to the 
cancelled surgeries. 
 
It’s resulted in maternity patients, new mothers, getting the 
bum’s rush out of their ward because maternity beds are needed 
for acute care. It’s meant that babies are going home before the 
nursing staff would like them to go home, Mr. Speaker, because 
they need the beds for acute care. 
 
It means that people who need acute care medical beds in Swift 
Current are being shuffled out of the system before they should 
be because long-term care patients are also taking up medical 
beds in the hospital. And why is that? Because this 
government’s actions caused the closure of long-term care beds 
in my community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister denies that there’s a problem with that. He denies 
that there’s a problem with that in Swift Current and across the 
province. I’d submit, with respect to the hon. member through 
you, that there is a problem with that. There’s a problem when 
the basic tenets of the Canada Health Act are being violated in 
Swift Current and across the province day in and day out as a 
result of this government’s underfunding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health care crisis in Swift Current is real. They 
say that we are fearmongering and their tired, old refrain is that 
we are purveyors of doom and gloom. And so we look at the 
Throne Speech for some hope, Mr. Speaker. But we don’t find 
it there. 
 
And we ask, through you, we ask them the question. Is it 
fearmongering to raise the plight of an 80-year-old blind 

woman who’s about to be moved . . . who was about to be 
moved from her long-term care bed until we were able to 
intervene? That is closing, that bed is closing, and they wanted 
her to move either back to the hospital to a much-needed 
medical bed or to a facility 30 miles west of Swift Current. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I can’t describe how shocking it was 
to hear the family of that lady describe her situation to me. And 
it didn’t take long for me to recognize who this lady was. 
 
I recollect door knocking during the 1999 campaign, and I came 
to her home and she invited me in. It was a hot night and she 
asked if I wanted a drink of water and I was very grateful for 
that. And we sat down and we had a long chat about issues. She 
was living very independently at the time, Mr. Speaker. So 
much so that she had to tell me, 10 minutes into our 
conversation, she had to tell me that she was actually blind, that 
she couldn’t see. 
 
And so imagine my shock when I put two and two together 
when her family was in my office all these months later, that it 
was this very same lady. Some medical catastrophe had befell 
her, and so she had to now be admitted to a long-term care bed. 
And they told me that it was very difficult for her because she 
had basically lived so independently all those years in her 
house. 
 
And so here’s this wonderful lady — this 80-year-old lady, 
pioneer of our province — trying to make the very difficult 
adjustment of moving from her independent home on 13th 
Avenue in Swift Current to a long-term care bed. And the next 
news she gets — thanks to this government — the next news 
that she gets is that they’re going to close that bed or they need 
her long-term care bed, and that she should be moved back to 
the hospital or maybe 30 miles down the road. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is it fear mongering to raise her plight, to try to get 
some justice for her? Or what about the story in . . . last 
summer, Mr. Speaker, at the Swift Current Care Centre. I 
remember it was a Sunday afternoon last — I think it was last 
July — and we received a call, Mr. Speaker, to our home. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — We received a call at our home, Mr. Speaker, 
from the nursing staff at the Swift Current Care Centre. It was 
in the middle of a heat wave in Swift Current, and they asked if 
we could just come down and check it out. They didn’t know 
where to turn. They knew we couldn’t fix it immediately or do 
something about it, but would we come down and check out the 
situation? 
 
And so my wife, Tami, and I, we drove down to the care centre 
and we were met at the door by nurses who were just absolutely 
perspiring from the work that they had done all day. And they 
brought us over to the eating area where most of the residents of 
the long-term care facility were. They were . . . while they were 
supposed to be eating, but none really were because of the heat. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure it had zapped their appetite. 
 
And then they asked me to come over and take a look at the 
digital thermostat on the wall at this care centre, understanding 
that the eating area was the coolest room in the facility, and it 



138 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

was 33.9 degrees in that eating area for these long-term care 
residents. There were fans going everywhere. 
 
As we toured the facility we noticed there weren’t even proper 
blinds on the windows. There were basically bed . . . you know, 
thin, cotton bedsheet-like curtains that basically were heat 
conductors as opposed to deflectors. 
 
And so in that case, Mr. Speaker, we simply asked the 
government of the day, we wrote a letter saying, is it too much 
to consider portable air conditioners? They have that 
technology now. They’re relatively inexpensive. Is it too much 
to consider that as an option, as an alternative? And there was 
no answer that came back. 
 
So when the heat wave hits again next summer, the situation 
will have changed . . . will not have changed at all. Senior 
citizens, people who built our province, will be forced to endure 
33 degree heat in their long-term care facility that their taxes 
and the taxes of their family members have paid for. That’s the 
kind of service that seniors will be able to expect because of 
this government, Mr. Speaker, and the chronic underfunding of 
health care in the Swift Current area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has broken the promise of 
health care region no. 1. They have betrayed the very authors of 
the medicare system that they falsely claim as their exclusive 
heritage. Their broken promises, their excuses, their ridiculous 
chants from the backbench meant to marginalize these serious 
concerns are absolutely unacceptable. And so, Mr. Speaker, I 
looked to the Throne Speech for some indication in the Throne 
Speech, that while we await Fyke, interim measures will be 
taken to deal with emergent issues, not just in Swift Current but 
across the province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech is completely silent on 
any such measure. For those in Swift Current waiting for some 
relief from this health care crisis — that the Minister of Health 
denies — there is nothing in the Throne Speech that would give 
them hope. 
 
Next to health care, Mr. Speaker, my constituency office deals 
with the deep and abiding concerns about taxes in the overall 
economy. And make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, the people in 
Swift Current and area have put the two together. They 
understand that in order to have a strong and a growing 
economy, you need to do it on the foundation of sustained 
lowering of taxes. You need the lowest taxes possible, in order 
to compete with the jurisdictions across this country. Not just 
with Alberta, but other provinces as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Swift Current has always felt that 
the competitive pressures . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. members . . . the hon. members are 
yelling from the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. members are yelling from 
their seat. Underscoring again for anyone that can hear and for 
those that can’t, I’ll repeat what I was saying. Underscoring 
once again, for everybody, that they simply don’t understand 
how it is you can have sustained health care and social services 

in our province or any other jurisdiction. 
 
You need people to pay taxes, you need businesses to pay taxes, 
families with the money in their pocket to pay taxes. It’s the 
only way. It doesn’t come out of mid-air. The hon. member for 
Regina South doesn’t understand that these things don’t appear 
out of mid-air. It’s all based on small-business men and women, 
large businesses too, and families with the ability to pay taxes; 
lower taxes, mind you, than what we pay now, but taxes 
nonetheless, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ll continue to explain it. I doubt that they’ll understand it, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s why we’ll soon be trading places, Mr. 
Speaker, because they don’t understand that basic issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Swift Current has always felt the competitive 
pressures of living so close to not just Alberta, but we live close 
to the lowest-cost community within Alberta in terms of paying 
taxes and utility fees. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
the member for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), when we’re asking about issues that relate to 
the energy crisis that we’re having right now, often cites 
Alberta and deregulation in terms of a reason to not go down 
that road, and he may be right. 
 
But what the minister fails to recognize is that two hours down 
the road from Swift Current is the city of Medicine Hat. Their 
gas prices are half the price of ours, even with deregulation. 
Their electrical costs are much lower than ours. Their property 
taxes are very much lower than ours. But the energy bills that 
they are paying, Mr. Speaker, in Medicine Hat are half the costs 
that we’re paying here, in a deregulated environment. That is 
what Swift Current has to compete with, Mr. Speaker. So we 
understand, we understand the need to be able to compete with 
Alberta. 
 
But lately, Mr. Speaker, our economic situation has become 
much more urgent. What has been very alarming for me and 
other people in my hometown and the surrounding area is the 
number of long-term Swift Current residents, many of them 
entrepreneurs and job creators, who have chosen to leave our 
city. Too many men and women who have the investment 
ability and the skill and the proven track record of creating jobs 
and economic development have left; and many others are 
sitting at their kitchen tables or at their office desks — where 
they used to plan business strategies, sadly, Mr. Speaker — 
they’re planning exit strategies today. 
 
I have talked to so many accountants in my hometown, Mr. 
Speaker, who feel bad for having done their fiduciary duty to 
their clients. They tell me they have clients considering selling 
out and getting out of business. And they tell me that they regret 
having to perform their fiduciary duty to those clients when 
they tell them, you know, before you sell out, you should get a 
mailing address, you should maybe move to Medicine Hat, 
because the taxes here are so punitive. 
 
And many of those people, Mr. Speaker, are the kinds of people 
who after selling out of their current business would like to 
invest it in a new business, would like to create more jobs, and 
now they will be doing that in Medicine Hat. It is lost to the city 
of Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, because they’ve decided to do 
that in Medicine Hat. And I have much more to say, Mr. 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 139 

 

Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It now being past the hour of 5 
o’clock, this House will recess until 7 p.m. tonight. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 



 

 

 


