















































Hansard: April 11, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 511 
 April 11, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m happy to present on behalf of constituents in my riding of 
Rosetown-Biggar a petition dealing with the Saskatchewan 
EMS (emergency medical services) development project. And 
the prayer reads: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from Biggar, Cando, 
Saskatoon, Elrose, Rosetown, Harris, and Wiseton. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today again I stand 
to present a petition on behalf of residents of the Cypress Hills 
constituency who have expressed grave concerns about the 
implications of the Saskatchewan EMS development project 
and the recommendations forthcoming from it. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition was signed, Mr. Speaker, by residents from 
Gull Lake, Tompkins, Hazlet, and Shaunavon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions from citizens of the Humboldt 
constituency who are concerned about the loss of 
community-based ambulance services. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Cudworth. 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding tobacco use and second-hand smoke. The petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to protect children and youth from 
second-hand smoke and protect them from the health 
hazards of tobacco use. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is from students of Regina. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition today 
regarding the EMS project. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Naicam. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with proposed 
conversion of paved highways to gravel. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel, commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents, and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Briercrest and Drinkwater. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m very pleased to present petitions here today from 
residents of the province who are concerned about the health 
hazards of second-hand smoke. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to protect children and youth from 
second-hand smoke and protect them from the health 
hazards of tobacco use. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are mostly signed from residents of Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of people in the 
Swift Current area concerned about their hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
And the prayer of this petition reads as follows: 



512 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2001 

 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Swift 
Current, Cabri, Herbert, Regina, Mankota, Simmie, Vanguard, 
from Ponteix, from Neville, and from Meyronne. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to present 
a petition in support of comprehensive tobacco control 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to protect children and youth from 
second-hand smoke and protect them from the health 
hazards of tobacco use. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will humbly pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and this petition is signed by members from 
Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present a 
petition on behalf of constituents in the Indian Head-Milestone 
constituency. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Radville, 
Weyburn, Fillmore, and the Milestone area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition in support of comprehensive tobacco control 
legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to protect children and youth from 
second-hand smoke and protect them from the health 
hazards of tobacco use. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by a number of children, I believe, from 
the city of Regina. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of constituents concerned with the 

centralization of ambulance service. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition come from the communities of 
Wynyard, Mozart, and the Kawacatoose First Nation. I do so 
present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Petitions regarding: 
 

The centralization of ambulance services; 
 
The Swift Current request for a new hospital; 
 
The level of services at Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia; and 
 
Protecting children from tobacco use. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 22 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: has your 
department made a submission to the Canadian 
Transportation Agency as a part of the CTA’s review 
process; and if a presentation has been made, is it available 
to the public, and would the minister please provide a 
copy? 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 17 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what is the foundation and 
methodology behind research currently being conducted by 
HSURC in the area of home care; when was this research 
project initiated and when will it be completed; to date 
what are the costs associated with HSURC’s study into 
home care? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have a second 
question. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day 17 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what is the foundation and 
methodology behind research currently being conducted by 
HSURC in the area of emergency medical services; when 



April 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 513 

 

was this research project initiated and when will it be 
completed; to date what are the costs associated with this 
study into emergency medical services? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 22 ask the government the following question 
regarding the Kroll report on no-fault insurance: 
 

Has the government or SGI done an analysis of the Kroll 
report and its recommendation of the premier options for 
reform of no-fault insurance; (2) if so, what has this 
analysis shown; if not, when can the government be 
expected to release an analysis of the report? 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 22 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Economic Development: has the 
company Kinetic Lloydminster received any start-up grants 
or funding; and if so, how much did they receive? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to all the members of this 
Assembly and to the province of Saskatchewan, I’d like to 
introduce some people who are seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have representatives here today from the Canadian Home 
Builders’ Association and the Saskatchewan Home Builders’ 
Association. These organizations, Mr. Speaker, represent 
members of all areas of Canada’s and Saskatchewan’s housing 
industry including new home builders, renovators, and land 
developers. They work to develop the professionalism of the 
industry, achieve a sustainable business environment for their 
members, and promote the interests of the consumers. 
 
From the Canadian Home Builders’ Association I am pleased to 
introduce Dick Miller from Halifax who is their 2001 president 
and president of Clayton Developments, Atlantic Canada’s 
leading community developer; and John Kenward, who is the 
chief operating officer for Canadian Home Builders’ 
Association; and from the Saskatchewan Home Builders’ 
Association I would like to recognize Tim Schaefer, who is 
their chairman and president and owner of Varsity Homes in 
Regina; and Mr. Ken McKinlay, the Saskatchewan Home 
Builders’ Association executive director. 
 
Please welcome them to the Assembly and to this province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, if 
I may be allowed, I would also like to introduce a respected and 
distinguished gentleman with whom all members of the 
coalition and I’m sure all members in this Assembly are very 
pleased to work with and that’s Mr. Sinclair Harrison who’s the 
president of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, also seated in your gallery. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
opposition I too would wish to welcome the home builders’ 
association and recognize the important part they play in our 
economy. 
 
On behalf of the opposition, welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to be able to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of this Assembly 52 grade 5 students seated in the 
west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re from W.S. Hawrylak School which is a beautiful 
school on the southeast corner of the city. They’re accompanied 
by their teachers, Shirley Wolfe, Brenda Martin, and Mrs. 
Moore. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m really looking forward to meeting with 
them following question period. I know they’ll have a lot of 
good questions for me and certainly are going to look with 
interest upon the proceedings during the question period time. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming the grade 5 
students from W.S. Hawrylak School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well I’d 
join the minister for Municipal Government and on behalf of 
my colleagues welcome Sinclair Harrison who is with us this 
afternoon. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we’re all familiar with the 
work that Mr. Harrison does as president of SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), the reeve 
of his municipality, and Mr. Harrison and his wife Gail are very 
active in their local community as well. 
 
And so we extend our welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all members of 
the House, seven very enthusiastic students from the Carrot 
River High School. They are seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, and they are here on a job shadow program, and I 
would ask each of them to stand as I introduce them. 
 
Brandi Gerbrandt, grade 10; Becky Sawatsky, grade 10; Tyler 
Shore, grade 8, and I should add, Mr. Speaker, that I think Tyler 
is the future politician in the bunch. And Tracy Warnock, grade 
7; Brittany Ralph, grade 7; and Alicia Kitely, grade 7. 
 
I also want to extend a very special welcome to someone who 
has worked in my office, my constituency office now for well 
over a year on a job experience program, Mr. Shawn Harrower. 
And the group, Mr. Speaker, are being accompanied by teacher 
associate, Carol Perrin. 



514 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2001 

 

And these students, Mr. Speaker, insisted that I refer to them as 
ambassadors of the town of Carrot River. So I would ask that 
everyone join with me in welcoming these fine young 
ambassadors from the great town of Carrot River. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 
to welcome a constituent to the Assembly today, Mr. George 
Siemens, in the gallery behind me, farms with his wife Pat, and 
his son Byron, in the Fiske community. I’ve known George for 
many years. George has a real heart for rural Saskatchewan, for 
the agricultural sector. He’s done much work. I’ve had the 
privilege of working together with him on some initiatives. 
 
And I would just encourage all members of the House to give 
George Siemens a very, very hearty welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to introduce to you, and through you to the 
members of . . . all the members of the House, Gordon 
Barnhart, a former Clerk of the legislature who left us to work 
in the Senate in Ottawa some years ago, but he’s returned to 
Saskatchewan as many good Saskatchewan folks do. They go 
away to find things are much, much better at home here. 
 
Welcome back home, Gordon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Elevator Losses Stress Highways 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week an 
elevator in the town of Rosthern went down in a cloud of 1930s 
dust. The Pool elevator was destroyed, and one of the series of 
elevators that we’ve lost throughout the province. 
 
And I think the significant thing of that is not that the elevator’s 
particularly gone, but that it’s going to put some extended stress 
and strain on Highways No. 312, Highway 11, and Highway 12. 
 
We already have a lot of . . . these highways already have a lot 
of stress on them from tourism. Batoche, Fort Carlton, Seager 
Wheeler, and Duck Lake — those areas create a lot of tourism, 
and increased heavy truckload that’s there is going to make 
those highways hard to maintain and also very unsafe until we 
get some good twinning taking place there. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Melville Community Events 
 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
highlight one of the great events happening in my constituency 
over the past few weeks. 
 
I enjoyed the warm reception I received at the Melville and 
District Chamber of Commerce Annual Trade Fair on March 2. 
The last week of March every year, the Chamber puts on a very 

successful event and this year is no different. 
 
I wish to acknowledge the efforts of the many Chamber 
volunteers who give unselfishly of themselves to organize such 
a successful event, and congratulate the many exhibitors on 
their displays. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that the ingenuity of the people 
in Melville and the area is amazing. Take the fundraiser for the 
hospital. It has had the community of Melville a buzz, you 
might say. The brainchild of Jim Schmidt, of the Melville 
Advance has raised a tremendous amount of money for the 
Hospital Foundation and lightened the load of several 
prominent Melville citizens. 
 
The promotion called Buzz Cut was organized by Mr. Schmidt 
and included 12 members of the community and the mayor. Six 
members of the team would lose some hair at the trade fair, but 
the real goal was to see Mayor Fisher receive a buzz cut if the 
promotion could raise $10,000. 
 
Well you know what, Mr. Speaker, all expectations were 
exceeded. In fact they raised $25,382.42 — $25,382.42, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to quickly acknowledge the tremendous efforts 
of the 13 brave men in promoting the Hospital Foundation to 
the community and raising a donation that exceeds all 
expectations: Jim Schmidt, Joe Kirwan, Lloyd Haylock, Merv 
Appel, Ray Lalonde, Richard Hill, Dave Broda, Henry Broda, 
Glen Miller, Father Rocky, Bob Simpson, Phil Randall, and 
Mayor Mike Fisher. Congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Dugout House at Craik Regional Park 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to talk 
about the reconstruction of a historic site at the Craik Regional 
Park. 
 
This past winter Mr. Austin Eade of Craik reconstructed an 
authentic dugout house of the type built by some of our first 
pioneers in Saskatchewan. Indeed, Mr. Eade says that he built 
this authentic dugout house on the site of the original one built 
during the mid- to late-1800s. 
 
Mr. Reed discovered the site a few years ago while walking in 
the Arm River Valley. He noticed impressions in the hill site, 
and upon further investigation revealed the depressions to be 
remains of the house and a barn. 
 
After archaeologists studied the site, Mr. Eade dug into the 
project recreating the original structure on behalf of the Craik 
Regional Park. 
 
The spartan one-room structure is furnished with antiques on 
loan from the local Craik Museum. Indeed the park hopes to 
complete the site by building the barn this spring. 
 
With the hard work of Mr. Eade and his dedication to history 
people visiting the park have the opportunity to step back into 
the province’s history. People get a glimpse of life of how our 
earliest pioneers survived the harsh climate by building into the 
hillside for shelter. 



April 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 515 

 

I want to thank Austin Eade for his remarkable achievement on 
behalf of the people of Arm River constituency and 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Snowbirds Team Names Deputy Crew Chief 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate 
Master Corporal Mark Gegner for being selected for the 
position of the Deputy Crew Chief of the ground crew on the 
Canadian Forces Aerobic Demonstration Team, the Snowbirds. 
 
Mark presently resides in Moose Jaw but was born and raised in 
Watrous. Master Corporal Gegner will fly with the team for the 
2001-2002 show seasons. Mark joined the Canadian Forces in 
1982. He completed his training for airplane technician in 
Borden, Ontario where he graduated the top of his class from 
the School of Aerospace and Ordinance Engineering. After 
completing this Mark was then posted in Moose Jaw. Mark 
rotated through most of the sections of the flight line, snags, 
servicing, and the maintenance sections working on the CT-114 
Tutor aircraft. 
 
In 1988 Mark was posted in West Germany where he served. 
And then in 1992, Mark returned to Moose Jaw where he was 
promoted to the rank of Master Corporal and now has been 
selected for deputy crew chief for the Snowbirds. 
 
Please join me in congratulating Mark in his accomplishments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Health Care Centres Open 
 
Ms. Jones: — Even more good news for the province, Mr. 
Speaker. Both the Unity Health Centre and the Carrot River 
Health Facility are new and exciting expansions to each 
respective community. 
 
In Carrot River a sod-turning ceremony kicked off the 
construction of the new community health facility, Mr. Speaker. 
This project will replace all of the existing health services 
placing them under one roof. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, residents of Unity and area have a brand 
new operational health centre. This health centre replaces the 
old Unimac Pioneers Lodge with additions and renovations to 
the existing Unity Hospital. The new facility consolidates 
community health services in one location, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The addition of these two new health centres will provide both 
communities with services such as long-term care, diagnostic 
services including lab and X-rays, palliative and respite care, 
and community health education services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these new health centres reflect this government’s 
commitment to working with communities and the partners of 
the health sector. Providing accessible quality health care to all 
people in Saskatchewan is one of the goals of this government, 
Mr. Speaker, and with investments such as these, we are 
achieving that goal. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Election Costs 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
one of the headlines in today’s paper reads “NDP top spenders 
in provincial election.” Mr. Speaker, that’s both bad and good 
news for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
It cost a total of $77,413 to elect one of the government 
members, Mr. Speaker. It cost an astronomical $284,611 to 
elect a Liberal member, Mr. Speaker. That’s the bad news for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The good news, Mr. Speaker, is that it only cost $38,230 to 
elect a member of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I believe this is clearly a 
case of quality over quantity which, in my opinion, Mr. 
Speaker, also speaks in relationship to the membership in the 
House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is another example of . . . there’s another 
example in this article, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP Party debt 
has risen to over 600,000. Now we see that government debt is 
heading in the same direction — going up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, both in their party operations and in government, 
it’s tax and spend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would just invite all guests to observe the 
proceedings and to not participate in the proceedings in any 
way, by clapping or anything. That is one of the customs of the 
House and I would ask that you observe that. 
 

Performing Arts Centre Opens in Lloydminster 
 

Mr. McCall: — Heed my words, Mr. Speaker, because I bring 
to you dramatic good news for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The city of Lloydminster held a sod-turning ceremony on April 
6 of this year to kick off the construction of the new Vic Juba 
Performing Arts Centre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — The centre is so named due to Mr. Juba’s 
dedication to the Lloydminster community and his many years 
of faithful service. 
 
This 538-seat theatre is to be connected to the Lakeland College 
in Lloydminster. Our government has contributed $100,000 
from the Associated Entities Fund towards the construction of 
this new facility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The new performing arts theatre will attract many performers 
and events from this region and beyond, which will be of great 
benefit to the city and surrounding area. As well, Mr. Speaker, 
this theatre will give the youth of Lloydminster a place to 



516 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2001 

 

perform and strut their stuff as the theatre will be shared by 
both . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. I just want 
to ask members to make it possible for our guests who are here 
to actually hear what’s happening. 
 
Mr. McCall: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, the new 
performing arts theatre will attract many performers and events 
from this region and beyond which will be of great benefit to 
the city and surrounding area. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, this theatre will give the youth of 
Lloydminster a place to perform and strut their stuff as the 
theatre will be shared by both school and community 
organizations bringing culture, recreation, excitement, and 
prosperity to all communities throughout Saskatchewan. As a 
goal of this government and with investments such as this, we 
are putting our commitments into action. 
 
All the world is a stage, Mr. Speaker, and now the city of 
Lloydminster can sit back and enjoy the show. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Fyke Commission Report on Health Care 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. For nearly a year now the NDP health system 
has been paralyzed awaiting the report of the Fyke Commission 
on health care. During that time more doctors and nurses have 
left the province, waiting lists have grown, and health care 
services have gotten worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has finally received its report. 
And the question is: what are they going to do with it? Are they 
going to follow Mr. Fyke’s recommendations or are they going 
to reject his report and move in a different direction? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for this government to make a decision. 
What are they going to do with the Fyke report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to be able 
to rise in the House and to share with members of the House 
and with the general public precisely what we are doing with 
the commission’s report received this morning. 
 
(14:00) 
 
We will be taking the commission’s report and inviting all 
members of this legislature to consider it over the course of the 
next few days. Then we will be inviting Mr. Fyke to attend to 
the legislature to be available in a Committee of the Whole 
process that all members in this House — government and 
opposition — will have the opportunity to put their questions to 
Mr. Fyke to gain a deeper understanding of the work that he has 
done. 
 
I know that I have questions, members on this side of the House 

have questions; I’m sure that members opposite have questions 
and we will have that opportunity in the week following Easter. 
 
Beyond that, Mr. Speaker, I’m inviting this legislature to create 
a special committee of this legislature — all-party, Mr. Speaker 
— that will be able and available to the public of Saskatchewan, 
to health care stakeholders and providers to hear their feedback 
on the report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It appears the 
Premier is planning on taking quite some time to evaluate this 
report. 
 
But I would remind the Premier that back in 1993 the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) closed over 50 hospitals. They put in 
place a plan to close the Plains hospital. And they drastically 
reduced the number of acute care beds in the province of 
Saskatchewan. All the while the NDP was assuring 
Saskatchewan people that health care services would improve. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, health care did not get better. It got worse. It 
was the wrong prescription for health care in 1993 and now it 
looks like they want to double the dose. Mr. Fyke wants to 
close another 50 hospitals. 
 
The NDP health care report says we, and I quote: “need to 
reduce the number of care beds.” And then goes on to say, there 
are too few health care managers, not too many. 
 
My question to the Premier: do you agree with this diagnosis? 
Do you think the solution is to close more hospitals, close more 
beds, and hire more managers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask that all questions be directed 
through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
continue on the plan that we have outlined this day, the health 
care providers in particular in our province — but not just 
providers, citizens of our province border to border — have 
been saying to me and have repeated again today their desire to 
have a period of extensive consultation about the 
recommendations that Mr. Fyke has brought forward in his 
report. 
 
It is to serve that end, to allow the people of our province, 
particularly the stakeholders in health and the health care 
providers, to have the appropriate feedback to we legislators — 
to this legislature — who ultimately will be called upon to 
debate and decide health care policy. 
 
To provide for that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, we are 
establishing and inviting the legislature to establish this special 
committee who can be available to the stakeholders and the 
public of Saskatchewan, to work from now until the fall when 
we can put together a plan that will ensure — ensure, Mr. 
Speaker — publicly funded quality health care for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



April 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 517 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier speaks with 
soothing words but we have 10 years of history under this 
government. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — . . . Saskatchewan people have heard these 
kind of assurances and soothing words in the past. In fact here’s 
what Louise Simard said back in 1993: 
 

I know it’s hard on people because they don’t see the end 
product yet, but when it’s in place it will be clear that they 
have a higher level of health care in their communities than 
before. 
 

That’s what the NDP said back in 1993: trust us, we’ll make it 
better. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it didn’t get better, it got worse. And now 
the NDP is recommending another round of bed cuts and 
hospital closures. Mr. Speaker, why should Saskatchewan 
people trust the NDP now after their first round of hospital 
closures turned into a disaster? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I understand, 
on CJME radio, the critic for the opposition, Health critic for 
the opposition, made this comment — which I support and 
ascribe to — he said: 
 

It’s absolutely critical that the people right across the 
province can have a mechanism where they have ownership 
of the system rather than just be bystanders and observe 
what is given to them on high. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we are putting in place this day just 
such a mechanism that can encourage the providers, the 
stakeholders, and the people of Saskatchewan to have a real 
significant role, a groundbreaking role in establishing public 
policy with their legislatures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite members opposite to participate in this 
process, to give it their dedication as members on this side will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have very 
grave concerns about this government’s commitment to health 
care because in the past, when Louise Simard was the Health 
minister, the current Premier was her right-hand man. It turns 
out that Louise Simard and the current Premier led a flat out 
attack on health care in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But as it turned out, Mr. Speaker, it was also an attack on health 
care services in our cities. The closure of acute beds in the 
smaller centres added pressure on hospitals in Saskatoon and 
Regina that led to shortages, growing waiting lists, overworked 
doctors, and nurses leaving our province. 
 
And now the NDP wants to do it all over again — more hospital 

closures, more acute bed closures, more pressure on hospitals 
and health care workers in the cities of Saskatoon and Regina. 
Obviously the Premier didn’t learn anything from the first go 
around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is closing hospitals and more acute care beds 
going to relieve the pressure on our city hospitals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, through the work of Mr. 
Fyke and the Medicare Commission they made an important 
and diligent effort to consult with Saskatchewan people in large 
numbers and with health care providers. 
 
Mr. Fyke has laid now before us, before this legislature, his 
recommendations — the recommendations that he has to the 
conclusions of. As I said earlier, I have a number of questions 
about those recommendations, as I’m sure members do on this 
side, as I am sure members do on that side. Mr. Fyke will be 
here available to all members to respond to some of the 
questions and issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not at a point of decision-making, because 
essential to making good policy is to engage those people who 
are providing the service, who are at work in our communities 
from border to border, north to south, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s what we’re going to do. We’re going to provide the 
very mechanism that the critic from the Saskatchewan Party this 
morning called for, and I’m encouraging — I am encouraging 
— members opposite to join with us in this regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier knows full well 
that what he is suggesting in this committee is to exclude 
individual members of the public to appear before this 
committee. He’s talking about stakeholders only, and another 
six or eight months of delaying of taking his responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people know that that’s the case. Health care 
has been studied to death. It’s now time for this government to 
own up to their responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Health. Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Fyke concluded that the only way to sustain health 
care of any quality in this province is to reduce services. Fyke 
says that people who live outside of the major centres are going 
to have to accept the fact that they have to travel further for 
services and that they are going to have fewer of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Health minister accept this 
recommendation? What is he going to do to make up for the 
reduced services outside of Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite this 
morning — this morning — on radio says that it’s absolutely 
critical that people right across the province can have a 
mechanism where they have ownership of the system rather 
than just be bystanders and observe what is given to them from 



518 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2001 

 

on high. 
 
Now this afternoon, several hours later, he stands in the House 
and demands that our government make immediate decisions on 
the recommendations in the Fyke Commission. 
 
Now which is it, Mr. Speaker? Do we want a mechanism which 
engages providers, which engages our community, which 
struggles together as legislators to establish good policy, or 
does he want immediate decisions? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I tell you we’ve decided what we’re doing. 
We are going to consult extensively with Saskatchewan people 
and we are going to build a plan to establish a quality health 
care system, publicly funded, publicly administered, in a 
sustainable fashion for the century to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, what the people of this 
province want is a system that on an ongoing basis will listen to 
their concerns; will give them an opportunity to have real 
ownership of the system; who will have an opportunity on an 
ongoing basis to be able to influence the decisions that district 
health boards are going to be making for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has refused to allow the people of 
this province to have that mechanism. And that’s what people 
are demanding, to be able to have ownership of the system, not 
just something that’s imposed on them by an NDP government 
who doesn’t understand the health care system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
this province are looking to the government that they elected to 
make some decisions about providing quality health care for 
them in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this government live up to its responsibility, 
the responsibility of the Premier and the Minister of Health to 
provide the proper structure for health care in this province so 
citizens can count on health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in my view, the people of 
Saskatchewan are looking for something more significant. They 
are looking for their legislators to on occasion rise above some 
of the partisan political game playing, particularly around an 
issue as significant as publicly funded health care. 
 
What the people are looking for is an opportunity, an 
opportunity to take part in this important public debate, and an 
opportunity to have input on the commission of Mr. Ken Fyke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what . . . Mr. Speaker, they ask the questions but 
they don’t prefer to hear the answers, apparently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are engaging on a very groundbreaking 
process here, a groundbreaking process of engaging 
Saskatchewan people in the most significant public debate that I 
think we could have. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while we now 
listen to the Premier’s rhetoric about this new direction, it really 
is a reinvention of the direction started in 1993. In 1993, the 
NDP said that everything was going to be fine in health care if 
you will just believe in what we’re doing. 
 
The NDP said that their plan to close 53 hospitals, including the 
Plains Hospital in Regina, was actually going to improve health 
services and shorten waiting lists. Well, Mr. Speaker, seven 
years later the people of this province have lost confidence in 
this image of health care. Doctors and nurses are leaving. Every 
day we hear of another specialist leaving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now Mr. Fyke is recommending that another 50 
hospitals are closed or converted. Mr. Speaker, does the 
minister really still think that closing another 50 hospitals will 
improve health care in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, maybe what we’re seeing 
is what the opposition thinks an opposition role is, which is just 
to be critical no matter what happens. If we were to make 
decisions they would be critical about the decisions, saying that 
you need to consult and listen to people. 
 
When we say we are going to consult with the Saskatchewan 
public, and stakeholders and providers, what do they say? They 
criticize and say we should make decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I asked the opposition to have the courage, my 
friends, have the courage to join with us in engaging in this 
public debate, engaging with the commission, asking about his 
recommendations, and talking to the people of Saskatchewan as 
we build a plan for quality health care, sustainable for the next 
century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the 
minister. Mr. Speaker, it’s really easy to do our job in this 
legislature, cause it’s to hold these people accountable for the 
mess that they’ve created in health care over the last 10 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago the Minister of 
Health said, well, wouldn’t you guys give us some solutions as 
to where we should go in health care. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
people of this province are saying: you’re the government, you 
come up with the decisions, we elected you to make these 
decisions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can howl, but they 
know it’s a complete lack of direction from that government 
that has resulted in this mess. And now, Mr. Speaker, will the 
minister stand up and say he’s prepared to watch over and 
preside over the further closure of 50 hospitals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 519 

 

(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not exactly 
surprised to hear the member report that the people are not 
asking their party for solutions to health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — But they are, in fact, asking this 
government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, can we not, can we not take a step forward — 
can we not take a step forward, Mr. Speaker — and listen to the 
people of our province? 
 
We have before us now the work of an expert in health care 
delivery who has provided for us a significant number of 
recommendations, not all of which will find unanimous 
approval, that’s for sure. Many of which we will have questions 
about; I have questions about; they will have questions about. 
 
Can we not take a step forward and working together work with 
the people of our province, listen to the people of our province, 
talk to the stakeholders, talk to the providers, and together build 
a 21st century health care plan that is sustainable and provides 
quality of care for people across our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
really interesting that, after 10 years, finally we get a 
willingness of this government to listen to somebody in this . . . 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if they’re in the listening mode, then why 
aren’t they listening to the ideas that we proposed to the Fyke 
Commission? For example, we said that a fundamentally 
important part of health care reform is to make a commitment to 
the people of this province through a health care bill of rights 
and responsibilities, that this was a fundamental thing that the 
people of this province needed to count on. It had to be backed 
up by an office of a commissioner who saw to it that health care 
was provided for people in this province no matter where they 
lived. 
 
Well if the government is in such a listening mode, Mr. 
Speaker, will he support our recommendation that a health care 
bill of rights and responsibilities is put in place so that the 
people of this province have something to count on other than 
this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure I heard or 
know if there was a question in that, but let me say this, Mr. 
Speaker, I have read, I have read . . . Well you see, Mr. Speaker, 
they ask a question but they will not be silent to hear the 
answer. Mr. Speaker, I have read the Sask Party’s presentation 
to the Fyke Commission. 
 
The member, the critic, the member from Melfort talks about 
whatever his description of it is, a bill of rights or something, 
Mr. Speaker. I think in fact, I think in fact, Mr. Speaker, there 
may well be some tea in this idea. Mr. Fyke has not brought it 

forward as one of his recommendations. Precisely the point, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We need to sit down, work together, work with the people of 
Saskatchewan, listen to the people of Saskatchewan, listen to 
each other for once — listen to each other for once — talk to 
stakeholders and try, member from Saltcoats, to get off of your 
political strategies and on to some public policy discussions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it seems that the 
recommendations are more leaning towards making a 
bureaucracy out of everyone. Indeed in what it’s talking about 
is taking doctors out of the system under which they’ve 
provided quality care to the people of this province for all of 
these many years, and putting them on a salary under the 
jurisdiction of health districts. 
 
The problem with this whole idea is that while at the one time 
Mr. Fyke talks about the need for retention and recruitment of 
medical professionals to this province, on the other side the 
record of the NDP is driving doctors and nurses out of the 
province in record numbers. 
 
Last week we heard that there were three psychiatrists leaving 
Regina for Alberta and two more were considering it. Yesterday 
we heard that a cardiac specialist was leaving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Health minister indicate if he supports the 
idea of putting doctors on salary and running the risk of driving 
even more of them out of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as I have stated on a 
number of occasions today, no decisions have been made about 
any of the recommendations in the Fyke Commission. 
 
Now the member will stand up and talk about the challenge that 
we have in recruiting and retaining specialists in our province 
— not a new challenge and we’ve been working hard at it. 
 
He does, I notice, Mr. Speaker, not stand in the House each 
time a specialist comes to our province, each time doctors 
choose to move to Saskatchewan — he doesn’t jump to his feet 
and say that’s great. No, but he will when a doctor decides to 
move. Well fair enough. 
 
But the point, Mr. Speaker, is this. We have a wide range of 
challenges in ensuring quality and sustainable health care for 
the people of Saskatchewan. There’s a wide range of issues and 
challenges. 
 
If we are going to meet those issues and challenges, we need to 
take the work that’s been done by the commission, listen to 
Saskatchewan people, listen to the stakeholders, and try and rise 
above some of our partisan political activity, work together, and 
build a quality plan for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the Fyke report says the NDP’s 



520 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2001 

 

first attempt at health reform, its so-called wellness model, was 
such a disaster that 300 people are unnecessarily losing their 
lives every year as a result of clinical error. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Fyke has studied the NDP’s health system for 10 
months and here is what he has concluded, and I quote: 
 

I have concluded that the quality of service is far short of 
what it could be and should be. 

 
Fyke also stresses the poor quality of health services is not the 
fault of hard-working doctors and nurses. It is the fault of poor 
system design. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister agree with the Fyke Commission 
conclusion that the NDP health system is causing the deaths of 
300 people every year in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what we have done today is 
asked the opposition to work together with us to work with all 
of the people of the province to respond to some very good 
ideas by a very bright man working with many other people. 
And what we want to do is work and use the skills that we have 
within the province to build a better health system. 
 
We know that we have things that we need to do, and we are 
going to work with the people who are in the system, we’re 
going to work with the people in the communities so that we 
have a quality publicly funded health system that works for all 
of us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this government has been hiding 
behind the release of the Fyke report for over a year and now 
the Minister of Health has said in a press release today that they 
are going to probably wait until Mr. Romanow’s release is 
made, and that could be 18 months. The people of 
Saskatchewan have been put on hold long enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Fyke report says the NDP has mismanaged the 
health care system to the point where 300 people are dying 
every year from clinical error. He also says that quality 
problems in the health system are wasting hundreds of millions 
of dollars every year. And what is Fyke’s solution? Close 50 
more hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the NDP support that idea? It’s decision 
time, Mr. Speaker. Will the Minister of Health tell the people of 
Saskatchewan, does he support the recommendations in the 
Fyke report and, if he does not, what is the NDP’s plan to fix 
the disaster in our health care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, those of us on this side of 
the House who want to build Saskatchewan in a positive way 
have extended our hands to the people opposite to help us do 
that job. Now it doesn’t help when they misrepresent things that 
are said. 
 

We are going to work and deal with the recommendations from 
Mr. Fyke with all of the people of Saskatchewan. We can’t wait 
until Mr. Romanow reports because there are many things that 
we need to do. 
 
We’re going to work with all of the people that are here so that 
we can build a quality publicly funded system that will work for 
all of us, that will save lives, that will do all of the things that 
we all expect of our health system. Let’s do it together; we 
invite you to join us. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 19, The 
Land Titles Amendment Act, 2001 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 20, 
The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2001 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 215 — The Democratic Unionism Act 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 
215, The Democratic Unionism Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have received from 
the auditor . . . Order, please. Order. Before orders of the day, 
I’ve received from the auditor a special report to the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan regarding changes to The Provincial 
Auditor Act, Bill 14, and I hereby table it. 
 
Also before orders of the day I would like to make a statement. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Yesterday the member for Moosomin raised a 
point of order concerning questions raised by the member for 
Regina Dewdney about the way in which another member of 
the Assembly chose to vote on a particular issue, in this case the 
budget motion. 
 
The member for Moosomin cited rule 32 of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan which 



April 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 521 

 

states that: 
 

No Member may reflect upon any vote of the Assembly, 
except for the purpose of moving that such a vote be 
rescinded. 
 

With regard to the application of such a rule, Beauchesne’s, 6th 
Edition on page 142 states that: 
 

In the House of Commons a Member will not be permitted 
by the Speaker to . . . reflect upon, argue against or in any 
manner call in question the past acts and proceedings of the 
House. 
 

Marleau and Montpetit further note on page 525 that: 
 

Members may not (reflect) against or reflect upon any 
decision of the House. This stems from the well-established 
rule which holds that a question, once put and carried in the 
affirmative or negative, cannot be questioned again. Such 
reflections are not in order because the Member is bound 
by a vote agreed to by a majority. 

 
At the outset, I believe that is important to make the distinction 
between any vote of the Assembly and any vote cast by an 
individual member. The prohibition stated in rule 32 applies to 
reflections on decisions of the House itself and does not, in my 
interpretation, apply to reflections on the voting behaviour of 
individual members. 
 
In his questioning of how the member for Cypress Hills voted 
on the budget, I do not believe that it was the intention of the 
member for Regina Dewdney to revive or revisit that particular 
debate or to reflect on that particular decision of the Assembly. 
Rule 32 is clear that such an action would most certainly be out 
of order. 
 
If rule 32 were to be interpreted in a broader sense, for example, 
that the rule does indeed apply to all members — pardon me — 
does apply to members questioning the votes of individual 
members, as the member for Moosomin is suggesting, I am of 
the opinion that such an interpretation would severely curtail a 
member’s ability to attempt to hold another colleague 
accountable for his or her stance on a particular issue. 
 
In the course of debate, members frequently challenge each 
other on their views and indeed on the way in which they have 
voted. I do not believe that it is the intent of this particular rule 
to restrict this activity. 
 
For reasons cited, I must rule that the point of order by the 
member for Moosomin cannot be accepted. I thank the member 
for bringing his concerns to the attention of the House. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Why is the member on . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day, by leave of the Assembly, to move a motion in regards to 
the final report of the Fyke Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I advise the House: 

That a Committee of the Whole be authorized to question 
Mr. Ken Fyke, Commissioner, with respect to the final 
report of the Commission on Medicare dated April 11, 
2001; and further to this purpose, 
 
That Mr. Speaker do issue an invitation to Mr. Fyke to 
attend before the said Committee of the Whole at 2:30 p.m. 
on April 19, 2001 in the Legislative Chamber. 

 
I so move. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Medicare Commissioner to Appear 
before Committee of the Whole 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member from Yorkton: 
 

That a Committee of the Whole be authorized to question 
Mr. Ken Fyke, Commissioner, with respect to the final 
report of the Commission on Medicare dated April 11, 
2001; and further to this purpose, 
 
That Mr. Speaker do issue an invitation to Mr. Fyke to 
attend before the said Committee of the Whole at 2:30 p.m. 
on April 19, 2001 in the Legislative Chamber. 
 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being an open and 
accountable government, we are very pleased to table the 
responses to questions no. 59 and 60. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 59 and 60 are tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to rise today in this Assembly to move second 
reading of The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment 
Act, 2001. Mr. Speaker, there are two parts to this Bill as 
mentioned in its title — emblems and honours. 
 
Saskatchewan’s proud tradition of establishing official emblems 
started almost 100 years ago. By royal warrant of August 25, 
1906, just a year after the creation of this great province, King 
Edward VII granted Saskatchewan its first official emblem, a 
shield of arms. Since then our province has built a legacy of 
official emblems that reflect the pride of our people, the 



522 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2001 

 

priorities of our society, and the value we place on our 
environment. 
 
Our provincial honours system, Mr. Speaker, began in 1985 
with the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. It was expanded in 1995 
with the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. As our honours 
system is enhanced, we are incorporating provisions which 
bring it into line with national and international practice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act allows this government to add to the rich 
history of emblems and honours that help to define the essence 
of our great and wonderful province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to welcome visitors in the 
gallery today. First of all, from my office, Dr. Michael Jackson, 
and from the Prairie Conservation Action Plan Committee, 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I would just ask the 
member to ask leave of the Assembly to introduce guests. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. You know, I’m 
trying to follow proper protocol. I thought I was welcoming 
them, rather than introducing them. But I will, if I could, have 
leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, and again I apologize. I would 
like to introduce visitors to the gallery today, from the office of 
. . . from Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs, we have 
Dr. Michael Jackson whom I’m sure all members of this House 
know. 
 
And from the Prairie Conservation Action Plan Committee, 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are Karyn Scalise, 
implementation co-ordinator; Chris Nikoluk, former 
co-ordinator; and Greg Riemer, core committee member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of this House 
welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2001 

(continued) 
 

Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, this committee spearheaded 
the initiative to have needle-and-thread grass named as one of 
our new provincial emblems. Now, Mr. Speaker, we currently 
have 10 emblems in this province. My seatmate, the member 
from Melville, during private members statement did a 
wonderful imitation of a railway conductor in getting out a 
whole bunch of names at once, so I’m going to try very quickly 
to give all members of this House a listing of our 10 emblems. 
 
I’ve already mentioned our first emblem, the shield of arms, 

was adopted in 1906. We also have a floral emblem, adopted in 
1941; that of course, is the western red lily. 
 
In 1945, the sharp-tailed grouse became our bird emblem. In 
1961, we adopted a tartan. In 1969, we adopted a flag. We 
adopted the wheat sheaf logo in 1997. A full coat of arms in 
1986. The white birch became our tree in 1988. Potash became 
our mineral in 1997; and in 1997, we adopted a dress tartan. 
 
Today I am introducing second reading of a Bill that will add 
three new emblems. Mr. Speaker, this Act establishes 
needle-and-thread grass as the provincial grass emblem. In 
Latin that is Hesperostipa comata. 
 
The impetus for this unique emblem came from a coalition of 
16 organizations, including both universities in the province, a 
number of non-governmental organizations, and federal and 
provincial departments. 
 
The coalition is called the Prairie Conservation Action Plan 
Committee. Its members conducted a vote for a provincial grass 
emblem to be recommended to this government. The 
needle-and-thread grass was the winner of their vote. 
 
And I said, Mr. Speaker, that this is a unique emblem. No other 
province in Canada — no other province in Canada — has 
named a provincial grass. 
 
One objective of naming the needle-and-thread grass as the 
provincial grass emblem is to raise public awareness of our 
natural environment and the prairie habitat. Let me mention 
here that the ranching industry has been crucial in preserving 
needle-and-thread grass on the prairie. 
 
Since the Act was introduced last week, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has already received many, many calls from the 
media and, most particularly, from the public wanting to know 
more about needle-and-thread grass. 
 
So I can say with confidence that the objective of raising public 
awareness about our natural environment is clearly successful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this Bill Saskatchewan will become the 
fourth province — the fourth province — in Canada to have an 
official animal, the white-tailed deer. Again, I’m going to try it 
in Latin; it’s Odocoileus virginianus. The initiative for naming 
a provincial animal came from Virtual Saskatchewan which is 
an on-line magazine. They first ran a viewer contest to name an 
official animal. And the idea, Mr. Speaker, caught on with other 
media and public interest and imagination soared. 
 
Now naming the white-tailed deer as our provincial animal 
makes sense. It is a familiar animal on the prairies and it’s also, 
I would say, occasionally a familiar animal in our cities, Mr. 
Speaker. Just last Sunday I was out for a run and I saw a 
white-tailed deer well within the Saskatoon city limits. Already 
the white-tailed deer is part of the prestigious and 
well-recognized coat of arms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to move on to our provincial sport emblem. 
Again Saskatchewan is setting new standards for other 
provinces and territories in Canada. We are the first — I 
emphasize, Mr. Speaker — the first province to name an 



April 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 523 

 

official sport. And that sport is curling. Now I’m not sure of the 
Latin for curling, Mr. Speaker. I only took grade nine Latin and 
I did that by correspondence so I will apologize in advance to 
all Latin teachers if I have the grammar or the tense wrong. But 
I think that probably curling in Latin could roughly translate as 
mitera petra robustus. In other words, send the rock strongly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, curling is the sport of choice for Saskatchewan 
residents. The Saskatchewan Curling Association started the 
very popular move to have curling recognized as our provincial 
sport. In a government opinion poll and in more than one media 
poll, curling was clearly the popular public choice for our new 
official sport and that choice is understandable. 
 
Curling has broad-based appeal in Saskatchewan. It has a 
colourful and a famous history and, at the same time, it is 
gaining in popularity with young people. Curling is enjoyed by 
rural and urban residents. It can be keenly competitive or just a 
whole lot of fun and it is a sport that is enjoyed by people of all 
ages, from 10 years old through to 50 through to 80 years old. 
 
Saskatchewan has produced many of our greatest men’s and 
women’s curling champions in the sport’s history. These 
champions are icons in our province and heroes to thousands of 
young people in Saskatchewan and across the country. 
 
Curling displays the best quality of sportsmanship, teamwork, 
and community spirit. In short, Mr. Speaker, curling is a perfect 
reflection of Saskatchewan values. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another part of this Act will also see the 
Lieutenant Governor automatically become a member of the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit by virtue of his or her office. The 
Lieutenant Governor, as we know, is already chancellor of the 
order and invests the recipients each year and will be doing so 
again in two weeks, on April 26. Mr. Speaker, it is standard 
practice across the Commonwealth for the Queen or Her 
representatives to be members of the orders of which they are 
nominal head. 
 
As well, the Act allows the province to honour distinguished 
non-residents of Saskatchewan through honorary membership 
in the Order of Merit. 
 
As Saskatchewan approaches its centennial year in 2005, it is 
appropriate that we have a vehicle for honouring persons such 
as foreign heads of state or government or internationally 
known figures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act permits our province to add to the rich 
history of emblems and honours that help define the essence of 
our great province. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to move second 
reading of The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment 
Act, 2001. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise today to address the very first Bill that the government 

has presented for second reading in this particular session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, honours and emblems of our province are indeed 
very important. They are a symbol of who we are and what we 
are, Mr. Speaker. In this particular Bill the government is 
bringing forward three new emblems to represent the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I asked around my colleagues as the minister was making her 
statement, giving her address to this Bill, just what 
needle-and-thread grass was. Now we have, Mr. Speaker, a 
good number of agriculturalists here, both grain and livestock 
producers, and not one of them could tell me what 
needle-and-thread grass was. 
 
I understand that the minister has been getting a number of 
phone calls and inquiries as to what is needle-and-thread grass. 
And I can certainly understand why, because people would 
want to know what is this grass; where is it; where do you find 
it. 
 
And clearly the minister gave no indication of where and how 
that might be. So I can only assume that either the minister was 
withholding information from us or that the minister herself 
doesn’t know. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that that particular 
avenue in this Bill be investigated to determine what this grass 
is. Is it a widespread grass across the province that represents 
all the geographic and diversity of this province, or is it isolated 
in one small area? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are those . . . when we employ an emblem 
that represents Saskatchewan, it should in large part represent 
the entire province. Now we have a very diverse province, Mr. 
Speaker, from — as Palliser described it — a desert, Mr. 
Speaker, to the Northern Shield. So we’re not going to have a 
uniformity of grasses or animals or flora and fauna of any kind 
across the province. 
 
But our emblems need to represent a generality in our province. 
And, Mr. Speaker, personally I’m not sure that 
needle-and-thread grass does that. We need to determine, Mr. 
Speaker, how this was arrived at and what does it represent, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second emblem that the government is 
recommending is that the white-tailed deer become our 
provincial animal. Mr. Speaker, every one of us in this province 
in all likelihood has had an encounter with a white-tailed deer 
— some of us, unfortunately, with the hoods of our vehicles. So 
it is a very widespread animal. And yet, Mr. Speaker, in talking 
to my father and asking him about the white-tailed deer in 
southeast Saskatchewan, he told me that he had not seen a 
white-tailed deer prior to 1934. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, talking to the other neighbours in my area, 
they recounted similar tales because in our area there were no 
trees prior to the settlement by the pioneers, the breaking of the 
land, the stopping of the forest fires, which in turn allowed trees 
to grow up in the low spots to create habitat for the white-tailed 
deer. 
 



524 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2001 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that the white-tailed deer, while 
vary numerous in Saskatchewan and widespread from our 
southern boundary on the US (United States) up into the 
forestland, is actually an animal, Mr. Speaker, that is native to 
Saskatchewan. And an indication that perhaps it is not, is the 
second part of its Latin name — virginianus, meaning from 
Virginia, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, as 
my colleague says, perhaps a better deer for Saskatchewan 
would have been the John Deere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I think we need to find out from the minister 
whether or not the white-tailed deer is actually native to 
Saskatchewan before we can possibly accept the fact that the 
white-tailed deer should be our emblem for Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
On the third part, Mr. Speaker, the sport of curling. Now the 
sport of curling goes back a long ways in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. It goes back to the original Scot settlers that came to 
this province. 
 
They, Mr. Speaker, though, did not use at that time what we 
would commonly refer to as rocks. They used, Mr. Speaker, a 
type of curling that is rarely seen any more, but like thrashing 
bees across Saskatchewan in the fall, in the wintertime a few 
communities, Mr. Speaker, have what is known as jam-can 
curling. That, Mr. Speaker, was the more likely first arrival of 
curling to this province. 
 
At the time of the pioneers, at the time of the first settlement, 
Mr. Speaker, what the pioneers would have likely done is 
taking a lard can, filled it with water, sat it outside overnight, at 
which time it would become solid, and you could then go out 
onto the river, clear off the snow, and throw your ice-filled lard 
can down the river to see whether or not you could connect it or 
get it into the circle that you would have scraped out on the ice, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, curling is not actually native to 
Saskatchewan. Perhaps a better sport for the minister would 
have been white-tailed deer hunting, because that arrived the 
same time as the white-tailed deer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister commented that curling is on the 
increase in some areas. Well yes, Mr. Speaker, in some areas it 
may very well be. But in general, across rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, curling, I believe, is on the decline, not because 
people don’t want to curl, Mr. Speaker, but because they can no 
longer afford to maintain artificial ice. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I grew up with natural ice in curling, which 
at times meant you could start in November, as we could’ve last 
fall. At other times it meant you couldn’t start until sometime in 
January, and it ended with a spring thaw when the Alida 
bonspiel was generally on at the end of January. So in those 
years curling, Mr. Speaker, was not a long-term sport in 
Saskatchewan. You might have got a month, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s even shorter than our swimming season, which isn’t very 
long, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that the minister still has a little bit of 
homework to do on this particular issue — that she needs to 
explain to us what needle-and-thread grass is; whether or not 

the white-tailed deer is actually a native of Saskatchewan; and 
to explain why white-tailed deer hunting is not the sport she is 
recommending, rather than curling, even though curling, Mr. 
Speaker, is a very, very excellent sport, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Therefore to give the minister the opportunity to find the 
answers to these questions, I would move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Historic Properties Foundations Act 
 

Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
my pleasure to rise today to move second reading of The 
Historic Properties Foundations Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is umbrella legislation. It makes it possible for 
individual foundations to be established to help support, 
preserve, enhance, and promote historic properties in our 
province. This give us a terrific opportunity to support our 
historic properties. 
 
Here is what the Bill makes possible through the creation of 
historic property foundations. And I would like to read, if I 
may. Under section 6, it says: 
 

The purposes of a foundation are: 
 

(a) to preserve and enhance the historic property; 
 

(b) to promote public awareness of: 
 

(i) the character, setting and decor of the historic 
property; 
 
(ii) (to promote public awareness of) the historic and 
cultural values of the historic property; 
 
(iii) the significant events in the governance of 
Saskatchewan; and 
 
(iv) the history of Saskatchewan generally. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this Act will make it possible to establish 
foundations that can receive corporate and individual gifts, 
bequests, donations, and grants. 
 
This Act specifically will allow the establishment of a 
foundation for Government House to focus on the Government 
House development plan. 
 
This Act will define the legal status of all foundations formed 
under the mandate of this Act and it will ensure appropriate 
administrative and financial procedures are in place for the 
foundation. 
 
This Act moves the Government House development project 
one step closer to reality, because, Mr. Speaker, the first such 
foundation we intend to establish will be a foundation in 
support of Government House. 



April 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 525 

 

Mr. Speaker, Government House is only a few kilometres away 
from this Legislative Building, but it represents a chapter of 
Canada’s past and a chapter in the birth of Saskatchewan that, 
lamentably, few Saskatchewan residents know well. 
 
For those of you who have toured Government House museum, 
you will know that the property is truly a gem in the crown of 
Saskatchewan’s historic properties. The Historic Properties 
Foundations Act will help this province share the richness of 
the Government House historic property with the people of 
Saskatchewan and the many, many tourists travelling through 
Regina. We can do this by developing this delightful property to 
its full potential. We can do this by following the development 
plan outlined for the Government House historic property. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in May of 2000 this government released a report 
outlining the Government House development project. It is our 
dream that this property will become a leading tourist and 
educational attraction for Saskatchewan. This could be 
accomplished by developing Government House to its full 
potential, as originally conceived, and by completing the project 
by the year 2005 to make it one of our key centennial projects. 
 
Some of the recommended enhancements could include the 
addition of a visitor centre and gift shop; the addition of an 
interpretive centre, and this interpretive centre would feature 
Saskatchewan and First Nations history. We could also have . . . 
will also have new landscaping and a new administrative centre. 
 
A major recommendation of the report was to establish a 
foundation responsible for raising 60 per cent of the capital 
funding required for the facility’s development. This Act, Mr. 
Speaker, addresses that recommendation. 
 
Clear vision and bold leadership for the Government House 
development project are needed. We want to work with the 
larger community to develop this unique facility by our 
centennial year. We want the community to discover the charm 
and the promise of Government House. We want the 
community to own the vision of this part of our heritage. 
 
A distinguished group of Canadians has accepted government’s 
invitation to serve on an advisory board. The advisory board is 
working with the province on the next steps of the development 
project. Members of that board are Senator Raynell 
Andreychuk, the Chair; former Lieutenant Governor, Senator 
Jack Wiebe; as well as such distinguished citizens as Leroy 
Larsen, Harold MacKay, David Dombowsky, Bob Mitchell, 
Scotty Cameron, and media personality Pamela Wallin. These 
people, Mr. Speaker, have faith in this project, as does this 
government. 
 
This is an exciting, fresh, and innovative idea. I am proud to be 
speaking to this Act today. I am excited about our future. This 
project gives all of Saskatchewan a chance to be excited and 
involved with our past and to connect to the future. 
 
For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of 
The Historic Properties Foundations Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to speak to 
Bill No. 3, An Act to establish Crown Foundation for Historic 
Properties. 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill brings up a number of questions and 
concerns — and opportunities, I might add. 
 
(15:00) 
 
As the member from . . . A timely member statement from my 
colleague from Arm River earlier talked about the 
reconstruction of historic sites at the Craik Regional Park and 
he talked in some length about the dugout house that the first 
pioneers used in Saskatchewan. And he also mentioned the 
sharing and the co-operation between the local Craik museum, 
as well as with the historical site and the park. 
 
And it is very important that we have the people of 
Saskatchewan given an opportunity to step back in the 
province’s history and get a glimpse of life like it was back 
when the pioneers first came to this province. 
 
But which brings to mind, Mr. Speaker, the possibility that the 
minister could look at incorporating this Act with the parks and 
within their structure that already exists without needing to do 
any building up any larger bureaucracy or growing government 
which this government has a habit of doing. 
 
As we know the province and the people of Saskatchewan are 
always faced with ever-increasing funds for health care and 
highways and education and in order to gain these funds we 
need to grow this economy through tax cuts to the people of 
Saskatchewan and small businesses in particular, Mr. Speaker. 
And I believe this is an opportunity to include some of these 
ideas into this particular Act. 
 
We recognize the need to protect and enhance historical sites, 
but we also need to recoup costs of operating these sites and put 
into place a plan to reconstruct and protect and develop the sites 
for future generations and also for the tourists that will be 
coming through this province. The government must identify 
resources that work best to utilize them, not only for the benefit 
of the sites and themselves, but also for the taxpayers of this 
province. 
 
And I believe integrating these historical sites into an overall 
economic plan for the economic development of the areas that 
exist is very important and many of these not only exist in the 
cities but many exist in rural areas. And I believe that this is a 
great opportunity to develop businesses and the economy of 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
As we all know, any business that’s thinking of setting up in 
rural Saskatchewan looks at the infrastructure, roads and 
highways, access to cellphones. And also when they’re looking 
at to hire employees they need to know if there’s proper 
hospital care in the community, as well as schools for the 
children of the new employees. And I believe that this is an 
opportunity to allow small businesses to have a hand in these 
historical sites, whether they be in parks or outside, to develop 
spin-off economies to help the economy of rural Saskatchewan, 
and in particular the tourist industry, as well as in conjunction 
with First Nations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think this is a great opportunity to allow the 
private sector to take a hand in the development of the sites, to 
best utilize the sites to gain the necessary funds to continue to 



526 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2001 

 

operate them, but to also develop them for the future of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that we will need to consult and discuss 
this Bill with the stakeholders and any third parties that may be 
affected, and I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
 
Subvote (EC01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. Before we start I’d ask the minister to 
please introduce his officials with us in the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman, it’s a pleasure to introduce my officials today. To my 
right is Larry Spanier, and Larry is the deputy minister of 
Economic and Co-operative Development. To my left is Debbie 
Wilke, who is executive director of marketing and corporate 
affairs. To Larry’s right is Denise Haas, executive director of 
investment and corporate services. Right behind me is Bryon 
Burnett, assistant deputy minister of community and economic 
and business development. And to Brian’s right is Lynn Oliver, 
chief information officer, information technology office. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the 
officials that are with us today, welcome. I look forward to an 
exchange based on some of the questions. 
 
I would like to start out if I could, Mr. Chairman, and direct this 
to the minister. When I was first involved with doing the 
estimates in Economic and Co-operative Development about a 
year ago now, we were . . . I asked if the minister would be able 
to put forward a vision, the kind of mission that he thinks his 
department should be following. 
 
I’d like him to give kind of an overview of the business plan 
that he would envision with this department. I’d like to see if 
there’s a relation with what has been going on in the past and 
look forward to what will be coming this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman, and to the member opposite, welcome. I look 
forward to the dialogue that we’ll have today; you being the 
veteran and me being the new person in these estimates. 
 
I just want to say a couple of words. I’ll go through first of all 
the mandate, the vision of the department, the principles under 
which we operate, goals, objectives. And I’ll try and be as brief 
as I can. 
 
The mandate of the department is to grow and diversify the 
economy by building on the province’s existing strengths. And 
to realize this, the department is providing individual 
entrepreneurs, business, community, co-operative, and sectoral 
organization with services which help to focus on business 
information and advice, strategic partnerships, investment 

attraction, and business financing. 
 
The goals of the department are, quote, “an innovative and 
prosperous and sustainable Saskatchewan economy with full 
participation.” 
 
The principles, guiding principles of the department are client 
service, excellent professional, knowledgeable, committed, 
partnerships as a way of doing business, and continuous staff 
development. 
 
I might say to the member opposite, I think the goal of 
government as a whole is to facilitate business opportunities 
and enhance the wealth of our province and the wealth of 
individual families. 
 
And the role of economic development is very much one to 
work in partnership to help to facilitate opportunities for 
Saskatchewan people, and as well to attract people to our 
province to invest and to live and to create opportunities for 
their children. 
 
So that’s very much part of the vision and the principles under 
which the department operates. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think the overall 
objective of growing the province through an economic 
development is certainly the right direction. My question now 
would be then, what would be your focus in terms of the 
emphasis you would place on . . . what part of the sector would 
get the focus of your energy from the department? Are we 
talking about individual economic development, small business, 
large business? Are we talking Crown corporation? What would 
be the focus of your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I can say to the member 
opposite, economic development and wealth, growth of wealth 
and opportunities isn’t isolated either to small business or the 
large corporate sector or the co-operatives or the Crown sector. 
It needs to be a combination of all. 
 
We’ve got a very diverse economy. We’ve got very large 
industries as you will know. Uranium, our largest producer in 
the world; potash — those are industries that need to be in 
contact with the government. We need to work closely. There 
are certainly other departments that have roles as well in that 
regard. 
 
The co-operative sector, I think you and I were at a meeting last 
night with the credit unions and just what a large part of our 
Saskatchewan economy they are. So it’s certainly another area 
that we have to grow. 
 
And no one can nor should forget individual potential and 
individual desires to start perhaps a small business and grow 
that business into a larger one. I think that’s every 
small-business person’s dream. It doesn’t always happen that a 
small business becomes a large business and nor necessarily 
should it. 
 
But what we want to do is work in partnership and in 
co-operation with those who see the private sector and the 
co-operative sector as a means of generating wealth and 



April 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 527 

 

generating jobs and job opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 
 
So in terms of the particular focus — I’m a small-business man 
myself so I have some particular interest in that area, as you 
will perhaps know — but I do know and I do understand. And I 
think the department works very closely with businesses of all 
sizes and from all different managerial structures in terms of 
helping to grow this economy. 
 
So basically what we are is a facilitative body within the 
department. We have some programs that are under our purview 
that will help to stimulate some areas of activity. And I think 
more importantly is to keep the attitude in this province and 
work to keep . . . working to keep a positive attitude which 
results in a positive business climate. That’s sort of an unseen 
part of this portfolio that in my short time here I’m learning is 
becoming very interesting. And I’m certainly looking forward 
to helping move in that area as well. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I certainly agree 
that in order for the economy to move ahead there has to be a 
positive approach to where we’re going. 
 
Mr. Minister, what signals would your department like to put 
forward and what signals have your department . . . what 
signals have they put forward in trying to develop a positive 
business approach to Saskatchewan, either to increase the 
efficiency and therefore the wealth within the existing 
companies, or trying to attract not only people but businesses 
back to the province? Do you have signals that you have put 
forward already? What do you plan on doing? 
 
(15:15) 
 
I think in particular of the budget that just came down, there 
was an actual increase in spending, but the revenues were 
dropping. I’m fearful that the signals that are being sent out 
may not be the correct signals in order to build that confidence 
to have people return to our province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think — and the member 
and I may disagree on this — one of the initiatives and I think 
one of the strongest signals that this budget delivered under the 
new Premier was a reduction in the corporate income tax as it 
relates to small business of 25 per cent, a reduction from 8 per 
cent to 6 per cent; an increase of the threshold from 200,000 to 
$300,000. There’s legislation that is before this House that 
allows professionals to incorporate. And I think those are two 
signals that will really indicate the direction of this 
administration. 
 
I think the other component that I would want to speak to, and 
it’s not specific to my department but it certainly has impact on 
mood and it has impact on people’s attitudes towards doing 
business here in Saskatchewan, and last year we introduced the 
largest income tax reductions in the history of this province. 
Those are carrying on through this year and into next year to the 
point where personal income tax for the average family will be 
down by a thousand dollars. I’ve indicated the business tax cuts 
and the introduction of a higher ceiling. 
 
There are some other things that I think are important and a 
signal to young people. And as you’ve indicated, this budget, 

expenditure is up. We’ve been for years in this province on a, 
very much, an agenda of fiscal restraint based on the pressures 
that we have in terms of the provincial debt, the deficit 
budgeting prior to us taking our position on this side of the 
House in 1991. So we’ve done eight straight balanced budgets, 
and I think that’s a very strong signal for business that the 
province is going to be managed in a small “c”, fiscal, 
conservative way. So I think those are really important signals. 
 
I talked about this year an enhanced expenditure in government. 
The development of our transportation infrastructure I think is 
very critical, and that’s another element of what we did and part 
of what the government did as an overall initiative; information 
technology in the developing of a high-speed Internet system in 
some 360, I think it is, communities in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I think our signal as well to rural Saskatchewan that we have 
not forgotten them in terms of economic development and 
opportunities in particular in rural and in small town 
Saskatchewan; to allow schools and to allow libraries, public 
buildings, government agencies, and ultimately business, allow 
them to do — and use modern and high-speed technology — to 
do their business in the rural part of Saskatchewan I think is 
another signal that we would like to have sent out. 
 
This budget as well . . . And I don’t want to dwell too much on 
the budget but I just want to sort of give an overview of the 
initiatives to the member. We’re going to be creating 1,500 
summer student jobs through the centennial summer student 
employment program. And I think that’s very much important 
in terms of allowing young people who are in post-secondary 
venues and who are furthering their education to have a better 
understanding of the workplace here in Saskatchewan in areas 
that they might be interested in. 
 
So there are a number of things that have been done. Not as 
much as we want — it never is — because we still have a fairly 
substantive debt load in the province and we do have a fragile 
economy. Everyone will know that the agricultural community 
is in some pretty severe difficulties. We’re trying to work with 
them but we do have our pressures. 
 
But I would want to say as well we do have some very positive 
opportunities for Saskatchewan people and people who would 
choose to locate their businesses and their families here in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. As you know 
signals are very important, particularly in economic 
development. Decisions are made daily. Decisions are made 
almost hourly in the city that I come from, where they compare 
one side of a border to the other. 
 
And I think Lloydminster — although I’ve talked about it a lot 
and I’ve been probably criticized for that — I really believe that 
the decisions that are made there as to location, investment, 
expansion, and so on, those decisions put Lloydminster in a 
very unique position. I think it’s a bit of a model and I think it 
could be extrapolated, that model could be extrapolated to some 
of the conditions and things that we want to see in this province. 
 
I guess, however, your point about the signals that are being 
presented are very positive if we want to get people to come to 



528 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2001 

 

this province, if we want investment to come to this province, 
and jobs. 
 
The problem that I have with this particular budget, although 
you highlighted some of the items on there, and again, the 
small-business corporate tax reduced by 2 per cent, I think is a 
very positive step. And I’ve commented on that before. 
However, we’re still following — we’re not leading. 
 
Anybody that is looking in Saskatchewan, Alberta, or 
Manitoba, either side, this is still not the area that they would 
like to move into. Is it going to attract . . . it will certainly help 
the small businesses that are here. Will it attract new investment 
into our province? I guess that’s yet to be determined. But I 
would say that that’s not the most positive signal that we have. 
And when I look at the corporate tax, that in fact has gone 
down. And I’d like to talk about that just in a minute. 
 
The signal that I see and from what businesses tell me from this 
particular budget, there is a . . . although you said there was a 
balanced budget, certainly I would agree with the General 
Revenue Fund. And I think the figures do show that the overall 
gross debt is going up when you look at both the government 
and the Crowns, which in fact has to be absorbed by the 
taxpayer. So that is a signal that I don’t think is going in the 
right direction. There is a projected greater number of civil 
servants even though the income is down and expenses are up. 
 
I’d like to talk a little bit about the Internet system that you’ve 
referred to, but I want to talk a little bit about it later. And if I 
could, I’d like to get your comment about the summer jobs that 
you referred to earlier as a signal. Correct me if I’m wrong, Mr. 
Minister, but those summer jobs, although very valuable to our 
young people, are they directed particularly at government jobs 
and Crown corporations and not private business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to say 
to the member opposite that no one should ever challenge the 
member for saying the good things he does about his 
community. I’ve had some experience in the Lloydminster area 
in my previous role as Minister of Energy and Mines, and I’ve 
very much come to appreciate the people and the businesses 
and the climate in that area of the world. And they do a good 
job. 
 
And it’s a good community, it’s a growing community, and it’s 
a strong community. And part of it is based on, as you will 
know, the resource revenue that takes place and the work that 
takes place in that area of the province. 
 
The member opposite mentioned the number of jobs and the 
incremental number of jobs in this year’s budget, and he’s right. 
The numbers of 570 jobs actually don’t reflect an increase in 
the number of full-time equivalents, and I want to give him an 
example of that. 
 
In previous years the Department of Environment and Resource 
Management, it seemed when we had unfortunate years and we 
had forest fires and then it appears that we might have one of 
those kind of years, it’s pretty dry up North, and I know we’re 
all sometimes worried about that. But in some of these years, 
we would have forest fires that would consume an awful lot of 
manpower, or person power, and an awful lot of money. 

And the budgeting process has been changed to more accurately 
reflect the actual happenings. And with that comes the FTEs 
(full-time equivalents) and the person power as it relates to 
forest fire suppression, and somewhere in the neighbourhood of 
80 or 90 of those are forest fighters who were in fact, through 
special warrants, funded in other areas. 
 
I just want to cite other examples of not being too negative, I 
would hope, in terms of the number of employees. And I want 
to refer to the Department of Energy and Mines. It is a 
regulatory and it is a licensing body that facilitates a billion 
dollars worth of investment in a year with the oil and gas sector 
and the mining sector. 
 
And one of the challenges that we had within that department, 
and we hope it’s alleviated now, was that we didn’t have the 
person power to process the paper in a timely manner for 
industry. And that was partly as a result of restraint over the 
years in terms of developing the budgets. 
 
The Department of Highways, I use as another example. 
Without infrastructure it’s difficult to transport the goods and 
services that we produce. And we are very much an exporting 
province. And of that, I think there’s 90 or however many 
people, FTEs, in that operation. Some of those are engineers, 
some of them are administrative people to manage a 
$312-million budget, the largest in the history of the province. 
So we’ve got a lot of contractors working. We have to have the 
drafts people in order to put the paperwork together to make 
those things happen. 
 
And I often think that it takes people from outside of our 
province to tell us what we can do and what we have done. And 
I just refer to an article that I happened upon in the Regina The 
Leader-Post of March 3 this year. And it’s titled, “10 Things 
You Don’t Know About Saskatchewan (It’s not just wheat 
anymore).” 
 
And that really is so true. Our economy is probably eight and a 
half, nine per cent agricultural based. Our resource sector is 20, 
21. Much of it takes place in your area of the world, as you will 
know. And there’s a lot of good, positive things happening in 
there. 
 
We look at the business profits that are being made and the 
exports are soaring is just one headline. “Jobs, jobs, jobs in . . . 
rural Saskatchewan,” another one. And it talks: 
 

Although cries of gloom and doom ring through rural 
Saskatchewan, the reality is there’s been (an) impressive 
job growth in a number of industry sectors. 
 
Outside Regina and Saskatoon there’s been a 17 per cent 
increase in non-agricultural employment over the past 
decade . . . 
 

And we know that that’s necessary based on pressures that 
agriculture is facing trying to manage large subsidies in the 
United States and in Europe. 
 
Have we solved all of the problems? Certainly not. We’ve got a 
long ways to go here in the province yet, but I think we’ve got a 
good solid footing on which to work. 



April 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 529 

 

In terms of summer employment, there has been, as the member 
will know, a summer student-hiring plan in the Crown 
corporations for a number of years. SaskPower as an example is 
always very anxious to hire engineering students from the U of 
S (University of Saskatchewan) and from the U of R 
(University of Regina) campuses and the reason is because they 
try and entice them to work, and it’s difficult in a job market 
where job opportunities abound. 
 
In particular, and I would refer to the province to the west of us, 
Alberta is very much a magnet. It’s got a very strong economy; 
a lot of it’s resource-based. They have . . . it’s got a core and it’s 
built a core in many areas and it attracts a lot of people, not only 
from Saskatchewan but across Canada and from the United 
States. 
 
So we have our challenges. But I think, to look at the 
Saskatchewan economy overall, it’s got a very strong base and 
we’ve got some very good opportunities for creating jobs for 
lots of young people and their families here. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, I’ve had quite a few letters. I 
would assume you as an elected representative might be getting 
letters too from the business community saying, hey what about 
me, in terms of being able to offer these jobs. 
 
I know there’s federal programs. The time frame has often run 
out before people think that there is an opportunity there. 
 
So I can see a real problem there and I would like to, I would 
like to make sure that when this is thought through again that 
you don’t exclude a sector of small business that in fact I think 
is the generator of the economy in terms of generating jobs for 
this province. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Let me talk a little bit about job creation because I think that’s a 
very integral part of the economic development strategy that I 
think you would like to see as well. And I get back to the 
signals that are being put forward from years before and also 
upcoming and I just wanted to draw your attention to, when we 
were talking about job creation, that it wasn’t long ago that the 
government — your government — was projecting something 
like 30,000 new jobs or some very large numbers. 
 
In this provincial budget it was downgraded substantially into 
what we think the job creation potential is here in this province. 
And I just wondered if you could explain the difference 
between those two projections. Have we got more of a problem 
than we thought in trying to develop or attract jobs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, in response to the member, 
he would of course be referring to the economic division 
documents that have been put forth by the department in terms 
of the number of jobs projected. And you know, certainly the 
numbers that were in this year’s budget documents were in the 
neighbourhood of 20,000 by their estimates. But there were 
some things and there are some things and there are some 
differences. 
 
First of all a vision of creating 30,000 jobs and setting a target, 
maybe in excess of what an accountant might tell me the 

economy would create, I think is not unrealistic. And I don’t 
think it’s an inappropriate approach to take. Because if we don’t 
have a dream and if we don’t have a vision and if we don’t set 
targets for ourselves and goals, how then would we ever expect 
to maximize our potential? 
 
The budget document this year forecasted growth in the 
neighbourhood of 2.2, 2.5 per cent. The economists — Toronto 
Dominion Bank, Royal Bank — are projecting economic 
growth in the province of three and a half per cent, which is 
fairly good by Canadian standards. And of course, all of this is 
subject to downward pressures on our economy, things that may 
or may not happen in the United States, the dollar, value of the 
dollar, all of these things are variables. 
 
But I think you would agree with me that the fiscal and the 
growth projections in our budgets in the last while here in 
Saskatchewan have been very much on the conservative side. 
What isn’t factored in, in terms of the job numbers in the budget 
documents, as well are the impacts of the reduction in the taxes 
that are taking place this year both in the business side and on 
the personal income tax side. And those are not factors that 
would increase that 20,000 jobs. 
 
So I think it’s fair to say that there’s no contradiction. What 
there are is very conservative projections from the Department 
of Finance just by its nature. And I’m not speaking of course 
about the Minister of Finance himself, but the people that he 
works with are fairly conservative when they’re putting 
together their expenditure numbers. Because I don’t think they 
want any year-end surprises that would say, whoops, we’re in a 
deficit position. 
 
So having said that, I don’t think there’s any inconsistency. I 
think we need to have a goal, we need to have the vision, and 
we need to have the dreams that we’re going to achieve to our 
full potential. So the documents I think are very much 
consistent and supportive of each other. 
 
Because you’re not going to have job growth and you’re not 
going to have employment growth, you’re not going to have 
business growth unless you’ve got a good economic base. And 
that’s what we very much, and I think business very much 
depends on, from the Department of Finance and from the 
government at budget time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess those are 
the concerns that I have too, is trying to make sure that we get 
the right signal out there, and not by wildly exaggerating the 
amount of jobs and then having to back away and say oh, I’m 
sorry, I guess we made a mistake. 
 
The Minister of Finance and I had discussed these things in a 
previous year as well, and one of the concerns that I have is that 
even though we recognize that we have to try and attract those 
people with the right signals, the fact is that from a recent 
publication in Sask Trends Monitor, it shows that employment, 
this would be . . . the key indicators . . . this was published in 
March. The key indicators in February were in fact down for 
employment as opposed to the provinces on either side, and in 
Canada particularly. 
 
So what we have to do is try and figure out why they’re down 



530 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2001 

 

and recognizing that some of that employment is, as you 
referred to, in the agricultural sector, we have to take some 
responsibility for those jobs too. We just can’t write those off, 
saying agriculture is out of our hands now. We have to do 
something very specific to try and turn that part around. 
Because without the employment, we are not going to generate 
what we had hoped and need in this province. 
 
In fact even in a publication published by the Department of 
Economic and Co-operative Development for March/April, 
there is a quote saying that there were 1,600 more full-time jobs 
in January 2001 than in the previous year. But there’s 
conflicting signals going out from all the different kinds of 
publications. 
 
There’s other headlines that say, Saskatchewan economy 
expected to slow down despite the oil boom. And I know that 
those are just viewpoints of different people. 
 
The fact is that if we want to try to expand our base, we have to 
understand why we’re not, and try and make the changes. And 
I’m not sure that even though the personal income tax over a 
four-year period is scheduled to be going down, which is 
exactly what should be done, but the signal from a year ago — 
and people have a great memory — people from a year ago 
remember that the tax base was in fact expanded, and in my 
particular part of the world that is a real burr under a lot of 
saddles. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what we have to do, I think, is to talk a little 
bit about the whole revitalization, and I would like to get from 
you what do you think you have learned from the numbers that 
have been ongoing? What would you have learned from the 
lower-than-expected projections of job growth — in fact I think 
it’s the other way around — is there something that you and 
your department can put forward that would indicate that we 
want to in fact move in a different direction than the indicators 
have been showing or the signals have been indicating? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well the indicators — certainly the 
member will recognize — vary from month to month and they 
will vary from year to year. I think what is important though, is 
if we look at year-over-year growth and year-over-year 
development. It’s a seasonal economy we have and there is 
many things that can impact on job forecasts for a month, 
month over year over year. And I think what one needs to do is 
what is happening and what the growth of the economy is over 
an extended period of time. Because those are the true figures 
and those are the figures that will give you a very good 
indication as to where your economy is going. 
 
You know, the one thing I think that one needs to look at is the 
wealth of the people and the wealth of your province. Is your 
. . . (inaudible) . . . province becoming wealthier or is it not? 
And I again refer to a newspaper in The Globe and Mail, 
November 6 of 2000, and it does an analysis of real domestic 
product growth of all of the provinces in Canada and it has 
Saskatchewan in the lead. That’s over a 10-year period. 
 
And so I think that’s important to know that when you have 
year-over-year growth and when you have a sustained growth, 
that there must be something positive that’s happened. 
 

And some of the indicators and some of the things that I have 
learnt is that our economy is much less based on and dependent 
on agriculture than it was in the past. And that’s because we’ve 
made and put in place specific initiatives to ensure that we’re 
diversifying what we’re doing. We’re going to focus on 
manufacturing and processing. As the member will know right 
now, there is a fairly major thrust in terms of developing our 
forest resource. And I think those are all important things. 
 
At the risk of boring members in the legislature, I want to quote 
from this article and it just says: 
 

When we look back on the nineties, which province will be 
remembered as the star economic performer of the decade? 
 
The nod — in popular memory, at least — is likely to go to 
Alberta, where the economy grew in every year of the 
decade. Ontario finished nineties with a strong kick, but 
suffered a deep recession in the early years that threw it off 
stride. British Columbia will be remembered as a solid 
underperformer all the way. Smaller provinces probably 
won’t even be considered. 
 
In fact, the lineup, by the only measure — the only measure 
— of economic growth that really counts, is quite different. 
 
The winner is Saskatchewan . . . 

 
And I think that says a lot about what has happened in this 
province in the last 10 years. 
 
Another quote from that same article: 
 

Saskatchewan has had so many economic problems in 
recent years — low resource prices, mainly — that it’s hard 
to remember the province’s stunning expansion in the first 
two years of the decade. With such a good start, and with a 
couple of other good years, Saskatchewan’s economy grew 
more than 32 per cent over the decade. 

 
And I think that’s what we need to look at and those are the 
figures that we do. 
 
And I mean, we can pull selective figures out. You will one 
month bring March over last March numbers that will show a 
decline in population. And I will, a month or two later, bring 
forward numbers that will show a strong increase over perhaps 
June . . . in last June’s job numbers. 
 
But I think what we need to do is we need to look at the year 
and year over year, and look at what’s happened in the last 
decade to determine really what is happening in our province. 
 
And I think you can make a very strong argument that 
Saskatchewan has had very strong growth compared to other 
jurisdictions in Canada. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, thank you. It would appear to 
me that, if we had that kind of an economic growth, we must 
have been doing something right. 
 
What I see, however, is the fact that people are leaving the 
province. We’re trying to attract them back. When we were . . . 



April 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 531 

 

And maybe the growth, the economic growth might be 
understood in this particular term — and again I’m going to 
quote from the Sask Trends Monitor, the March 2001 — and 
this is year over year. I agree that we can be selective in terms 
of month to month and so on, and maybe those aren’t as big of 
an indicator as year to year. 
 
And I’m looking here at the employment by category, and the 
employment paid by the private sector has virtually been level. 
It hasn’t changed a great deal. The employment paid by the 
public sector has actually gone up 12 per cent, and I’m looking 
at the year 1998, ’99, and 2000, over that period of time. 
 
Self-employed has actually decreased by about just over 7 per 
cent. The trend, as I see it there, is that even though 
employment might be steady or increasing — although we can 
debate that — it would appear that in the public sector the 
self-employed is not increasing in employment. And to me 
that’s a signal that the small business or self-employed people 
are not staying and contributing. 
 
If I was going to look at the statistics that were put forward by 
StatsCanada, and also Health Services Utilization and Research 
Commission, they try to look at trends, and the trend in terms of 
growth is the — and we’re talking about population forecasts 
here for the province — the trend predicted annual growth rate 
is near zero for the population in the short term. Unfortunately, 
Saskatchewan has remained fairly stagnate all through the 
period. 
 
Even though our economy might be looking good in 
comparison to before, we aren’t attracting . . . we aren’t keeping 
our young educated and trained and skilled people. I think the 
general trend is away. 
 
And I guess that’s why . . . and I hate to keep going in this line, 
Mr. Minister, but I think it’s very important that we try to learn 
from what we have in place, why we are successful, why we are 
not successful, and try to correct those kinds of things. 
 
(15:45) 
 
In terms of . . . if I could, I’d like to switch gears a little bit, Mr. 
Minister, and maybe before, if you wish to have a comment, I 
would certainly yield for you to do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and to the 
members opposite, you know the figures that the member 
quotes are accurate, but what I want to point out is they include 
agriculture which is what we talked about a little earlier. 
 
If you look at the areas of decline, the agricultural community is 
siphoning off jobs. There are fewer people working in that 
industry for a number of reasons. I mean we have technology 
changes, we have farmers who are farming larger and larger 
operations to build economies of scale. But what those figures 
also tell you on the other side is that manufacturing and 
processing is up, oil and gas and the development in those areas 
are up, forestry is up, and certainly a lot of that is offset by what 
happens in agriculture. 
 
Now if we were fortunate enough to have the support of the 
national government such as farmers in the United States, who I 

understand are looking right now at a new support program for 
their farming community. If we had the kind of support from 
our national government that they’re receiving in the United 
States and in Europe from their governments, my guess and my 
suggestion to you would be that these statistics would look 
much, much different as it relates to agriculture. 
 
But that is not our case. And what we have been doing is we 
have been investing on a per capita basis hundreds of millions 
of dollars every year into agriculture in hope just to stabilize. 
And in many cases it can’t even stabilize that industry. 
 
And we with a population of a million people cannot fight the 
American governments and we know that. But we’re doing 
what we can to support rural Saskatchewan and to support 
agriculture. Is it enough? I’ll tell you it’s what we can afford. 
Maybe it’s not enough but it’s what we have available to us. 
 
They’re going though a fairly dramatic transition and we all 
understand that, but as I said the statistics do include agriculture 
and I think that’s important to recognize. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I certainly 
don’t quarrel with the fact that agriculture is in a serious 
situation, really through no fault of the farmers. They’re 
probably the best and most efficient in the world. They’re up 
against a situation that is impossible if they are to remain in the 
same kind of agricultural mode that they have been in. 
 
I would suspect that agriculture will continue to flourish in this 
province. I have a great deal of faith. I’ve been involved in 
agriculture one way or another for a great number of years, as 
my age may be a clue. But agriculture will not be the same as it 
has been. It has to have changes and there has to be signals 
placed into that area as well. 
 
And I guess this leads me to my next question. And the question 
I would have is — although I’m going to refer to the office of 
Rural Revitalization, I realize this isn’t your particular ministry 
but I think there’s some crossovers here, not only with 
Economic and Co-operative Development, but with also the 
Department of Ag and Food — from your perspective, Rural 
Revitalization, do you see a redundancy here from the things 
that could be done, should’ve been done, are being done by the 
Department of Economic and Co-operative Development? And 
I’m referring particularly to the REDA (regional economic 
development authority) and the REDA influences in the rural 
areas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. And to the member opposite, I don’t think there are 
redundancies. I think there are some synergies with respect to 
the role that REDAs play and the role that the department of 
Rural Revitalization will play. 
 
It, as you will know, is under the same ministry as the Minister 
of Transportation and Highways. And so I think that there are 
some interconnects certainly between Rural Revitalization, that 
agency, and the Department of Highways and Transportation 
and one minister. Certainly it’s not that the programs that are in 
place through Community Futures, federal government, 
provincial government programs, a combination of all of those 
things . . . And I guess sometimes it seems a bit disjointed. 



532 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2001 

 

When I look at this government just in terms of its, you know, 
its administration, and I look at the role the Department of 
Economic and Co-operative Development plays, we’ve got so 
many other economic development arms of government. 
There’s Rural Revitalization now. There’s the Department of 
Energy and Mines. There’s the Department of Environment and 
Resource Management, as it relates to the development working 
with this department in terms of forestry. 
 
You’ve got the Agriculture Development Fund as part of the 
Department of Agriculture and the initiatives that they do. 
There’s SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation), 
another arm of government to help facilitate capital for some of 
the smaller businesses. 
 
There’s the role of many of the different departments and it 
somewhat seems disjointed. And I must admit that it may in 
fact be somewhat . . . I’ll pass the floor to the member. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Asking permission to introduce guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, members of the legislature. I 
would like to introduce this afternoon, Mike Badham who is 
sitting up in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
He’s had an illustrious career in education, and I served as an 
educator at the same time that he was in leadership positions 
there, and now very strong in municipal affairs. And it’s 
probably significant that he’s here as the committee is 
discussing economic development and I’m sure he’s interested 
in that for the province and for cities. 
 
So would you join me in welcoming Mike Badham. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Thomson: — I too request leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, it’s a pleasure also to 
welcome Mike Badham who is a constituent of mine as I am a 
constituent of his in the fine city of Regina. It’s a pleasure here 
to have Mike here again. 
 
He’s of course a regular visitor to observe our proceedings and 
offer very insightful advice to me personally on things that I 
should be doing in our riding, as well as things obviously that 
our government should be doing for the province. 
 
And I’d ask all members to again join with me in welcoming 
him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
 

Subvote (EC01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I’m going to have to find my place again because 
I’m not sure . . . I think I know what we were discussing but 
I’m not totally sure. But it had certainly something to do with 
department of Rural Revitalization and its role. 
 
But before I begin trying to find where I was, I want to say 
good afternoon to Mr. Badham and welcome him to the House. 
 
The role of the department of Rural Revitalization. I just talked 
about a number of the different areas of economic development 
and how it sometimes seems a little cumbersome and 
sometimes frustrating within government to try and get the 
different agencies to work together to do all the things that we 
want to do in terms of building this economy. The role and part 
of the role of Rural Revitalization is to help with the 
coordination of those things as it relates to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. There really is a 
large amount of different entities and it gets very confusing. 
 
One of the objectives that I’ve observed from the annual report 
of Saskatchewan Economic and Co-operative Development, 
1999-2000, when you’re looking at the 2000-2001 objectives, 
was to develop a strategic plan for the department that would 
address the government’s overall accountability objectives. 
 
I guess in that vein, are you able to . . . or have you been able, 
or your department’s been able to analyse the effectiveness of 
some of these rural initiatives, such as the REDA. REDA, if my 
recollection serves right, is something like $2.8 million in terms 
of your budget going to those areas. 
 
Is there any indication that there’s a return on that kind of an 
investment in developing rural economic initiatives in those 
particular areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can say to 
the member opposite that I’ve been on a bit of a steep learning 
curve here in the last couple of months, because I’ve had the 
opportunity to assume the role and the responsibility for 
Economic and Co-operative Development. And it’s allowed me 
to meet with a number of different REDAs throughout the . . . 
across the province. 
 
I’ve met in Saskatoon, Regina, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, 
Yorkton, and there are others that I certainly hope to meet to 
find how they’re interacting with their chambers of commerce, 
how they’re interacting with the different civic administrations 
in their areas. And what I’m finding is that it’s money very well 
spent. 
 
A lot of the time that local people put in, as you will know, in 
terms of developing their community, is volunteer time. And 
the people who work in the REDAs and work with them — I 



April 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 533 

 

find certainly some a little more successful than others, and 
some are working a little better and co-operating a little better 
with the different entities in their community —but what I want 
to say is overall the volunteerism and that component of 
REDAs and what they are able to do in terms of stimulating 
development, then I would just . . . I was quite impressed. 
 
And I would want to share with the members of the House, I 
spent an afternoon in Moose Jaw. And I’ve known Moose Jaw 
well. Like some of us, I grew up in the southern part of the 
province and I saw Moose Jaw on a decline. I saw Central 
Avenue at one point in time, in the recent history, where you 
could have shot a cannon down Main Street and you wouldn’t 
have bothered anybody; you wouldn’t have impacted anybody. 
 
But the REDA, working with the chamber and working with the 
civic administration of that community, had a vision and they 
had a dream and they had some goals, and they set out on a plan 
to revitalize their downtown core. And they’re a long way along 
in doing that, and it’s not because there were massive amounts 
of government expenditure. But the Department of Economic 
and Co-operative Development worked with the local REDAs 
and with the chambers, and with Sask Water in that area, 
another government entity, and with private investors and they 
put a package together to relive and revitalize that town. 
 
And those are stories that you can see in other places in 
Saskatchewan. There are many communities who have been 
able to take those initiatives and turn them into economic, 
positive economic results. I think of the Watrous, Englefeld, the 
Humboldt area — just great examples of what people with an 
entrepreneurial spirit working within their communities and 
with their neighbours have been able to achieve. And you’ve 
got manufacturing and processing some of the most innovative 
farm machinery equipment anywhere in the world. And that 
doesn’t happen everywhere. 
 
So I think it speaks to a couple of things: one, that government 
can help to facilitate with small dollars some very positive 
things. And I think REDAs are a program that exemplifies that, 
but most importantly it needs to be community and it needs to 
be community spirit. 
 
And as I said, I just would want to take my hat off to the 
volunteers who spend their time on the regional economic 
development authorities making good things happen throughout 
the province. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, I look forward to seeing the 
government’s overall accountability objectives, I think, that you 
work through your department and see how they match up to 
what you had planned. 
 
And if I could, I would — because we’re talking about rural and 
some rural diversification and those kinds of interesting areas 
— and maybe while Mr. Anderson is with us behind the bar, I’d 
like to defer to my colleague from Swift Current for a question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A question to the 
minister and it relates to an industry that I’ve become familiar 
with and that’s basically working ranches, and specifically 
ranches that are in the business of attracting Europeans to come 
and experience western life, and I actually have been involved 

directly in that sort of an operation for some time. 
 
And not long ago I met with a ranch that I have worked with — 
they’re also friends — and we had a discussion about what do 
we do this year. Granted it’s a part-time business. Nobody’s 
paying the rent off of this, granted, but it is one that’s been in 
operation for some time. And the question that we were talking 
about is, do we even pursue our business for this year because 
of the foot-and-mouth scare overseas. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Given the fact that a lot of these ranches involved in this 
business, the heart and soul of their business remains the ranch 
and remains the raising of cattle. And often the tourism element 
is an aside to generate a little bit extra revenue to diversify a 
little. 
 
We’ve made a decision — it’s tentative — but we made a 
decision to sort of just maybe hold back for the year. We’re in a 
position to do that. 
 
Some operations . . . and there are more and more in the 
province all the time, by the way, Minister, as you may know. 
And I can also tell you that Tourism Saskatchewan, I think, has 
done a good job of working with that kind of a venture in trying 
to attract those people. 
 
But there are more and more of those operations that rely to a 
much greater extent certainly than I do, or than the ranch I 
partner with does, on this revenue. And for them I think they 
have some questions. If they are going to continue with this, 
and I don’t know how many are, I don’t know that they’ve 
heard from the ministry of Agriculture and Food or from the 
federal government on steps that they could take to safeguard 
their livestock, their livelihood, and their communities from 
this. I’m not sure they’ve heard of anything and that’s the 
question that I have for you today. 
 
Has Tourism Saskatchewan had contact from these sorts of 
operations? And if they have, are they referred to the federal 
government or where can these people turn for very important 
answers to these questions on their operation? 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Mr. Minister, you have other 
officials that have joined you in the Chamber and would you 
mind taking a minute to introduce your further officials that are 
here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Chairman, I have Roy Anderson, president of Tourism 
Saskatchewan; Tim Frass, who is the director of finance — I’m 
learning all of these new faces — and Gerry Adamson who is 
the vice-president of STEP (Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership) is also with us here today. 
 
As I was saying, the question I guess is very appropriate. I’m 
told that there is a news release about to be issued from 
Tourism Saskatchewan that deals with the interaction between 
Tourism Saskatchewan and the federal government as it relates 
to regulatory and those types of issues. I’m reading it as we 
speak here. So what I will do is I’ll pass the member a copy of 
this, and if there’s any further questions or items that you need 



534 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2001 

 

to discuss with me or with the officials, we’re certainly more 
than willing to do that. 
 
I should say, Mr. Chairman, we had the proposal — and I’m 
speaking now as House Leader — and I certainly don’t want to 
cut this debate off on the member from Swift Current, but we 
had agreed to move to the Department of Education at 4 
o’clock. It’s just a few minutes past there, so if we could move 
from Economic Development to Education. 
 
We’ll be back to what I’ve found a most interesting discussion 
and I’m looking forward to carrying on with this later on in the 
session. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I move we rise, 
report progress and ask for leave to sit again . . . rise and report 
progress. Sorry, I’m learning this too . . . We move to report 
progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Education 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (ED01) 
 
The Chair: — I’d first of all like to ask the Minister of 
Education if he would please introduce his officials present with 
him, with the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair, and 
certainly it’s a pleasure to be here for the estimates in 
Education. 
 
And with me here today, I have Craig Dotson, who is the 
deputy minister of Education, immediately to my right. And 
I’ve also got Dr. Michael Littlewood, immediately to my left, 
who is the executive director of legislation and school 
administration. And I’ve got Ken Horsman, directly behind me, 
and he’s the associate deputy minister of Education. And Mr. 
John McLaughlin, who’s seated at the back, who is the 
executive director of Teacher Superannuation Commission. 
 
Mrs. Frances Bast, who is right back behind me as well, and 
she’s the director of finance and administration corporate 
services. Mr. Cal Kirby — and where is Cal — he’s at the back 
of the room as well. He’s the director of facilities planning. And 
Gerry Sing Chin, grants manager, school finance, and Gerry’s 
right to my right as well. 
 
So thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and to your officials. I’m starting to recognize some 
faces, so that makes it easier to ask questions. So I appreciate 
the first of probably many times that we’ll have a chance to get 
together this session. 
 
Mr. Minister, first maybe I can start by asking if you’ve had the 
opportunity to get the answers for the global questions that we 
had sent over previously. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And to the 
member opposite, we have received the global questions. We 

have not yet compiled the answers to those. It is my 
understanding that we are waiting for the final numbers with 
regard to recognized expenditures, and we’ll have those 
available after April 20. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then I 
guess maybe some of the questions that I have for you today, 
you may not have all the answers yet. 
 
But I’d like to start by asking about the extra . . . we have $33.7 
million extra in school operating grant money this year, which I 
know made many school boards right across the province very 
happy. And it took 32.2 million of that to just keep the status 
quo when it came to teachers’ salaries, support staff salary, 
transportation costs, and so on. And also this year we have the 
added issue thrown in that we have reassessment. 
 
So I’m wondering if you can give me an idea today how many 
school divisions will actually see a change, and then we’ll start 
by saying an increase in the money that they will be receiving 
this year from the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The member 
opposite asked a very specific question with regard to the 
budget. And I’ll just make a few comments in general terms 
about the budget this year. Certainly it was considered by many 
to be the best budget that the province has seen in some 15 
years. 
 
We recognize that there was a significant increase on the 
foundation operating grant. There was also significant increases 
with regard to some of the targeted programs. And more 
specifically, it is my understanding that because of the size of 
the grant this year on the calendar year, that school divisions are 
actually looking at their grant numbers right now and compiling 
the numbers in terms of . . . before they set their mill rates. 
 
And I understand that some of the school divisions have already 
indicated that with the increased grant this year, that there will 
be an opportunity for them to lower their mill rates. And for 
example, Eston/Elrose has indicated that it will be dropping its 
mill rate from 17.75 to 14.2 this year. And we’ve heard some 
very good news from Saskatoon public and also from the Chair 
of the Regina board. 
 
And certainly when we talk about the major stakeholders in 
education such as the School Trustees Association and the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, they rated the budget as an 
A this year and are very pleased with what they’ve seen in the 
budget for education this year. 
 
And to answer more specifically the question from the member, 
it is my understanding that many school divisions have seen an 
increase in their grant, and this is on top of course some 
reassessment changes in terms of a global assessment. 
Province-wide the global assessment has gone up 10.8 per cent. 
In rural Saskatchewan it was 9 per cent. In Saskatoon the 
assessment went up 20 per cent and Regina roughly 60 per cent. 
 
So there has been an increase in the assessment base that school 
divisions have to work with. We do respect the autonomy of 
school divisions to have the opportunity to tax this local tax 
base. And certainly it is my understanding that because the 



April 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

 

province has significantly reinvested in education this year that 
there is an opportunity for many school divisions to either 
freeze their mill rate or even lower it. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Actually, I know that 
there was many school divisions that have contacted me and 
said that they were going to be able to hold the line. I actually 
haven’t heard . . . didn’t know that somebody was actually 
going to be able to lower their mill rate. 
 
Mr. Minister, I do know that some school divisions, like Tiger 
Lily, will be getting $100,000 less, and so that’s going to mean 
for them that they’re going to have to either cut staff or they’re 
going to have to raise their mill rate. 
 
And I guess what I’m really looking for is to find out if you do 
have the breakdown yet. You said after April 20, but obviously 
you would know from your own figures what is going to be 
happening there. I imagine Tiger Lily wouldn’t have contacted 
just my office, must have contacted yours as well. 
 
We have had . . . Since 1991, I believe it is, we haven’t seen 
any increases in education funding. In fact, we’ve seen the 
decreases. Pardon me, I believe last year there was some 
increase. So we really are still sort of behind the eight ball and 
behind even the inflation rate, if we’d have calculated it since 
1991. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, maybe you could tell me if there are any 
school divisions besides Tiger Lily that have contacted your 
office to date to let you know that they’re receiving less money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the 
member opposite. Certainly some of the concerns that we had 
with dealing with the massive debt that was incurred when this 
current government took office provided for some, obviously 
some significant decisions that needed to be made at that time. 
 
(16:15) 
 
But since 1995 there have been increases to the education 
budget that have actually exceeded the rate of inflation. And 
last year, of course, there was an increase on the foundation 
operating grant of $29 million. And with the increase this year 
we’re looking at over $60 million in just two years, which is 
close to a 16 per cent increase over those two years on the 
foundation operating grant when the rate of inflation in 
Saskatchewan is projected to be 2 per cent or lower. 
 
With regard specifically to Tiger Lily, none of the school 
divisions have actually contacted my office with any concerns. I 
think that we recognize that the funding of education in the 
province of Saskatchewan is a shared responsibility between the 
province and school divisions, and that the foundation operating 
grant is based on a formula that has been arrived at and agreed 
to by all the stakeholders, and it’s A minus B equals C. 
 
We have one part of the formula which talks about recognized 
expenditures within that school division. We have one part of 
the formula that talks about the recognized revenues based on 
assessment and mill rate. And then of course the difference is 

covered by the province because the grant is provided on an 
equalization formula. 
 
So in the instance with Tiger Lily, recognizing that here’s the 
recognized expenditures, here’s the recognized revenue, if their 
grant decreased then it’s most likely dependent on things like 
enrolment which the grant is very sensitive to, and certainly 
these numbers in terms of how we provide grants are provided, 
and then they make their decisions on the types of services they 
need to provide and what they need to access in their tax base to 
provide those services. 
 
But we do believe in the principles of equity and equitable 
opportunity for students in the province of Saskatchewan, no 
matter where they live. And the foundation operating grant 
principle has worked very well, and is recognized as being the 
proper way to distribute provincial funds by all of the major 
stakeholders. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, recognizing that the 
reassessment effect has . . . and I realize that on the west side of 
the province especially where the assessment really went up, 
there should be instances where the mill rates will go down, and 
it’s still going to be the same amount of money charged to the 
taxpayer, because of the difference in the mill rates. 
 
So I guess I shouldn’t have gotten quite so excited when I hear 
that somebody has actually been able to lower the mill rate. It’s 
still going to cost you the same amount of money in the long 
run. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, maybe if you haven’t had calls from the 
school divisions regarding the actual mill rates, how many calls 
have you had from school divisions that are saying they are still 
going to have to close schools? 
 
This is an issue that is at the heart of problems here in rural 
Saskatchewan. I know that your new Minister of Rural 
Revitalization is probably looking at this issue as well. But most 
of the members on this side of the House have had calls from 
school divisions saying that we are going to have to close 
schools. They’re all working through their budget numbers. 
 
I know that the member from Arm River is worried about 
Marquis school. We’ve got Spalding School. Weekes School, 
they’re afraid they’re going to lose that school. And I’m 
wondering if this is . . . how you are addressing this issue and 
what kind of numbers you’re talking about and the calls you’re 
getting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Certainly the 
topic of school closures has been a reality for the province of 
Saskatchewan for many, many years. And just to talk, just to 
give some background in terms of the numbers of schools 
closed, we’re looking at during the 1980s, anywhere from 9 to 
20 in any given year. For example, 1984, there were 20 schools 
closed. In 1983, there were 19. In 1990, there were 20. 
 
When we look at the 1990s, 1993, there were 18 schools closed. 
Last year, there were seven. And it is my understanding that this 
year we’re looking at approximately three schools that will be 
closed in the province of Saskatchewan, which would actually 
be the lowest, the lowest total in some 20 years, Mr. Chair. 



536 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2001 

 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, could you tell me specifically 
which three schools? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The process 
for school closures, especially in rural Saskatchewan, is clearly 
defined, and the process that is followed is for notices of motion 
to be provided by school boards with public consultation. 
 
Now it is my understanding that the final motions have 
occurred with regard to Tantallon which is in the Potashville 
School Division; Langbank, which is in Broadview School 
Division; and Spalding, which is in the Tiger Lily School 
Division. That’s a K to 7 school, a K to 6, a K to 8. The 
enrolments were 26, 68, and 63. 
 
We are also in the process where the final motions have not 
been received for an additional, looks like four to five other 
schools. That process is being followed. It’s a process that’s 
been in place for some time. And again, this is a reality that has 
been out there for many, many years but it looks like this year 
will actually be, in terms of the numbers of schools closed, less 
than we’ve seen in the previous 15 to 20 years. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one of 
the headlines in the paper about three weeks or a month ago 
now was something that I’m sure that your staff members were 
quite upset about. And it’s going to mean that your numbers of 
school closures is probably going to be increasing not 
decreasing, because we understand that 30,000 students are 
going to be out of this system over the next eight years. 
 
The article I read and the enrolment figures that we’ve reviewed 
showed that it’s not going to be just rural Saskatchewan but a 
lot of rural Saskatchewan. And I’m wondering how your 
department is dealing with this when it comes to things like 
your teacher negotiations, and even determining where your 
schools are going to be built. 
 
This is just a horrendous problem. It’s something that we in this 
province should be ashamed of. When we’re thinking that we’re 
going to lose not only the students but the parents of these 
students, it doesn’t give us a lot of hope. 
 
So I guess when school divisions are looking at how they’re 
going to be spending these hard-earned dollars that they take 
from taxpayers, they’re going to have to determine whether 
they should be building, repairing, or buying new school buses 
to truck them down the road a little further. 
 
So I’m wondering how your department is dealing with this 
issue that you received information on last fall. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, the fact of declining 
enrolments in Saskatchewan is one that has been there for 
many, many years. We’re looking at, over the course of the 
1990s, approximately a 10,000 drop in enrolment. 
 
School divisions, when they’re looking at their demographics 
and looking at their enrolments, they have the autonomy to 
make plans associated with that. 
 
Certainly the provincial government in recognizing that these 
are challenges faced by school divisions and that we do want to 

provide an equitable opportunity for students no matter where 
they live in the province of Saskatchewan, that we do provide 
incentives such as we’ve introduced in this budget with regard 
to things like sparsity factors which we’re talking about 
enhancing into transportation. We’re talking about isolated 
schools, in terms of what are the schools that are far enough 
from other schools that they need to be maintained, and 
maintaining them is encouraged by the provincial government. 
 
And also the whole factor of distance education and technology 
enhancement, recognizing that the reality of rural Saskatchewan 
is changing, and that the provincial government through public 
education is certainly supportive of all these initiatives to ensure 
that there is an equitable opportunity for students in rural 
Saskatchewan as well as in urban Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the issues that you discussed 
about sparsity, the sparsity factor, isolated schools, and distance 
educations are all issues that could possibly save schools like 
the ones that we’re closing this year and the four or five that are 
threatened to be closed. 
 
Has your department contacted those school boards? Is there 
any way that they can be looked at? Is there schools considered 
viable if there was any extra funding or any extra programming 
available, for instance, through the new Internet training or 
Internet access that you’ve been discussing, not only in the 
budget but in the Role Of The School document. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Chair, the decisions 
on whether to keep a school open or close it is a local decision. 
 
All school divisions are aware of the procedures and plans that 
we are putting forward with regard to technology enhancement. 
With the announcement of CommunityNet in the budget, we 
will be providing high-speed Internet to all school locations. 
And we have absorbed the costs with regard to this. In fact by 
assuming the costs 100 per cent for CommunityNet, that this is 
a savings to school divisions of $1.5 million globally, and that 
we are incurring those costs. And that actually became effective 
on April 1 of this year. 
 
So school divisions no longer are paying Internet costs. They 
are all absorbed through the CommunityNet program. 
 
Certainly we also recognize that through the Centenary Capital 
Fund, that once you’ve got the Internet to the wall of the school, 
that it’s important that distribution and connectivity within the 
school also be provided for. So the provincial government is 
providing $2 million this year and the subsequent years to 
provide for that connectivity within these schools. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you. That 
sounds great. Now you’re absorbing the costs of the 
CommunityNet, and my question to you, is this really going to 
save any of the schools that are in . . . I think you said four or 
five schools that are in danger of closing this year. Have you 
contacted, or have those schools contacted you, and could you 
perhaps tell me which of . . . could you name the four or five 
schools that have their resolution in place right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With regard 
to the motions of intent, we’re looking at Parkview in the 



April 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 537 

 

Melville School Division, which has a motion of intent for 
closure. And that is a grades 5 to 7. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Yorkdale School Division, the Bredenbury K to 6 school. 
Griffin School in Weyburn Central, which is a 1 to 6 school; 
and Hudson Bay School Division, the Mistatim, which is a K to 
6 school, with an enrolment of 15 students. These are all 
projected with motions of intent for later this year, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Excuse me, Mr. Minister, I maybe just didn’t 
hear you. But did you say, Griffin, McKague, Bredenbury, and I 
think there was one other one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Yes, that was Parkview, Bredenbury, 
Griffin, and Mistatim. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, you haven’t received any 
resolution from the Hudson Bay School Division regarding 
Weekes School? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the Hudson Bay School 
Division in the Weekes School is calling for a grade reduction 
not a closure. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, Mr. 
Minister. Good afternoon to your officials. Mr. Minister, my 
question is with respect to the capital expenditures of the 
Department of Education. 
 
I think we all understand now that there has been no increase 
whatsoever from the previous year’s amount of $24 million. 
And I think that we also understand that this is going to create a 
lot of added pressure for school divisions. Costs are constantly 
increasing. 
 
This afternoon I had the opportunity to introduce some students 
from the Carrot River High School, Mr. Minister. And while 
they seemed to be managing in the high school in Carrot River, 
there is a very, very serious problem with the elementary 
school, Mr. Minister, to the degree where in talking to local 
school board members some of them have expressed to me an 
outright fear of the roof possibly caving in, in the near future. 
 
Now given the seriousness of that situation and the lack of 
increase in capital, Mr. Minister, can you explain to me how the 
people of Carrot River and the Nipawin School Division are to 
cope with a constantly deteriorating facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Chair, the 
prioritization with regard to how capital is allocated is based on 
a standardized, very transparent formula. And health and safety 
concerns are the number one priority. If there is a concern from 
a school board with regard to a particular facility, they would 
contact the facilities branch of the department and indicate what 
their concern is, then an evaluation would occur. And if there is 
a health and safety concern, then these are dealt with as the top 
priority in as quick a fashion as possible. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. 
Minister, there is a member of the local school board from 
Carrot River in the gallery, and I’m sure that she would be more 

than willing to meet with you and further discuss this matter 
because I think they are taking it very, very seriously. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, could you give me the specific status at this 
time of the Carrot River Elementary School as to what stage it 
is on the priority list it is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — It is my understanding that the 
current listing for Carrot River Elementary is itemized as a 
renovation and upgrade. It is not identified as having a major 
structural concern. So if there is a concern, and there is a health 
and safety . . . if the roof is having problems, obviously then 
that needs to be brought to the attention of the facilities’ people 
because we would quickly upgrade that in terms of the priority 
list. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well, Mr. Minister, I will take you at 
your word and I will either have the board member in 
attendance today speak to you, or I will have members of the 
local school board contact you at a later date. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, you 
had talked about Bredenbury before, you had mentioned with 
the motion of intent being put forth already. 
 
I’m wondering — there’s quite an active group in that 
community, Mr. Minister — and I was wondering if you had 
received correspondence from this group. They had actually 
gone so far as to even see if there was ways that they could 
possibly do such things as move the town office out of the 
community into the school building. A number of other services 
maybe that could be provided out of the building to help assist 
with the cost of running the building and maybe therefore being 
able to keep that school open longer. 
 
I just wonder, Mr. Minister, have you received correspondence 
from this group and what was your response to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I certainly 
don’t recall actually having a direct message to my office from 
Bredenbury on this one. We recognize that school divisions do 
have the responsibility, and have had for many, many years, in 
terms of how they allocate facilities within their school 
division. 
 
School closures do happen. There is a process in place where 
motions are provided to the public, the process is followed, and 
the arguments are mounted. And it’s certainly up to the school 
division to satisfy to the public of that division that this is in 
fact a reality that they can’t avoid and that their services for that 
student population will be provided in alternate circumstances. 
 
The provincial government certainly, and the Department of 
Education, provides guidelines and funding based on closeness 
of schools, how far they are from other schools. And that 
information, through the foundation operating grant, are 
provided to school divisions. 
 
I think it’s always a very difficult and challenging decision for 
any school division to make to close a school, but we recognize 
that that is something that school divisions have had 
responsibility for and continue to have responsibility for, Mr. 
Chair. 



538 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2001 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
understand that the school division is the one that makes the 
final decision, but still as government we have a lot of input 
into what happens within the province. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, in the situation that I’ve 
described before, where they’ve gone as far as to even think of 
providing services from that building to help prevent the closure 
of their school, in your estimation should that or would that 
make a difference to what happens, how quickly that school 
would close. Because the operating costs naturally would be 
going down for that facility. And I’m not saying to the degree 
that the monies . . . the amount of money saved the school 
division maybe is looking for, but on the other hand it should 
certainly assist. 
 
Mr. Minister, would that come into the decision-making do you 
feel, or does your department think that should come into the 
decision-making of still closing that school, or maybe reversing 
their decision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well certainly, Mr. Chair, when 
local school divisions are looking at particular circumstances 
surrounding whether it is appropriate for them to close a school, 
or if there were mitigating factors such as a municipality or a 
library or whatever that would locate and share operating costs, 
that that may be a mitigating factor with regard to that school 
division in making that decision on that school closure. 
 
Certainly we don’t have a particular policy. We do recognize 
the school divisions have that responsibility, but if 
arrangements could be made and communities obviously felt 
that they could distribute some of those operating costs in a way 
that would allow for that school to be sustainable, then I don’t 
think that anyone in the department would have a problem with 
that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I just want to 
thank you for your answer, Mr. Minister, but I am sure you are 
going to receive correspondence from this group, and I would 
hope that you would possibly give them the time to show how 
much we value what they’re trying to do here to save their 
school. 
 
Last year I lost MacNutt School in my constituency, and now if 
Bredenbury’s on the list, it’s getting to the point where we’re 
losing about a school a year in some of our constituencies in 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, and it’s really starting to be a 
drain on rural Saskatchewan. So thank you for your answers. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, I just have one question. I 
understand that you indicated that you received a notice of 
intent from the board that Griffin School would be closing. It is 
my information that at their last board meeting, which was held 
within the last two weeks, that they had rescinded this motion. I 
wonder if you could clarify that for me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Yes, it certainly would be quite 
possible. Obviously, if there was a recent rescinding of that 
motion, it certainly hasn’t come to my attention or my official’s 
attention at this point in time. But if that was rescinded, I would 
think that that’s a decision that that school division has made. 
 

And if it was based on new information provided with regard to 
the budget and the grant that they would receive, then I would 
welcome that they were able to look at that in a different light. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, could you just check on that for 
me and verify it in one of the days ahead for me, please? Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — That would be, Mr. Chair, that would 
be no problem for us to check into that and verify and provide 
that information to the member opposite. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, since you’re checking into these 
various schools, the one in my constituency that is causing a lot 
of concern, besides the fact that I know Spalding is closing, is 
the Weekes School. You’ve indicated that it’s not going to 
close; it’s going to be downsized. 
 
But when you talk about the various initiatives that may be 
helping to look at these smaller schools with the sparsity factor, 
isolated schools, and distance education, have you contacted the 
school division; or is there any way that the mechanics there to 
make sure that the schools are aware of all the new initiatives, 
and that saving schools and the communities is at the heart of 
your department’s intent to provide education in Saskatchewan? 
 
So I’m asking if you’ll check with Weekes School and see what 
they’re going to be doing with their motion of intent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Chair, we can contact, 
I think it’s the Hudson Bay School Division, and find out what 
their response is to their budget figures this year, and whether 
they were planning on making any changes with regard to grade 
reduction at the Weekes School. And once we have that 
information, we will provide that to the member opposite. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, we 
note that there are . . . their gross up has been discontinued this 
year on non-agriculture and non-residential assessment. I 
believe that’s correct. Can you tell me what kind of an impact 
this is going to have on the assessments? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Chair, the 
announcement with regard to elimination of the commercial 
gross up was made in November of last year, so all the school 
divisions were aware of this. The commercial gross up was 
brought in following reassessment as a business tax proxy. 
There are no business taxes in the province of Saskatchewan 
with regard to property any longer. And the stakeholders, all of 
the stakeholders supported the elimination of the commercial 
gross up at this time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, also I know there was a change 
in the small schools factor. Could you explain what the change 
is and what kind of an impact it’s going to have on the small 
schools in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — This year the small schools factor 
was changed to a category called isolated factor. And what it 
does is, through the foundation operating grant formula, 
actually provides greater support to those schools that are truly 



April 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 539 

 

isolated. It’s formula driven and it’s a formula that was arrived 
at and agreed to. 
 
And certainly we believe that it is a better way of actually 
dealing with the situations where we have some schools who 
really do fit the bill of being truly isolated and separate and 
obviously requiring additional support. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, thank you. Mr. Minister, 
could you tell me what this formula is? Is there a distance 
involved? Do you have to be 25 miles from the next school? Or 
what other factors are part of the decision on the small schools 
factor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. And to 
the member opposite, the isolated school factor was . . . the 
information in terms of the new formula was provided to all the 
school divisions on budget day. And what it really amounts to is 
that we categorize the distance to the nearest two other similar 
schools and we look at the enrolments. And then funding is 
provided based on the distances. 
 
Generally for kindergarten it’s 20 kilometres to 40, and for 
middle it’s 30 to 50, and secondary it’s 30 to 50. And then the 
number of students per grade, if the enrolment or the number of 
students in that particular grade is small, then there’s a higher 
amount of grant recognition. If there’s more students enrolled in 
that grade, then there’s a lower grant recognition per student. 
 
But it is a formula that does benefit and does allow for 
additional resources to be provided to these isolated schools. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, could you tell us how many 
schools are going to benefit from this change in the formula? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To just give a 
bit of background on why the change was made and this 
isolated schools factor was created, there is an external 
reference committee made up of all stakeholders who have 
provided a recent report. And just to quote what the report said, 
and I open quotes: 
 

The committee reaffirmed its conclusion of last year. The 
small schools factor should be replaced with funding 
arrangements through the grant formula that more 
appropriately supports schools that are unavoidably 
isolated. It was noted that the department had conveyed in 
writing, in March 2000, its intention to pursue such a 
course. The committee noted that any changes along these 
lines implemented in 2001, should be phased in and should 
entail increased support for truly isolated schools. 

 
And certainly that’s what we have done in this budget. And the 
2001-2002 expenditure for isolated school factor has increased 
to approximately $17 million. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I think you said increased to $17 million. 
 
The member from Cypress Hills would like to know if the 
schools at Consul, Golden Prairie, or Frontier will be affected 
by this change in the formula? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, it’s actually not possible 

for us to determine whether Consul or Frontier at this point in 
time will be getting more. Just looking at the formula, 
recognizing that with regard to Consul, I think the nearest 
school is 68 kilometres. This factor would actually enhance 
their grant allotment. 
 
But just to comment in terms of the overall package for rural 
Saskatchewan, when we look at this budget and we look at the 
basic per pupil rate increase of $396, which is the largest 
increase in basic per pupil rate in some 20 years, that that is the 
unconditional side of the grant. So all school divisions have 
benefitted tremendously just from the unconditionality and 
recognition on the basic school rate. 
 
We also recognize that there has been a significant increase in 
recognition on the expenditure for rural transportation. 
 
And we also recognize that there was also an additional $8 
million factor with regard to the enrolment decline, which is 
another factor that we incorporate into the grant formula more 
specifically for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know that the 
school divisions who do get grants from the government were 
very pleased with the extra $396 per child. But we also know 
that there’s, I believe, 11 school divisions in the province who 
get no funding from the government and about 40 school 
divisions who get less than the 40/60 split. 
 
So one of the issues that we talked about last year that your 
government put in place was the property tax rebate for the 
education portion of property tax, and I’ve been talking to a 
number of constituents who are still waiting patiently to get 
some money back. 
 
And I’m wondering if . . . I believe it goes through municipal 
government, but I’m sure that your department has some impact 
or you must have had some calls wondering how you’re going 
to deal with this issue. Could you tell me, is the funds actually 
started to flow out to people who have applied for this rebate on 
the education portion of property tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The education tax property rebates 
are administered by the Department of Ag and Food. Certainly 
grant . . . the rebate money has been flowing. There was some 
concern that not all of the rebates could be provided for the year 
2000 so we have extended the deadline for both rebate years — 
the year 2000, calendar year 2000, and calendar year 2001 — to 
February 15, 2002. 
 
So any ratepayers out there who have not yet applied for year 
2000, they have until next year to actually apply for those 
rebates. 
 
The other thing to note with regard to the foundation operating 
grant is that this is a grant that is transparent, is recognized as 
being the most equitable way of providing funds to school 
divisions, and it is 100 per cent endorsed by all the 
stakeholders. So there is no possibility in terms of changing that 
unless there was complete consensus among the stakeholders. 
And at this point in time the current system is the one that is 
recognized. 
 



540 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2001 

 

And just to correct the member opposite with regard to the 
number of school divisions who will receive no grants or a zero 
grant or a negative grant for calendar year 2001, it will be four 
which are the same school divisions that were last year. So the 
amount of increase was significant enough to actually just 
maintain that particular negative or zero grant board. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 
 
 
 


