















































Hansard: June 19, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1947 
 June 19, 2001 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This evening I have 
with me . . . to my immediate right is Mr. Gord Nystuen, who is 
the deputy minister. To his right is Ernie Spencer, who is the 
assistant deputy minister. To my immediate left is Susie Miller, 
who is the assistant deputy minister. Right behind me is Mr. Hal 
Cushon, who is director of policy and program development. 
And behind the deputy minister is Mr. Jack Zepp, who is the 
director of administrative services. And Mr. Ross Johnson, who 
is the manager of operational services. And seated in the back 
row is — way back row — is Louise Greenberg, who is director 
of inspection and regulation management, and Doug Matthies, 
who is the general manager of Saskatchewan Crop Insurance. 
That’s our officials that are with me, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, welcome to 
you and your officials here this evening. We have a number of 
issues that we want to discuss with you tonight with regard to 
agriculture. 
 
Certainly there are many things that are on the plates of farm 
families across this province, some of more immediate — and I 
mean right now — concern and certainly in terms of areas of 
interest in terms of farm policy now and into the future. 
 
In the areas of immediate concern, and I mean right now 
concerns, that farmers have, I wanted to touch on a couple of 
areas dealing with a registration, temporary registration of farm 
chemicals, and in the whole area that we talked about a little bit 
the other day in question period related to the areas of 
strychnine poison for rodent control. 
 
Mr. Minister, I expect and I imagine you are familiar with the 
problems associated with pulse crop production here in 
Saskatchewan. There are large numbers, growing numbers of 
acres of pulse crops in this province that producers have seeded 
and now are in the process of looking at their crops and looking 
at the possibilities for disease control, things of that nature. 
 
One of the areas that comes to mind is in the area of crop 
protection products for lentils and chickpeas . . . are of 
tremendous importance right at the moment. Producers in many 
areas of the province have a very, very good crop coming on in 
terms of lentil production and chickpea production. However 
those crops are at risk as a result of ascochyta blight that is a 
very, very serious concern particularly as we experience 
showery-type rain conditions that are all across this province at 
the moment. 
 
The last about 10 days or so we’ve experienced those kinds of 

conditions — the type of condition, Mr. Chair, and Mr. 
Minister, that result in very quick and rapid growth of that 
blight, ascochyta, situation all across this province. We are 
getting many calls from producers all across Saskatchewan, 
particularly out of the east and southeast and east-central areas 
and directly south of Regina where they’ve had perhaps even 
more rainfall than other areas of the province. 
 
One of the crop protection products that is of value is a product 
. . . and I think we can and should get into brand names 
although I’m a little bit reluctant, but it’s the only name I know 
these products by. There is obviously the chemical name for 
them, but I’m not familiar right off the top of my head with 
them. 
 
Bravo is a product that you may be familiar with. It has some 
. . . certainly a good product. However another one that we are 
getting a lot of calls on, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair, is a product by 
the name of Quadris. It is a product that has had tremendous 
amount of promise in terms of a crop protection product for 
ascochyta blight. It’s a product used primarily, I understand, at 
this point in the canola production, but has tremendous amount 
of promise for chickpeas, particularly some for lentils and other 
pulse crops. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m aware that there was some temporary 
registration last year of the product, or I’m told there was. I’ve 
not used the product myself, but I’m told there was some degree 
of temporary registration of that product last year. I’m also told 
that Manitoba may have registration or at least temporary 
registration again this year of that Quadris. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could . . . For the House and 
for farmers across this province who right now are looking at 
what kind of crop protection products they want to use in 
chickpeas, lentils, peas, other crops of that nature, whether or 
not you are looking at . . . and I say immediate needs because 
every day that a shower comes up somewhere in Saskatchewan, 
ascochyta starts ravaging chickpeas particularly. The window 
for application is very, very tight. We’re looking at a few days 
only before you can have an infestation of ascochyta blight that 
takes your crop out entirely. 
 
We had discussions earlier with the Saskatchewan Pulse 
Growers Association. I know that they have been in Ottawa 
recently lobbying for the registration of Quadris and other crop 
protection products for pulses. This is one though that we need 
to move on very, very quickly. You could see people in the 
field — I would dare say — by tomorrow morning if that 
product were made available and would be using it very, very 
extensively. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could fill us in and the farm 
people across this province on what steps are being taken for 
registration or temporary registration of that product. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and to 
the member. I very much appreciate this question because it has 
associated to it a great deal of urgency in terms of getting the 
registration. Just last weekend I had the opportunity to be in 
Vancouver at the invitation of a number of pulse growers and 
the pulse industry. We had a huge convention in Vancouver as 



1948 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

it relates to this industry. And I think, as you’ve accurately 
framed it, this is . . . the pulse industry in Saskatchewan will 
make a tremendous difference to our diversified needs in this 
province. 
 
And there’s a . . . for sure in the area from which I know that 
you farm in, because a number of people who were at the 
convention were people from your part of the region of 
Saskatchewan, and clearly they stated emphatically, as you have 
this afternoon, the importance of making sure that we have 
protection for the pulse industry and this pulse crop. 
 
I want to say to you as well that here we are discussing to some 
degree the need for . . . or the impact that rainfall has on 
particular crops in this province, where at the same time we 
sure would like to see a lot more rain across the province in 
various different parts of it. But for sure as it relates to the pulse 
industry today and the pulse crops, we need to try and find a 
solution here. 
 
I want to say to the member that last year when we made 
application for the Quadris, it was not approved, and so we 
didn’t get the opportunity to test how the product would work 
last year because we couldn’t get it registered. I should say to 
you that we have made that application now, and it’s been 
before our friends in Ottawa for some time. And as I was just 
conferring, as you were speaking, with my officials, we were 
hoping that we would have by now received the registration so 
that we could advise the producers in your area of the province 
that they could begin to make the application. 
 
So, like you, we wait minute by minute here, hoping that we’re 
going to get the approval from the federal government 
immediately. To date we’ve not yet received it. As of today’s 
end, we haven’t received that kind of approval, but my hope is 
that that will happen in short order for us here in the province, 
hopefully as early as tomorrow morning. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, just to 
emphasize the point, every day that goes by puts more and more 
crop at risk in this area. So it’s not a case of we can sit back and 
just assume that the federal government is going to do the right 
thing here. We have seen temporary registrations been granted 
in a number of areas over the years. I think back to times when 
there was grasshopper infestations, when there was flea beetle 
infestations, that type of thing. We’ve got temporary 
registration of those types of products. 
 
Now I realize they’re not exactly similar circumstances. Crop 
protection products are a little bit different than crop pest 
products, but nevertheless at that time the governments of the 
day acted very, very quickly. 
 
I hope in your communication with the federal government you 
have made it very, very clear to them that time is of essence 
here. And we’re not talking about hoping we’ll see registration 
by the first week of August or the first week of September or 
anything like that. We want to see registration of this product as 
quickly as absolute possible — talking about today, tomorrow, 
the next day at the latest kind of thing. 
 
That is an issue that is of tremendous importance. The pulse 
industry represents a growing . . . approaching a 

billion-dollar-a-year industry to this province in terms of sales. 
And it’s an area that has some tremendous promise for us. 
 
Another area that I want to talk about in that whole debate 
about chemical registrations is the area of strychnine poison for 
rodent protection here in Saskatchewan. It’s an area that is, 
again, of tremendous importance to farm families. While it may 
sound . . . and to those not acquainted with the subject, it may 
sound like kind of a frivolous thing, I assure you, Mr. Minister, 
it has tremendous impact on farm operations. 
 
All you have to do is drop the wheel of a $20,000 air seeder into 
it — $20,000 would be an extremely modest cost of one, 
escalating to a $200,000 one very, very quickly — drop the 
wheel and break that off in the middle of seeding time and you 
quickly realize the impact that it has on that farmer’s seeding 
operation or loss in a whole number of ways. 
 
And we are aware that the federal government . . . and in 
Alberta there has been a change in policy with regard to 
strychnine poisoning. I think I have the letter . . . I do have the 
letter from the Alberta government and from a number of 
municipalities in the Lloydminster area. They have been able to 
get together very, very quickly a registration of a more potent 
amount of strychnine within that poison, and it has resulted in 
action in Alberta. 
 
And we wonder, Mr. Minister, what action has been taken in 
Saskatchewan with regard to this, what representations you 
have made to the federal government, and how soon we can 
expect a poison that has some increased control available to our 
farm families. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the member, I 
just want to reinforce one more time before I go to the question 
on the strychnine as it relates to the pocket gopher, and say to 
the member that in relationship to the Quadris, we have been 
also not only working — and I forgot to mention this in my 
comments to you earlier — with the federal government, but 
we’ve also been working with the company to try and 
encourage them or help them in making sure that the federal 
government understands the importance of their approval on 
this particular issue. 
 
So it’s been a joint partnership here with the company that 
makes the chemical as well as with the federal government to 
try to get those approvals in place. And as I said to you, we 
understand very much the importance of protecting our pulse 
industry in Saskatchewan and have asked the federal 
government to act as quickly as they can on it. 
 
In respect to the strychnine use for the squirrel and the pocket 
gopher and your analysis of how important it is to try and 
control the rodent is extremely essential here, not only for the 
seeding equipment, but today farmers are getting ready — 
particularly the cattlemen are getting ready — to go out there 
and make some of their hay. Today the investments that they 
have in haying equipment is extremely expensive, as you well 
know. And so we need to try and find a solution to this little 
animal that’s become quite pesty all right, without any doubt, 
and it’s created a great deal of havoc in that part of the 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1949 

 

province. 
 
What I have in front of me, and I will share with you and get a 
copy to you, is a number of municipalities across the province 
that we’ve been working with, we’ve been requesting access to 
the 2 per cent strychnine concentrate. And what Alberta has got 
permission to use is not an enhanced quality of the strychnine 
— they’re still at the 2 per cent — and so the federal 
government’s not prepared to move beyond that. But what the 
federal government is prepared to do is to make . . . or give 
approval for a fresher bait. And apparently the studies and 
analysis have shown is that the fresher bait will be far more 
potent as it relates to dealing with the rodent. 
 
Now what we have not yet got approval from is that we do not 
yet have approval from the federal government on our request. 
We have done a couple of things in the preparation for them 
providing us with that kind of approval, and it’s this. We’ve had 
the conversation with the municipalities to say that we’re very 
interested in providing service to assist them with this area. And 
what also is required is that we need to have people who are 
certified to provide the bait to the municipalities. And so what 
we’ve been doing is talking with the municipalities about 
possibly using their employees who are currently in the field, 
their rat control officers, because we won’t need to duplicate the 
workforce in order to get the appropriate bait out to the 
municipalities. 
 
This of course will require a short training session which the 
federal regulations will require, and we’ll make those 
opportunities available to the municipalities to get those people 
trained up in the way in which we need to have that happen. 
 
Of course you should also know, and you probably do, that 
there is concern on the part of environmentalists regarding the 
application of this type of bait, both for domestic animals as 
well as, for sure, birds, hawks in particular, who might in fact 
eat the rodent after it’s found lying dead on the fields, or in fact 
coyotes or fox who may in fact also consume some of the 
animals that in fact have had the bait. And so there’s concern 
here from the environmentalist community about increasing the 
strength of the strychnine which, as I’ve already indicated, 
we’re not in a position . . . the federal government won’t 
approve. 
 
So the management of this whole piece has two fronts on it, of 
which we’ve made a decision to make the application, and 
we’re waiting for the federal government now to provide us 
with the authority to proceed because we understand, as you’ve 
rightly pointed out, that there are several municipalities across 
the province, and they’re not all concentrated only on the west 
side. Some of them are in the central part of the province, and 
some are in the southwest part of the province for sure, and in 
the northwest. 
 
But we’re hoping that we’re going to get that kind of approval 
and the training program in place fairly quickly. There’s a short 
window here, as you know. There are, I think, three breeding 
periods for the gopher, and certainly by the mid-July or from 
the middle of July to the end of July, we should have all of this 
bait in place and that will help us I think with the control of the 
rodent into the future. 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, as you know, Alberta has done just that. They have 
that type of training program in place now for their pest control 
officers. I have the bulletin in front of me from the Department 
of Agriculture in Alberta, the county of Vermilion River, No. 
22, their bulletin, and yes, they’ve implemented that type of 
training program. 
 
And it’s too bad that we hadn’t got on this a little bit earlier; we 
would have had some of the control methods in place that they 
are using. And I certainly implore you and your department to 
move as quickly as possible to get in place what Alberta already 
does have in place to control this, this very significant pest. 
 
And I know I noted with some degree of chagrin the other day 
when one of the columnists was talking about here in 
Saskatchewan about how insignificant of a problem it is. And I 
suppose if the only thing your feet touches is pavement and 
concrete, I suspect maybe it isn’t that big of an issue to you. But 
I can assure you that if from time to time your feet touch dirt — 
your shoes touch dirt, your workboots, or your cowboy boots 
touch dirt — you will find that this is a very big issue in parts of 
this province. So I would certainly, as I say, implore you and 
your department to move as quickly as possible to get what 
Alberta already has in place. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wanted to talk as well to you this evening about 
in the whole area of pulse production to keep with that 
particular theme for a moment. I noted with a great deal of 
concern, and I’m sure every pulse producer in Saskatchewan 
noted with a great deal of concern, an article in The Western 
Producer two weeks ago, perhaps three weeks ago, where the 
Americans are looking at using export enhancement programs, 
subsidy programs of all nature, to enter into pulse production. 
And that is of tremendous concern, and should be of 
tremendous concern, to all of us and policy-makers here in 
Saskatchewan, Western Canada, and Ottawa. 
 
This represents a tremendous problem for us potentially. Not 
trying to be too alarmist here, Mr. Minister, but if we see the 
countries start into this game of heavily subsidizing pulse 
production, all of the efforts, a lot of the efforts at least, that we 
have made in terms of diversification in this province will be 
put at risk. 
 
We have some 200-plus pulse production facilities contracting 
and cleaning and processing facilities here in Saskatchewan 
representing tremendous amount of investment. This is one of 
the areas of success that we have had in Saskatchewan in terms 
of diversifying our economy and diversifying away from a 
wheat mentality here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And this is something that we have to very, very seriously take 
head-on, Mr. Minister. And I hope again you and your 
department are on top of this issue, as important as it is. If we 
put at risk that industry, what kind of production or what will 
producers look towards growing in the future? We’re already 
dangerously close to seeing prices at a level where we are going 
to see curtailing of production here in Saskatchewan. Fourteen 
cents a pound lentils isn’t the most attractive price in the world 
for a commodity that at one time commanded 25 and 30 cents a 
pound. 
 



1950 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I want to emphasize to you the importance of 
that industry to Saskatchewan and the economy of 
Saskatchewan, and most importantly to the farm families of this 
province. That has been a success story that we cannot, and 
should not take lightly, and we have to do everything we can in 
lobbying, both in Washington and in Ottawa, to ensure that they 
understand how important this is to farmers of this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. I want to very 
much tie my comments with what you’ve just said because 
there is no question that in Saskatchewan today the future of the 
pulse industry will do a great deal to enhance the agricultural 
industry without any doubt. And there is a tremendous story 
that’s being told today across the province of what the pulse 
industry has been able to already achieve in the part of the 
world from which you farm and come from. 
 
And I want to share with you one more time that this past . . . 
last weekend I had the opportunity to attend the pulse 
convention in Vancouver, of which we had countries from 
around the world that are very much interested in our 
commodity. And at that convention, of course, there were 
people who are your neighbours who were at Vancouver . . . in 
Vancouver, and talked about how they’ve been able to turn their 
farming operations around and been able to make a difference, 
not only for their farm family but for the agricultural industry. 
 
And what was most impressive from the discussions that I had 
with them — and these are young farmers, and I expect they’re 
closer to your age than mine. That’s why I suggest that they’re 
younger producers. And these gentlemen talked about how in 
fact they weren’t interested in any longer taking their 
commodities and shipping them abroad, but want to work at 
processing those commodities right here in Saskatchewan. And 
the aggressive position that they took with the people who are 
interested in our lentils, in my view, is the way of the future. 
 
I want to also state, because not often do we get an opportunity 
to do things together in a harmonious fashion in the way in 
which that I think we could do more in this province, but I 
appreciate very much the opportunity that you and I had to 
present to the Standing Committee on Agriculture in Ottawa not 
more than two weeks ago, where not only did I talk about the 
importance of the federal government stepping up to the plate 
as it relates to the future of our grains industry, but I was very 
pleased to hear you as well talk about the impact that subsidies 
have on the grains industry in Canada. And so when you asked 
the question or make the comment tonight, it very much 
parallels the kind of presentation that we both made to the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture just not more than two 
weeks ago that I know that we’ll be making across this province 
over the next several months. 
 
We have, I expect, in the next two or three months the Prime 
Minister’s task force on agriculture making its way to 
Saskatchewan. And I expect that at that occasion both you and I 
and farm producers and organizations in this province will 
make their way in front of the committee and will talk to the 
committee about the kinds of things that we’re talking about 
tonight. 
 
And that is that we need to make sure that the governments of 
the . . . the national governments of the US (United States) and 

those in Europe do not get into the subsidy wars as it relates for 
sure to the pulse industry. Today the pulse industry could make 
its way nicely in the world markets and provide great 
opportunities for Saskatchewan producers but will be hampered 
in a tremendous fashion if in fact the national government in the 
US lumped them in with the other grains and oilseeds that 
they’re currently subsidizing. 
 
So our position will be very clear at the national level. Our 
position will be, next week when I’m at the ministers of 
agriculture meeting in Whitehorse along with the federal 
minister, we’ll be telling them emphatically that they should be 
paying attention to what the national government in Ottawa or 
in Washington is saying, that in fact the large farm subsidies 
that the US are intending on moving down is detrimental to the 
Saskatchewan-Canadian grains industry, and that what should 
be happening for sure is that they should not be including the 
pulse industry into that category. Rather than increasing the 
subsidies for grains and oilseeds and pulse crops, they should be 
getting out. 
 
Now my view is — and you’ve heard me on it on several 
occasions, and I say it again tonight — is that American 
producers are going to continue to be subsidized by American 
national governments, and our national government needs to 
step up to the plate in time here to try and make sure that our 
Canadian, Saskatchewan farmers are on an equal playing field. 
 
(19:30) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I can’t say much 
more other than we certainly support you in your efforts in that 
area. This is an area that we don’t need to get into any politics 
about at all. This is an area of too big of importance to our 
industry collectively here in Saskatchewan, the agriculture 
industry that is so important to this province. 
 
We are world leaders in terms of production of those pulse 
crops. We have a tremendous growth potential here in 
Saskatchewan. The Pulse Growers Association tells me that 
they expect this industry to grow to a 
couple-billion-dollar-a-year industry in the not too distant future 
here in Saskatchewan. That would put it above almost all other 
areas of economic activity here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And that has to be underscored to Ottawa and has to be 
underscored to people who will be possibly putting that industry 
at risk here in Saskatchewan. So all efforts, any efforts we 
would certainly be prepared to join in to support in that area, 
Mr. Minister. This is something that crops that are 
agronomically suited for our province. Many, many of the 
innovations that we will see at the Farm Progress Show here in 
the next few days from Draper headers to MacDon headers to 
all kinds of innovations in agriculture are directly as a result of 
the kind of pulse production that we have here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I would certainly want to emphasize that efforts are 
welcome and efforts are appreciated from your department, and 
we certainly anticipate a positive response from Ottawa with 
respect to this. Unfortunately I think they’ve kind of dropped 
the ball in a number of areas when it comes to protecting farm 
families here in this province and indeed Western Canada. But 
this is something that we can’t underscore any more than we 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1951 

 

have already here this evening. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to move to another area that’s within your 
area of responsibility. I believe that we touch on from time to 
time, or we hear from producers from time to time, the province 
of Saskatchewan holds a tremendous amount of land within its 
jurisdiction, a tremendous amount of land that was once owned 
by the farmers of this province but now is owned by the 
Government of Saskatchewan through the land bank program of 
the ’70s starting out at in excess of a million acres. I understand 
it’s dropped back to approximately 750,000 acres. 
 
I rarely see, Mr. Minister, any kind of communication in terms 
of . . . from your department about possible sell down of those 
acres. Are they regularly put up for sale to the people who are 
farming them today or are these acres regularly tendered? 
Again, as I said, I never . . . I don’t recall seeing advertisements 
in this area. This is something that I know that obviously enter 
into the equation, leases and the expiry of leases and all of those 
kinds of things, terms of leases, but I’m sure just like any other 
land in Saskatchewan that we see from time to time changes — 
people deciding to exit the industry or enter the industry or 
make changes in their farming operation. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to know what the government’s 
position is with respect to land in their responsibility that was at 
one time under the land bank jurisdiction, whether you intend to 
look towards sell down of those lands. Are they regularly 
tendered? And can we expect changes in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the member, in 
the province now we have, as I’m looking through some of my 
notes, about 8 million acres today that are in our purview. And 
what we’ve been doing over time is gradually moving some of 
this land to either people who own it today through a proposal 
for purchase, or in fact when land becomes vacant along the 
way, what we’re doing is putting these particular parcels of 
property for tender. 
 
I say to the member that the number . . . the reduction of this 
farmland has been relatively low in terms of disposal over the 
last several years. It’s interesting, I think, because those people 
who in fact today have leases, Crown leases, are quite satisfied 
with them. And so accordingly when you are in possession of 
this particular piece of property it tends to stay within the 
landholder for several years. 
 
In fact, most recently I had someone from the part of the 
province that I live and farm in, say to me that they want to pass 
it on intergeneration, who . . . they’ve had it I think now, the 
leases I believe are around 33 or 35 years — cultivated land, 33 
years. And their son is now getting involved in farming and of 
course want to just simply roll it over into their operation. 
 
So individuals today who have access to the Crown land tend to 
like to hold on to it, which is not unlike I think what happens in 
the southwest side of the province where you have large range 
and pastureland tracts of course, and people have them today 
for grazing some of their livestock on. And the retaining of 
those properties are most valuable and useful for them because 
they run large, large lots of livestock on those properties. So the 
disposal of the properties has been very limited over time. But 
when they become vacant and we do tender it and where in fact 

somebody wants to purchase a particular parcel of land, we get 
an independent appraisal on it and then offer it up to the 
individual for possible purchase. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister and Mr. Chair, are those lands . . . 
do the market value for the leases reflect what would we expect 
market values of land trading of similar nature, or are they 
indeed wrote down by the taxpayers of this province to some 
extent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, it would be the appraised 
market value. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. Is that for a sale, Mr. Minister, or is 
that for a lease as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the leases are on productive 
value. And sales of the farmland is . . . or the sales of the land is 
on the market value. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure you and your department 
are aware that there are huge variations in the lease rates of 
farmland all across this province, from areas of the province 
where you can see land renting for $50 an acre all the way 
down from there to considerably less. 
 
So if we, as an example, Mr. Minister, if we saw land, very 
productive land in . . . my good friend and colleague, the 
member for Melfort-Tisdale, if we saw land in that area which 
may generate as much as $50-an-acre-plus for rentals, would we 
expect that we would see the same value attached to any land 
bank land of a similar type in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well that analysis, Mr. Chair, is how it 
would work. The productive value would be determined by the 
assessed rate of a particular region of the province. Once the 
assessment in that region is determined and the production 
value is determined, then the value of the property is associated 
to it. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Would you in your estimation then say that they 
would be relatively equal in terms of productive value as 
opposed to what value you can actually get for that land on the 
market? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the variations would really be 
determined by the local markets and the kinds of demand that 
you might have for property in the particular region of the 
province. And accordingly, the values would be determined on 
that basis. 
 
I can say to you that in the area that we farm in today, there is 
some land that is Crown land that currently is being used for 
pasture, some of it is being used as cultivated land. And the 
market value of those particular pieces of land would be based 
on the regional assessment and what the productive value of 
those properties would be. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I want to get, Mr. Minister, beyond productive 
values. I want to know specifically from you if land on the open 
market was cash renting for $50 an acre, would we expect the 
quarter right beside it that would be owned by land bank to be 
renting for a similar monetary amount of $50 an acre? 



1952 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

Nothing to do with productive value, but there are all kinds of 
influences on the market value, the price people are prepared to 
pay for the lease of land. So can we reasonably assume that that 
same thing would happen in this area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, as I explore 
more fully the way in which the land value is determined, 
clearly within the land bank properties that you talk about of the 
past, there is a formula that we use today to calculate what the 
value of that particular piece of property would be worth. 
 
It would certainly be based on location and it would clearly be 
based . . . one of the other criteria the formula has in it is 
whether or not the individual who is making the application 
would be making the application based on a lesser amount of 
land property today. 
 
We tend to provide these properties I think to individuals or 
farmers who are beginning in their operations, if they are. And 
then we would take into account the production of that 
particular piece of land over a period of time, and then 
determine our value of that particular property, based on that 
kind of analysis. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can we explore that 
formula a little bit this evening. Would it be based on . . . What 
kind of crops would we be looking at in an area, as I say, we’ll 
take the Melfort-Tisdale area as an example. A very productive 
area of the province in terms of productive value, productive 
land, productive capability. So we would assign a crop 
insurance amount of production that we would expect. Is that 
how it’s done? On a basket of crops, or on a single crop, how 
do we assume that? Are we looking at . . . included within that 
formula, are we looking at all kinds of things like carrying 
costs, are we looking at the opportunity to grow special crops? 
What kinds of things do we take into account in that formula 
when we assess what those productive values are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Chair, to the member, as I 
explore with my officials the formula, we don’t have the 
formula in front of us, so it’s . . . we’re trying to design the 
information from the formula and provide it to you. 
 
And I’ll just give you sort of a generic outline of the kinds of 
things that we would be looking at. We would be looking at 
things like the quality of the land. And then we’d be looking at 
the current market value of a basket of commodities. When you 
asked about whether or not it’s based on a basket of 
commodities, it is. 
 
But what I should do, Mr. Member, is provide for you the 
formula that we currently use, make it available for you so that 
you would have a full appreciation of the way in which that 
process is determined today. And I would undertake, Mr. Chair, 
to the member to have that available for you tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That will certainly be 
helpful to us. 
 
Moving to another area of land ownership here in 
Saskatchewan. We, from time to time, all of us hear from 
people that might want to start farming operations, or take up 
operation here in Saskatchewan. We have within our province 

land ownership laws that by all accounts I think represent some 
concern to us or should represent some concern to us. Probably 
more than anything, or one of the things that we are looking at 
and need to look at here in Saskatchewan is for more 
investment into our province. Land ownership regulations and 
law here in Saskatchewan is quite restrictive, and as a result of 
that maybe . . . I believe we are not seeing the kind of 
investment in land here in Saskatchewan that we might be able 
to see. 
 
(19:45) 
 
We hear from farmers that may like . . . may want to set up 
operations in Saskatchewan that the legislation is simply too 
restrictive to meet their needs. The legislation was put in place 
some time ago and I think needs review, Mr. Minister. Are you 
looking at that currently? 
 
I think in the media in recent weeks you have said that you are. 
I think we need to move perhaps even quicker than you are 
prepared to in this area. Any amount of investment into the 
industry is welcome, as you know, and I’d like to know from 
you how soon we can expect legislative change. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I just want to 
say to him that he is correct when he says that we have been 
examining this piece now for some time. And I too have been 
meeting with the Farm Land Security Board and a number of 
people across the province around this issue. 
 
I should say to you as well that this matter has become a front 
and centre discussion for one of the committees of ACRE 
(Action Committee on the Rural Economy). And the 
recommendation that soon will be coming from the committee 
that has this particular piece of work in their area is that we 
should be making some adjustments to the farmland ownership 
. . . the farmland security ownership Act. 
 
Now here the issue, as you can appreciate, is most sensitive and 
we have all kinds of opinions on this. And every time that we 
do a bit of discussion around it we tend to find half of the 
population is interested in changing the legislation and the other 
50 per cent is quite comfortable leaving it where it is. 
 
But it’s my view that we need to make some adjustment or 
alteration to this piece of legislation. I’m looking at a sheet of 
paper that has on it the comparators of Saskatchewan, 
Manitoba, and Alberta in the way in which it’s applied across 
these three provinces. 
 
And at least what I would like to move us towards is to have 
some parity with the three provinces from which we continue to 
have crossover in terms of farming opportunity. The one that I 
think troubles most people is the Canadian investment of 
residents from across the country. And when we take a look at 
those, we see in Saskatchewan that restriction is about 320 acres 
where in Manitoba and Alberta there is no restriction today. 
And clearly I think what this message says to us is that we 
could easily have Canadian investment in our province. We 
have people to the west of us who are very much interested in 
acquiring of some of our properties in this province, will help 
us with growing, I think, some of even our livestock industry. 
 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1953 

 

And so in sort of a long-answered way, our task here is 
certainly to review this legislation in greater detail. I had hoped 
that during this session we might have been able to do 
something around this. We have not been able to accomplish 
this, but my hope is that by the time we get to our next session 
that we might have for you a package that I think would reflect 
more fully the kinds of ownership requirements in this province 
that I think would be more suitable to the agricultural needs in 
our province. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. While I appreciate that 
you’re working on the area and you’re looking at the other 
provinces, and I can certainly understand the need to be 
cautious in terms of drafting something of this nature, and 
putting in place a piece of legislation requires a fair bit of effort 
and certainly research, I want to share with you that we’ve done 
that research for you. We have prepared, and now we are ready 
to move forward with a piece of private member’s legislation 
that I think accomplishes what you are talking about and 
removes restrictions in those areas that are very, very restrictive 
for Canadians and investment from not only Canadians but 
outside of our jurisdiction, outside the jurisdiction of Canada. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, while you’re not in a position at this time to 
be able to move forward with legislation, we have a piece of 
legislation that we’ll be introducing tomorrow, I believe, to help 
accomplish the goal that you suggested that you are prepared to 
look at. And I know that you don’t have any further information 
on it other than what I am saying, but it’ll be introduced 
tomorrow. We will, I believe, see a great deal of support for it. 
 
Recently the Canadian Federation of Independent Business 
have surveyed their membership and have found that there is 
support for legislative change, so the groundwork is done for 
you is what I’m saying. You don’t have to do anything more 
than just stand in your place and vote. And we will be prepared 
to move it along very, very quickly. We have said that with 
your support we can advance this piece of legislation. It’s not 
something that is of a partisan nature, Mr. Minister, it’s just 
doing the right thing in getting the job done for people who 
want to invest in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’m hopeful that upon review of that legislation in the next 
couple of days we can see a legislative change move forward. 
We still have time in this spring session for all of the debate to 
ensue for every member of the legislature — including the 
member from Moose Jaw over there who seems to be nodding 
his head in approval to our plan — that perhaps even the 
member from Regina back there is supportive of it. 
 
So the work is done; we’re prepared to introduce it; we hope we 
can gain your support in this area. It accomplishes I think 
exactly what you said, and so we will be seeking your approval 
and speedy passage of a piece of legislation in this area. 
 
Mr. Minister, can we expect your support? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, he 
certainly has my support in taking a look at the legislation that 
they’re going to be crafting, or they’ve crafted, and will be 
introducing. I know that the member recognizes that on this side 
of the House, there’s a great deal of enthusiasm by our 
members to look at this piece of legislation with a great deal of 

interest. 
 
And I know that what we can do here, given that I hear you 
saying that this will be a complementary piece of work, that you 
and I and members on your side of the House and ours will find 
the solution to this particular issue. And I know that we will. 
 
And so what we’ll need to do of course is compare the 
information that you’ll be putting forward in your Bill, and will 
look at what we have done to date. We’ll examine carefully 
with the interest groups across the province of whom we need 
to talk with I think yet one more time, and then I think we’ll 
find the solution to this particular issue. 
 
And clearly it’s not about the disposal of property or disposal of 
pieces of property in Saskatchewan because that’s an easy 
exercise for any one of us to undertake. Last year at this time, or 
just in January of last . . . two years ago now when farm 
organizations and groups were rallying here at the legislature, I 
had an occasion to speak with many farmers about this very 
particular issue. 
 
And farmers were very clear with me, particularly those who 
were in their latter years of their farming careers say to me, why 
don’t you just open up your Farm Land Security Act and 
dispose of property across the province in a significant fashion 
because they were very pleased, or would be very pleased, to 
sell off their farms. 
 
And I’ve often said on many occasions that we could sell 
Saskatchewan off in about 20 minutes if we wanted to do that. 
This wouldn’t be a very hard exercise. There are many, many 
countries of the world that would like to have access to our very 
valuable properties, and so we need to be very prudent in this 
exercise. 
 
And I say to you that the working committee on ACRE where 
we have had a great deal of work done — and I am going to be 
following their lead, I want to say to you — and they’re 
providing me with a recommendation in short order which I’ll 
be bringing to my cabinet and caucus colleagues for a review 
and debate and that I know that you and I and members of your 
caucus will further explore what kinds of options we have. But 
without any doubt this solution . . .we need to find a solution to 
this that not only disposes with property in Saskatchewan but 
also addresses the need of building strong communities and 
enhancing the quality of life in rural Saskatchewan which is 
what, very much what ACRE is looking at. 
 
When we get into discussing the farm land ownership Act, we 
need to be sure that it complements the kinds of vision that in 
particular the ACRE committee and the rural revitalization 
groups of men and women are talking about, because this is not 
only about the disposal of property. This is about trying to find 
solutions for an enriching rural Saskatchewan in a different 
way, and I know that you want to be a part of that. And I think 
this legislation should reflect that when we get to it. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So we’ll be 
anticipating with a great deal of thought and a great deal of 
anticipation your eager support for the piece of legislation that 
we’ll be introducing. 
 



1954 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

I note that the member for Saskatoon Southeast is an 
enthusiastic supporter of moving in this area and with her 
support and continued support in this area, you can take all the 
credit on it. We don’t want any of it. We are prepared to move 
and get the job done in this area, in this session, Mr. Minister. 
 
So with the member from Moose Jaw’s enthusiastic support, we 
will be able to get this done as well. I know the considerable 
amount of influence he has in his caucus, and it will be with 
members like him and the member from Southeast that we will 
gain your support, I would hope, in this effort. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to talk a little bit . . . I want to discuss a 
little bit with you a very serious situation that we have here in 
Saskatchewan, and that’s an area of drought that we have across 
this province, although it is, I think, shrinking a little bit in size 
as a result of recent rains. There are still many, many areas of 
this province that have drought-like conditions both for our 
livestock producers, a very important sector of our economy, 
and for the grains and oilseeds and specialty crops sectors as 
well. And perhaps we can move to that area of discussion this 
evening. The Crop Insurance department, I understand, is quite 
busy assessing reseeding claims and establishment benefits and 
all of those kinds of things. I’m told offices are very, very busy 
writing off crops right now. And that’s something that we need 
all be concerned about, Mr. Minister. 
 
What amount of acreage have we at risk here in Saskatchewan? 
What amount of acreage has been written off to this point? And 
have you made in your department, the Crop Insurance 
department, any assessment of the potential liability that Crop 
Insurance has in this area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. I just want to 
say, first of all that he’s identified in my view quite accurately 
that across the province today we had some situations that were 
very difficult for us over the last month or so as the crops are 
coming up and as farmers, particularly ranchers, prepare to cut 
their hay and clearly the amount of hay land or pasture land that 
is going to be grazeable through the course of the next several 
months. 
 
We’ve had a long discussion over the last two or three weeks. 
In particular closer to just the last two days, we’ve had a long 
conversation and discussion with stockgrowers and livestock 
associations across the province about what it is that we might 
be able to do in the province. And so as their recommendation 
has taken us, clearly there is going to be some need for us to, I 
think, convert some of the current crop land into grazing. And 
also I think for us to look at maybe extending the deadline for 
reseeding into the middle of July so that those producers who 
want to cut or reseed some of their properties . . . or some of 
their farmland for forage into the future is what we’re thinking 
of doing. 
 
Now specific to your question about the number of acres today, 
now there are 1,829 claims that we’ve had to date. And these 
claims have come, as I look at the sheet, from across the 
province. From places like Tisdale . . . or Turtleford I mean, 
Preeceville, Tisdale to Moose Jaw, Davidson, and Swift 
Current. So there’ a number of communities, core areas across 
the province that have been affected. So there are 1,829 claims. 
 

(20:00) 
 
Now last year at this time we had 2,507 claims at this very same 
period. And I’m looking at exactly the same areas of the 
province. So we had more claims last year than we did this 
year. 
 
Now in the year 1999 we had, on the same communities, 3,265 
claims over the same period. And then in . . . this would be 
1998, and the number of claims that we would have had in 1998 
were 6,095 over the same period of time. So this period of time 
in 1998, of course, there was far more urgency in the province 
as it relates to moisture, as compared to this year. 
 
So over the same period of time, last year versus this year as a 
comparator, our claims are down by about 700. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In a situation of 
drought there are a lot of information that we should be passing 
on to farmers with respect to the production of grains and 
oilseed and specialty crops here in this province. 
 
I wonder if you could explain for us what the procedure is and 
how farmers . . . what their role in terms of notifying you about 
the writing-off of a particular crop is. I understand, Mr. 
Minister, that the procedure is — and I would like for you to 
confirm this if this is indeed correct — that if you see a crop . . . 
if you feel that your crop isn’t going to be a viable crop that you 
just simply don’t . . . are in a situation where you’re in a 
drought situation and the crop is not going to make it, you 
contact the Crop Insurance office in your area, or Melville for 
that matter, and from there they send out a crop insurance 
adjuster who looks the crop over, does a count of the amount of 
material that is growing, the amount of crop that actually broke 
surface and is apt to form the basis of crop development. 
 
From there the farmer has the option, they can be put into a 
choice category, or simply write it off at that point. If they’re 
put into a choice category, the farmer can look to establishment 
or re-establishment or reseeding benefit of $20 an acre. The 
Crop Insurance department at that point either says that this 
crop has to be reseeded because there’s adequate moisture for 
germination, or if there isn’t adequate moisture for germination 
it’s the farmer’s decision at that point. 
 
And the dates for this are very, very close. I understand it’s 
June 20, Mr. Minister, so we’ve only got tomorrow. Many 
farmers would be in that situation, so I think, Mr. Minister, that 
we have a responsibility here this evening to make sure that 
farmers our aware of their role, their responsibility in writing a 
crop off to benefit from the establishment or reseeding benefit. 
Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the way in 
which you have described the program working is the way in 
which it in fact does work. 
 
We’ve had now of these 1,829 claimants that I’ve talked about, 
we’ve had our crop insurance people visit these sites, and of 
course the issue here of course is the determination of the term 
establishment. The crop that’s currently in the ground and that’s 
coming up, does it have the best chance in terms of determining 
the full yield, or do we want to look at — this would be the 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1955 

 

producer’s decision — about reseeding it? And does the 
reseeded crop then have the better opportunity of meeting the 
full yield loss? And so currently that’s the kind of work that’s 
being undertaken. 
 
My understanding is that these 1,829 claimants are what we’ve 
received to date. We expect, my crop insurance officials tell me 
that we expect that there will likely be more claims than we 
have currently. And it will be the re-establishment issue that we 
will be examining over the next short while here. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, let’s be very clear with farmers 
across this province. 
 
Their responsibility then is to notify Crop Insurance prior to 
June 20 or on June 20. At that point, they will have an adjuster 
come out and have a look at their crop as quickly as possible. 
Then they will have the opportunity, if there is sufficient 
moisture, to reseed that crop. If there isn’t, they’re eligible for 
$20 an acre and the reseeding benefit. At that point, then they 
have a very, very tight window to plough down or chem kill, 
chem fallow that failed crop. And from there then that crop 
would qualify for summerfallow coverage next year. 
 
Is that indeed correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the . . . Deputy 
Deputy Chair, just to say to the member that the process in 
which the examination of the crop is carried out and the way in 
which the member described it is accurate. 
 
What is important here though is that there is a variation in 
terms of what the payout is, depending on the type of crop that 
you would be looking at. So if you’re looking at cereals, flax or 
coriander or mustard, that is the $20 an acre which you talked 
about. In fact if it’s a . . . and canola and sunflower is at $25 an 
acre. And then of course when you look at the pulse, fababean, 
field peas, dry beans, and all classes of lentils and chickpeas, 
it’s $30. And then the winterkill is the $20. So there is a 
different rate in which there would be recognition if there needs 
to be a payout. 
 
Now we should also emphasize that on each of the 
circumstances that we’re talking about, it would be on a 
case-by-case basis. And so as the adjusters make their way to 
the producers, they would then get into a discussion around 
whether or not there’s still opportune time to reseed. And in 
some instances here, as you’ll be familiar, it may be too late to 
proceed with the reseed so it would then require a decision 
around the payment. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s I think helpful 
and I hope that has adequately explained to farmers who have 
. . . are making those decisions every day now. As farmers are 
looking over their crop production, they have a very, very 
important decision if they feel that their crop isn’t in a position 
to be a viable crop. 
 
Even though that reseeding benefit will not in a lot of cases 
make up — recover the cost that they have had to expend to this 
point — it is indeed somewhat of a help and is an important 
feature of the crop insurance package that’s available to them. 
 

Mr. Minister, the other area that we talked about in terms of a 
drought and what kind of impact it has on people here in 
Saskatchewan, producers of livestock, is the other area, and 
that’s the one I want to touch on now with you if I could. 
 
Mr. Minister, livestock production has been a feature of 
Saskatchewan for a very, very long time. Livestock producers 
know that we are going to be impacted from time to time with 
drought conditions, and we are certainly experiencing that now 
in areas of our province. In Alberta recently they have put in 
place a livestock program to help with the drought that they are 
impacted by there. The last time we spoke, Mr. Minister, you 
talked that you . . . you mentioned that you were discussing 
with producer organizations, livestock organizations, a program 
for this province. How soon can we expect a program to be 
announced, and are you prepared to share any of the details of 
that program now, or what kind of features that you expect to be 
included in a program for livestock producers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, I want 
to say to you that we’ve had considerable discussions over the 
last several weeks about how we might be able to address the 
situation as it relates to hay and pasture across the province, and 
water. A number of members on your side of the House have 
talked to me personally about some of the situations in their part 
of the province. And I have also undertaken to have discussions 
with stock growers and livestock associations across the 
province to hear from them as to the kinds of issues and 
difficulties that they’re facing in the livestock industry. 
 
Clearly, one of the concerns that I have and I’m sure that the 
livestock . . . and I’m not sure, but the livestock industry has 
expressed with me, is that we want to try and retain and grow 
the livestock industry in Saskatchewan. And one of the ways 
that we need to do that of course is to try and protect the 
numbers of livestock that we have in the province today, and so 
we need to try to find some solution. 
 
Clearly the last week and a half or 10 days with the moisture 
levels that we’ve had across the province have helped us a bit. 
And clearly if we were to get a bit more rainfall, which we’re 
hoping will happen in spite of what’s happening with the 
chickpeas that we talked about earlier, it would be most helpful 
for the hay and the pasture. 
 
So what I’ve been looking at generically . . . one of the 
questions that I’ve raised is whether or not we should be 
involved in providing some kinds of transportation assistance 
for livestock producers in the province, either for hay and/or for 
the transportation of the livestock themselves. 
 
There was a point in time where in this province we were 
involved in an exercise of that kind, I think it was in 1988, and 
that there was some financing that was provided for the 
transportation of livestock and/or hay. 
 
I want to report to you that the uptake by the cattle associations 
across the province for putting money into that kind of a 
venture was not well received. Producers across the province 
have said to me that the people who would most benefit from 
that kind of a program would be the trucking industry, and that 
it would not be most helpful for them. 
 



1956 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

Secondly, what livestock producers have said to me is that on a 
regular basis, on an annual basis, the kinds of decisions that 
they make about the management of their livestock herds, they 
include in their budgeting process either the purchase of hay 
and/or the transportation of livestock. Because it’s not 
uncommon today to have people moving livestock large 
distances. 
 
And clearly, I know today in the part of the province that I live, 
not only do we have Saskatchewan livestock that is from the 
western side of the province that is in our area, but we also have 
livestock from Alberta that’s in our part of the province. Partly 
because we have some land . . . we have farmland that’s rich in 
both hay and pasture. 
 
I can say to you as well that last week I had a conversation with 
my colleagues from Alberta and Manitoba, and we have 
livestock today from the southwest part of the province, it’s not 
only in Saskatchewan but it’s already in Manitoba. 
 
So the issue that they’ve raised with me is how is it that we 
would compensate various different producers today, when in 
fact this is part of doing their business every day. And so that 
issue for us is one that we’ll be reporting on more fully, but 
that’s the kind of response that we’ve had on the transportation 
piece. 
 
What farmers have said to us though is that the deferral on the 
sale of the livestock . . . the tax deferral program, as it applies to 
the drought, would be most useful, and that we should be 
thinking about implementing that over a period of a couple of 
years. And so we’re exploring that in some detail today to see 
what kinds of options would be available through the crop . . . 
or with the federal government. 
 
The other is that I think we can do some things around the crop 
insurance. The conversation that we just finished having, there 
may be some things that we can do as it relates to reseeding. 
And some of that reseeding could be using for green feed, 
particularly in those parts of the provinces where there may be 
sufficient moisture for that to occur. And so I’m giving 
consideration to that area. 
 
(20:15) 
 
I think that there may be some avenues for us to explore as it 
relates to an early leverage on CFIP (Canadian Farm Income 
Program) so that farmers might be able to access some of the 
CFIP dollars in advance of the December timeline. So if we 
could encourage the federal government to look at that, that 
would be most helpful. 
 
I think the other piece that livestock producers were very 
emphatic about in our conversation with them as late as 
yesterday morning, is that we need to find some long-term 
solutions as it relates to water because we’ll have this situation 
again in the future. 
 
Now I’ve had a conversation with my friends in Ottawa, and the 
PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) program 
that supports water projects is out of money. And the reality is 
that in order for us to provide long-term solutions as it relates to 
sufficient, adequate water for cattle producers, particularly in 

the south-west part of the province, we need to see the federal 
government add more money into the pool that PFRA provides. 
 
So what I’ll be doing in my discussions with the federal 
government in our meetings next week will be raising this very 
issue that you’ve raised with me today, to see if we can grow 
that pool of financing in the PFRA’s side for long-term 
solutions as it relates to water. 
 
Those are some of the things, Mr. Member, that we’ve been 
doing, some of the people that we’ve been talking to, and some 
of the directions that we’re getting. I’m expecting by the week’s 
end — not expecting, but by the week’s end — I’ll be making a 
definitive announcement on what our approach will be. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. I certainly, Mr. Chair, and Mr. 
Minister, appreciate your comments that we can expect by the 
end of this week a decision and an announcement of what that 
decision will be from you and your department. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, that’s correct. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — What areas are you . . . you’re looking at then 
water well drilling, I assume; you’re looking at dugout 
construction; you’re looking at perhaps direct assistance then — 
can we assume that? Are you looking at feed transportation? 
And are you looking at the movement of cattle as well? Are 
those the areas that we are talking about here, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — That’s right, Mr. Chair, to the member. As 
I’ve highlighted that I’ve looked at five or six different areas. 
We’ve looked at the transportation of livestock and feed. We’ve 
looked at tax deferral as an option. We’ve looked at what we 
might do through crop insurance as some options. We’ve 
looked at how we might be able to engage a earlier cash 
injection to the CFIP program. 
 
And we’re also talking with the federal government about 
traditional funding for the PFRA water program. We have, 
certainly, some of our own expertise in Sask Water. We partner 
with PFRA in some of our joint work, but the actual financing 
for infrastructure for farm communities and producers is really 
done, the financing is done through PFRA. 
 
That fund, as I’ve indicated, is now out of money. But I think 
that the way in which the PFRA funding works is that various 
different regions are allocated sums of money, and so there may 
be some room today to move some of that money around in that 
pot. And so we’ll be looking at that as yet another option. So 
those are some of the issues. 
 
One other issue is that if there is Crown lands that are available, 
or possibly . . . well Crown lands that are available, we might be 
able to . . . we’re looking at whether or not we could make some 
of those properties, lands available on a short-term basis to 
assist those producers who need grazing land. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Alberta’s response to 
this problem has been a direct assistance program, a per acre 
payment. Is this something that producers in Saskatchewan can 
anticipate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well Mr. Chair, Alberta’s in its second 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1957 

 

year of a very difficult situation. I think when you examine the 
kinds of drought that Alberta experienced last year, and the 
provincial government in Alberta did come to the aid of 
livestock producers last year and made a contribution, I think of 
in around . . . was it $4 an acre, I believe, is what they made. 
 
And then this year, of course, this year started out in a very 
similar fashion right up until the middle of June where their 
situation didn’t improve at all, and so they’re in a two-year 
drought cycle now. It was interesting that Minister McClellan 
said to me just the other day that right after she put her money 
in, it started to rain in Alberta. So I’m hoping that she’d put 
enough in there that some of that will make its way, some of 
that rain will make its way to Saskatchewan. But their situation 
was far more drastic, as you could appreciate, now being into 
their second year of drought. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So to answer the 
question that I asked you: can people in the livestock area of 
our province that are experiencing droughts . . . drought expect 
a program of similar nature to what Alberta has or not of similar 
nature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, it’s not 
my intent to make a cash payment to farmers in this . . . in the 
province, if that’s the direct question. So I can say to you 
definitively tonight that an acreage payment in this province, 
we wouldn’t be making. But all of the other areas that I’ve 
highlighted that I’d be exploring tonight are certainly options. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, that 
presents some concern, I’m sure, to ranchers and farmers here 
in Saskatchewan because available feed supplies are going to 
become a very, very important commodity and expensive 
commodity. And if a rancher from Maple Creek is going to be 
competing with a rancher from Medicine Hat for those same 
feed supplies and a rancher from Medicine Hat has considerable 
resources now as a result of Alberta’s program at his disposal, 
his or her disposal, is that not going to create a very, very 
difficult situation for the farmer/rancher from our side of the 
border? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, I know 
that we’re competing with the payout that was made to 
livestock producers in Alberta. But I also want to share with 
you and reiterate one more time that my discussion, our 
discussion, with cattle producers across the province we had as 
late as yesterday morning. And what livestock producers were 
saying to us, Mr. Chair, quite explicitly, was that they weren’t 
looking for a cash injection. That the cash injection is not what 
they were looking for and that in fact we should be looking at, 
in particular, the tax deferral piece as the lead option. 
 
So I say to the member opposite that as much as it may create 
some disparity in terms of our Saskatchewan agricultural 
producer, there will be a problem if we were to proceed down 
this path in terms of precedent as well as equity. So at this point 
in time I’m going to be following the lead, by and large, of the 
livestock producers. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well on behalf of 
livestock producers here in Saskatchewan, I can say to you that 
we will be looking forward to your announcement later this 

week with a great deal of anticipation. And we hope that we 
will be seeing all of those areas addressed that we talked about 
from concerns in terms of water and water development, feed 
and feed assistance, and transportation, and those areas that are 
of importance to the livestock producers here in Saskatchewan. 
So I’m anticipating very, very positive results from your 
announcement later this week, and we’ll be, I’m sure, wanting 
to discuss those results with you at some time here in the future. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to take this opportunity this evening to 
thank you and your officials for your assistance and for your 
answers this evening to the inquiries that we’ve had. 
 
I understand, Mr. Chair, now that we’ll be moving to reporting 
progress and we’ll be looking forward to discussing the very 
important subject of agriculture in the not too distant future 
with you once again, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m 
pleased to have with me tonight Glenda Yeates, who is the 
deputy minister, to my left, and to her left Duncan Fisher, who 
is the assistant deputy minister. And then behind Glenda is Rod 
Wiley, the executive director of finance and management 
services. 
 
And right behind me is Steven Pillar, who is the associate 
deputy minister, and to my right is Lawrence Krahn, assistant 
deputy minister. And behind him is Bert Linklater, executive 
director of district management services. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Good evening, 
Minister, and officials. Welcome to . . . I believe this is the 
fourth in the series of Health estimates that we have before us in 
this legislative session, and I again welcome the opportunity for 
us to explore a number of topics. 
 
Minister, as you may recall on our last session we were talking 
a lot about personnel issues and training issues. 
 
We talked about the College of Nursing and the SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
programs and those issues, and I want to continue briefly on 
that direction if I may. 
 
Mr. Minister, we talked about the great concern about some of 
the demographics and the need that we are going to have for 
increased medical personnel and medical professionals not only 
in our province but really across North America as that same 
baby-boom bulge is going through the system. 
 
And I think that we pointed out and talked about the fact that 



1958 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

there were decisions made in the early ‘90s in terms of the 
belief that we were not going to require as many medical 
professionals, particularly in nursing and medicine and those 
areas. And there was actually across this country some 
restriction and reduction in the number of training seats by 
governments of every stripe across the country. 
 
And I think that we can look now and we look and reflect on 
some of the demographic studies that have been done by people 
like Dr. Foot, etc., that are saying that the principle of this 
baby-boom bulge is going to move one year at a time through 
the system, and it’s going to be a reality that we’re going to 
have to face very soon . . . is true. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, we said that there is going to be some 
real challenges and difficulties because as these impact not only 
in our jurisdiction but in neighbouring jurisdictions across 
North America, these shortages are being experienced 
everywhere, and we’ve seen in very recent times two 
phenomena coming together. 
 
There is a demographic phenomenon where we are getting short 
of medical personnel given the increased demands that there is 
going to be an aging population. And we’ve also seen for the 
first time in some while where governments are reinvesting if 
you like or increasing their investment in health care across the 
jurisdictions as well. And so we are seeing the beginning of 
expansion of programs in some jurisdictions, and so we are 
seeing a great deal of competition for qualified instructors in 
colleges of nursing, instructors in colleges of medicine, 
instructors in SIAST and the training institutions as they are 
trying to meet this challenge in this reality. Many jurisdictions 
are expanding their training seats and so there is a great deal of 
competition now for medical people at the training level. At the 
same time there’s expansion of programs in institutions, and so 
there’s competition at that level as well. 
 
(20:30) 
 
So we’re really sort of getting in . . . the point I’m trying to 
make is we’re indeed getting into a very difficult and 
strategically challenging position in terms of meeting these 
needs. 
 
And I talked about last time about the fact that the SRNA 
(Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association), and different 
institutions are projecting that we need more people. You had 
indicated that you’d done some studies and agree that we need 
to have more people and that the department is endeavouring to 
move forward in terms of increasing training seats, especially in 
the College of Nursing, and that you doubled the training seats 
in technology and those areas and perhaps more needs to be 
done. 
 
Tonight I’d like to focus in this venue on the College of 
Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. And 
I think, Minister, that you’re aware that the college has had, I 
think it’s fair to say, challenges not only in this most recent 
past, but over a number of years. 
 
There have been a number of difficulties that they’ve had, 
decisions that they’ve made that maybe in retrospect were not 
as wise as we would have hoped where programs that they had 

outreaching to the Regina area in terms of residency programs 
and things of that nature were reduced, and there was much 
more of an entrenchment, if you like, around the Saskatoon site. 
And so some of those things have created difficulties in the 
College of Medicine and those sorts of issues are there. 
 
There’s been a number of studies done, the Noseworthy study, 
and most recently the Glynn study on operating procedures and 
things of that nature. And there has been a heightened 
awareness of the challenges of the College of Medicine, and 
what the College of Medicine is facing. 
 
And I would like to ask you first of all, Minister, is how do you 
see the College of Medicine and its role in the health field in 
Saskatchewan? Is it an integral part of our future as a province 
and its delivery of health care services in this province? Is there 
some modifications that are going to happen? Where do you see 
the College of Medicine fitting into the big picture in the health 
services program delivery in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the member 
for the opportunity to talk about this particular issue because 
it’s very clear that the College of Medicine is a very integral 
part of how we provide health care in Saskatchewan. The 
medical school obviously trains the medical practitioners, many 
of whom become part of the system, but it’s also a place where 
many of the specialties operate in conjunction with the medical 
school so that we can have those specialties in Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the things that we do know is that the medical school is 
continually re-evaluating their place and their role in the health 
system as we examine the health system. And one of the 
specific tasks that they are about, is looking at, well, what are 
the special roles that they can play as a College of Medicine in 
the Canadian scene and what areas can they be experts at. And 
there’s no question that the opportunities are there for expertise 
around rural medicine, around providing the Aboriginal 
population with good medical care, and with a lot of the issues 
around the primary care model and the integration of physicians 
into that model. 
 
We have also some very good specialties that will continue, but 
one of the things that we do know, given the size of our 
province and the size of the medical school, is that we can’t be 
sort of the best in every specialty and that we have to work 
co-operatively with some of the other neighbouring medical 
schools to make sure that we provide the broad training that will 
be necessary to gain the full range of specialists. 
 
But I think the simple answer is that the medical school is very 
much a part of how we organize health care in this province and 
it has to be something that everybody in the province feels 
ownership in and feels a part of. And one of the tasks that we 
have is to figure out how we do that in the coming decades. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, do 
you contemplate a situation where we wouldn’t have a College 
of Medicine? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer is no. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I’m sure that you 
know of Dr. Roger Pierson at the College of Medicine. Dr. 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1959 

 

Pierson is an internationally renowned instructor at the college, 
and medical researcher. Dr. Pierson has been speaking out as of 
recent about expressing some pretty grave concerns that he has 
about the future of the College of Medicine, and he wrote in a 
viewpoint article at the campus news on March 23 of this year, 
and his heading on the article is “Fund the College of Medicine 
properly or close it.” And I think that he goes on in his article to 
really make the case that there has been a chronic underfunding 
and a mismatch between the need for resources over the years 
and the college’s ability to function in the future. 
 
In his article he goes on, and I won’t attempt to quote the whole 
article because it’s very comprehensive, but he is expressing his 
concern that the College of Medicine is getting into an 
impossible situation, is going to struggle to meet an impossible 
challenge, and that we are going to sooner or later run into the 
situation where it is simply not sustainable. And he expresses a 
great deal of concern in articles I’ve read quoting him, that have 
said that this crunch may come as early as this fall in the 
accreditation process. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think most people in this province, and I, 
certainly agree with you when you say you cannot contemplate 
a situation where there is no College of Medicine in the 
province of Saskatchewan. To me, that is simply unthinkable, 
and yet here you have one of the leading researchers and 
instructors at the College of Medicine that are basically saying, 
unless something is done and something very significantly in 
the very near future, we are indeed facing the real possibility, in 
this gentleman’s esteemed opinion, that we’re going to lose it. 
 
He says, and I quote: 
 

Let me connect the dots for you. We are attempting to run a 
College of Medicine on a shoestring budget in rundown 
facilities following decades of underfunding and cutbacks 
in an intensely competitive environment against provinces 
who want to be leaders in the academic, clinical, and 
biomedical research game. If we are to be successful in 
convincing the provincial government that the medical 
college is worth saving and receiving the financial 
resources to run a first-class College of Medicine. 

 
And, Minister, I would like you to comment on Dr. Pierson’s 
warnings, if you like, in light of your pretty strong commitment 
that I heard a moment ago that you don’t conceive of a situation 
where there is no College of Medicine. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I appreciate the 
question and the ability to comment about this particular issue. 
One of the things that we know is that it’s not only money that’s 
needed in this particular situation. 
 
Just to give you a bit of an indication, over the . . . since 
1994-95 there’s been about a 50 per cent increase in the amount 
of income that’s gone to support sort of the academic side of the 
school, about 7 per cent a year. Right now in this year’s budget 
there’s about $21.6 million that goes 12.5 for academic teaching 
and service for the faculty and about just over 9 million to 
support 210 resident training positions for post-graduate 
medical students. 
 
And so the budget that comes from Saskatchewan Health 

represents about 25 per cent of the cost of the college. But even 
given the fact that there has been more money going each year 
into the college, there are many needs. One of the things that is 
happening right now is that, as you mentioned, the Glynn report 
and other reports have asked many questions about the role of 
the College of Medicine and how it fits in with the university. 
 
And so we are working together with the University of 
Saskatchewan and the Department of Post-Secondary Education 
to have further discussions about how the College of Medicine 
can become a valuable asset in our health system over the 
coming years. And it doesn’t only involve more money; it also 
involves some very serious discussion about the role of the 
school and what kinds of services and education it will provide 
over the long term. 
 
A key partner in this discussion as well is the Saskatoon Health 
District because there are many of the services that they provide 
that are integrated together with the College of Medicine. So 
it’s a complicated situation that requires careful thought and 
discussion and that’s what’s happening right now. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I do 
appreciate that the situation has a certain level of complexity to 
it. However I think that what we’re doing is we’re doing 
studies. And we’ve done Noseworthy, and we did Glynn, and 
all the rest of it. And we’ve got an advisory panel that’s made 
up as a result of the Noseworthy report that is beginning to 
discuss these issues. 
 
And the problem is, is that that’s fine and dandy to take this 
consultative process in an ideal world. But what we’re in right 
now is a very competitive world in the medical field. And every 
day we’re seeing or we’re hearing stories — maybe not every 
day, but virtually every week — we hear stories where people 
are being offered very, very attractive packages in other 
jurisdictions because, as outlined before and you agreed at our 
last meeting, that this competitive force is going on 
internationally. 
 
And so it’s not as if we’re sitting here sort of with walls around 
us and that we’ve got all the time in the world to sort of consult 
and study and think about what we’re going to do. We’re in an 
extremely competitive environment and the pressures to pick 
away at our brightest and best and go to other jurisdictions are 
sitting there looking us right in the face. 
 
You know, recently Dr. David Popkin is leaving his position as 
the dean of the college. And he wrote in the College of 
Medicine alumni review in March 2001. And again I won’t go 
into all the points that he was making, but in his article he sort 
of traced his experience in the College of Medicine and some of 
the challenge and difficulties that the college has endured over 
the years. 
 
And again he uses a word in this report, or in his paper, in this 
alumni association periodical, where he says, chronic 
underfunding of the college and its failure to meet many 
competing expectations, etc. Those kinds of words are used 
quite extensively in his report about the problems of the College 
of Medicine. 
 
And I understand clearly that funding is not the only answer. 



1960 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

There are other components to this whole issue as well. And I 
want to talk to them as well. But I think that clearly in the very 
near future — and I’m not talking months or years, I’m talking 
days and weeks — but there has to be a clear commitment by 
this province to the College of Medicine that we say clearly and 
unequivocally that we’re going to put the resources in place that 
are going to make a vibrant, dynamic College of Medicine, 
albeit that it can’t be all things to all people and it can’t have 
every specialty trained and all the rest of it. I understand that 
and I think that just makes sense. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you know, the people that will work as 
instructors and professionals in a College of Medicine sort of 
are different people from the normal medical world, if you like, 
because they have a different set of priorities. 
 
First and foremost, I think, they are teachers. First and 
foremost, I think I should say before that even, that they are 
excellent and they aspire to an excellence in their profession 
and strive for an excellence in a search for knowledge that is 
unprecedented. 
 
(20:45) 
 
And then second of all, in order to build on that excellence, they 
need to do research; that a research component of their 
profession and what they want to do in their job satisfaction is 
extremely important. 
 
The next thing they want to do is pass on that knowledge, and 
so they’re teachers. And a teaching component is part of that 
whole exercise, and of course a part of the whole teaching 
component is you have to have clinical opportunities in order to 
pass that knowledge on to your students. 
 
And so there is that three-pronged, if you like, balance to what 
their careers are and what their priorities are. And, Mr. Minister, 
if we don’t properly deal with all three of those components, 
we’re going to be in difficulty. 
 
And it isn’t just money — you’re absolutely right. It has to deal 
with all of those components. And you can’t have them being 
satisfied if all of their time is spent in teaching, not only to the 
College of Medicine students but College of Arts and Science 
and other science programs as well. You can’t have that balance 
if they’re being overloaded with teaching requirements because 
of the fiscal realities of the university needing to get the 
teaching job done. 
 
We’re not going to be able to have job satisfaction for them if 
they don’t have the ability to have proper research facilities in 
conjunction with their work. And that isn’t in some Atco trailer 
stuck in a back lot. It means something decent in this 
competitive world of medical research that not only requires the 
funding for the research but requires the funding for the 
physical floor space and the equipment that goes with it. 
 
And finally one of the problems in the Glynn report was talking 
about that in terms of allocation of O.R. (operating room) time, 
etc., between the College of Medicine and the Saskatoon 
District Health. And you know there’s a lot of tensions and 
strife there as that whole adjustment is happening. We’ve got to 
adjust that as well. 

So, Minister, what I would like to ask you tonight is what is 
your plan to not only just deal with funding, not just have more 
studies, but what is the comprehensive plan that’s going to send 
a positive message to the College of Medicine and the people 
that are in it that are saying to them clearly and unequivocally 
from this province of Saskatchewan, that you’re an integral and 
an absolutely critical part of the health care process in this 
province, and we’re going to have the resources available to 
you to make sure that happens — not years from now, but 
tomorrow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The member has 
quoted from Dr. Popkin’s report. And I guess I would respond 
to part of what he’s asked me by quoting Dr. Popkin. And he 
talks a bit about the Kerr White report in 1989 and the 
Noseworthy report in 1999. And basically he says that both of 
those groups of people were impressed by the quality of the 
faculty, students, and graduates. And Dr. Noseworthy 
concluded: 
 

The College of Medicine is an enormous attribute to the 
province of Saskatchewan and its people, their health, and 
health care. 

 
And then Dr. Popkin continues in his article: 
 

Saskatchewan Health responded to the Noseworthy 
recommendations by injecting a significant amount of new 
funding to support the recruitment and retention of clinical 
full-time faculty in our clinical departments. 

 
So that was the responding to the Noseworthy report that there 
was sufficient cash injected to assist some of those things. 
 
But practically what has been happening — and I think is 
happening right now in the sense of, yes this is an important 
question, one that is something that has to be dealt with in a 
timely fashion — about a month ago the boards of the 
Saskatoon District Health and of the University of 
Saskatchewan met together to talk specifically about this 
problem, the whole program, and about the college and about 
how to put together a framework agreement where they can 
work together as a district and as the college. We also know that 
the college has to continue to expand its connections to all of 
the districts to work with the Department of Health which they 
are doing. 
 
What we see is a willingness on the part of the university, on 
the part of the college, on the part of the Saskatoon district, and 
of all of the people to come and work together to use the 
resources that they have, identify where they need more 
resources, and basically develop a new vision for the school. 
And they have many, many capable people who are doing very 
good jobs, but they’re working together to try to develop this 
sense of going and providing for what we need in the province. 
 
I think very clearly the Department of Health, the Government 
of Saskatchewan, has included this whole area in our discussion 
about what the vision for the health system in the province will 
be. And that’s part of what’s under discussion now as we have 
the Standing Committee on Health Care respond to what Mr. 
Fyke suggests. It’s also the kind of discussion that we’re in with 
communities across the provinces. How does the College of 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1961 

 

Medicine assist in providing health care in Melfort, or 
Moosomin, or Tisdale, or whatever other part of the province. 
 
One of the interesting statistics that Dr. Popkin does set out in 
this report is that there are, he says as of March, they’re 1,544 
permanent positions licensed to practice medicine in 
Saskatchewan. Of those, 516 received their MD (Doctor of 
Medicine) degree at the University of Saskatchewan, many of 
the others received some or all of their post-graduate medical 
education at the university. 
 
I guess the important thing is that that school has been a very 
integral part of the health system in Saskatchewan for almost 50 
years and our goal clearly is that it will continue for the next 50 
or 100 years or however long that we’re here in this province 
because it is a very key part to how we provide health care in 
the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well it’s always 
important to understand that the College of Medicine is indeed 
an integral part, and that the people at the college are indeed 
looking back on their history with a great deal of pride, and 
rightfully so. There are indeed a third of the family physicians 
that are practising in Saskatchewan were graduates or are 
graduates of the Saskatchewan College of Medicine. And I 
think across this province people are very much appreciative of 
our graduates. People across this country see our graduates in 
positions of leadership as well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to, you know, continue the 
quotes that the minister is using from the very same article. And 
he says, and I quote: 
 

As we gaze into the future through the eyes of Janus we 
may see an uncertain future for the College of Medicine, 
yet one full of promise. The federal government has made a 
renewed commitment to fund health research. Our 
provincial government is now more active in supporting 
health research than in the past, but has yet to make the 
kind of commitment that will be required for a College of 
Medicine to meet the expectation of the university and the 
public it serves. 

 
And so, Minister, I certainly challenge you today to make that 
kind of a commitment because I think that this is what is 
needed. And when I talk about what’s needed, Mr. Minister, it’s 
certainly a multi-faceted commitment. We need the 
commitment from the department and I think you have the 
commitment in terms of a philosophical sense to doing what’s 
necessary to see to it that the College of Medicine receives the 
necessary support from the provincial Department of Health, so 
it can succeed. 
 
But there’s other components to the piece, and I am sure that 
the Minister responsible for Post-Secondary Education will also 
work with you in terms of meeting those other requirements. 
 
Minister, you’re well aware is that the Canadian light beam 
project that is occurring in Saskatoon currently is a huge 
scientific undertaking, and it has incredible promise for medical 
research. But you know, Mr. Minister, sometimes I really do 

fear that what we’re going to really need further to that campus 
is not research facilities but a hotel sitting next to the light beam 
source so that the visiting technicians have got some place to 
stay when they come and do their experiments and then leave 
town. 
 
And as great as the promise of the light beam is, it’ll only be a 
wasted and only a half-fulfilled promise if we don’t make sure 
that the research component is properly taken advantage of. 
And I recognize, Minister, that the Department of Health is not 
the only person or individuals that are responsible for it; it’s a 
commitment on behalf of this whole province. 
 
But what we’re going to need to do is to look at how are we 
going to attract people and use the advantage of the fact that the 
light beam is in Saskatoon as a method of actually recruiting 
people to come and practise at the College of Medicine, and 
you can’t do that if you don’t have the research facilities. 
 
And so when you go and you tour around the College of 
Medicine campus and the facilities that they have — and I’m 
sure you have done that; I have spent a day there — and you 
find that very often the laboratory research facilities are very 
lacking, and they’ll tell you that. 
 
And so the university administration has come up with a 
proposal for an integrated health sciences facility that has the 
promise of potentially providing for not only the classroom 
space but the research space, not only for the College of 
Medicine, but for the College of Nursing, the College of 
Kinesiology, and the medical colleges. 
 
And we’ve gone on record, Mr. Minister, as saying that we’re 
fully in support of that kind of a commitment on behalf of the 
people of this province to the College of Medicine and to the 
College of Nursing and to all of the medical colleges at the 
University of Saskatchewan. Minister, I believe that that’s the 
kind of signal that needs to be clearly given to the people at the 
University of Saskatchewan and all the medical colleges. And 
so I’ll ask you very simply and very directly: what is your level 
of support for the integrated health sciences facility project 
that’s being proposed by the University of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Before I go 
to that specific question, I’d like to point out how the funding to 
the College of Medicine takes place right now. 
 
The Department of Health directly supports medical education 
and clinical services at the College of Medicine through the 
clinical services fund. This accounts for approximately 27 per 
cent of the college’s budget. Health also funds the college 
indirectly through fee-for-service clinical earnings of faculty 
members, accounting for another 20 per cent. Including 
research grants, Health funds approximately 50 per cent of the 
college’s total revenue. The Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training funds another 22 per cent. So 
basically between the two departments, the province funds 
about 75 per cent of the college’s total operations with the 
remaining 25 per cent coming from research grants, trust 
accounts, and other special purpose accounts. 
 
So obviously there’s very solid support from the provincial 
government for the college and its operations from Department 



1962 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

of Health and from the Department of Post-Secondary 
Education. 
 
Now I understand that the university has brought forward a 
preliminary proposal for a new health sciences building and we 
support this in principle. Bringing together the health sciences 
and creating an environment to support a team approach 
necessary in health care delivery today is a very worthwhile 
objective, and it also would have as an added benefit the whole 
enhancing of the research capacity, as you’ve stated. 
 
I understand that the Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training officials have been discussing the concept with the 
university and the university has been asked to develop a 
comprehensive academic plan and explore funding support 
from the federal government for a health science research 
infrastructure. This work is very closely related with the Health 
Sciences Advisory Council which is exploring the development 
of an academic health sciences centre in Saskatoon. 
 
This will be a very costly initiative and will have to be priorized 
by the university and by the government in the context of all of 
the capital and financing pressures on government. The total 
cost of the project at this point is estimated to be somewhere 
between 120 and $170 million. 
 
But I guess what I would emphasize is that we support this in 
principle. It fits with the long-term plan for the province, for the 
health system, and the work is going ahead with 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training and the 
university officials. 
 
(21:00) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, I am 
very pleased to hear your comments in terms of your support on 
behalf of the Department of Health and your government, and I 
expect Post-Secondary Education as well, because, as you point 
out, a very significant part of the budget of the colleges are 
coming from both of those sources. 
 
And so I am pleased to hear your commitment to this and I 
think that that is exactly the kind of message that we shouldn’t 
have to kind of drag out of you in terms of making the 
commitment. But that is a very important signal that needs to be 
sent across this province that this . . . that the colleges, the 
Health Sciences Colleges at the University of Saskatchewan 
and particularly the College of Medicine, have got a future here 
because there’s a commitment on behalf of a multi-level sort of 
support and really a non-partisan support for this concept that 
we have to move forward. 
 
And I think that, Minister, as you know, that the College of 
Medicine is having some challenge right now in attracting 
someone to the position . . . to fill dean, and that has actually 
been delayed in terms of the whole search. But I think those are 
the kinds of signals that have to be sent out strongly and loudly 
and forcibly that will potentially be very attractive to a 
candidate who would be considered for the position of dean of 
the College of Medicine, that there is going to be this kind of 
commitment and that he is going to come into an improving 
environment instead of one that seems to be very, very difficult. 
And all the reports from Noseworthy to Glynn and on down 

have said that the environment is not all that healthy. So it isn’t 
the kind of environment someone wants to get into but certainly 
if they can hear that there’s going to be a renewal and a 
renaissance of the College of Medicine and the integrated health 
sciences facilities that that is an important message and I thank 
you for it. 
 
Minister, I’m going to now turn it over to my colleague, the 
member from Weyburn-Big Muddy to ask some questions on 
another topic. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — First, before we move on to another topic, 
I’d just like to say that what I’ve said to you tonight I have said 
directly to Dr. MacKinnon at the university and to the officials, 
and we’ve been working with them and I know that my 
colleague from Post-Secondary Education has been working 
there as well. And I know that when the new dean is recruited, 
she will be very happy to work with the new vision that we 
have for the college. So thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Welcome, Minister, and welcome to your 
officials. 
 
First of all, Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you a question 
regarding a certain case that you’ve been in contact with and 
informed of. I believe you’re familiar with the case of Mr. Jim 
Jackson and his sister Eileen Jackson and their request for 
someone to take responsibility and also for Saskatchewan 
Health to reimburse the family for the constant care that they 
had to pay for. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d just like to refresh your memory. I’ll read a 
portion of a letter that Eileen Jackson wrote to yourself in 
March of this year, and I’m reading from her letter: 
 

As a taxpayer contributing to a publicly-funded, 
publicly-administered health system, I find it highly 
illogical that Saskatchewan Health is not prepared to pay 
for $11 an hour attendant care for Jim, but is prepared to 
pay for costly legal fees to Balfour Moss law firm to deny 
my brother the necessary constant care that he required. 
 
If Jim had received constant care following his first surgery 
on December 2, 1998, he would not have had to have a 
second surgery and the lengthy recovery period that 
followed. 
 
I hired Total Care Nursing on December 7th, 1998 when 
Jim was a patient in the Pasqua Hospital facing his second 
surgery within one week because of negligent supervision. 
 
Upon discharge to the Hammond unit of Pioneer Village 
which did not provide constant care, I understandably 
continued with the services of Total Care Nursing as I was 
not about to see Jim placed in another unsafe situation 
where he was at high risk of re-injuring his ankle causing 
permanent damage. 
 

And now I’d like to read from a letter from Dr. Kendal of May 
15 . . . or pardon me, of November 7, 2000. And I’m reading 
from Dr. Kendal’s letter: 
 

I have read very carefully the letter from the Associate 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1963 

 

Minister of Health dated September 7, 2000, which was 
directly copied to you. I interpret Ms. Junor’s letter to say 
that if one-on-one care for any patient in a hospital is 
ordered by a physician, it will be provided. If this claim is 
valid, it remains unclear to me if a physician can issue such 
an order with an expectation that it will be honoured, even 
when it seems clear that such care could safely be provided 
outside a hospital environment. 
 
For the benefit of future patients who may find themselves 
in the unique circumstances that your brother faced, I 
believe this policy needs to be clarified. I have written to 
Judy Junor asking that she accept responsibility for 
clarification of this policy, and for possible modification of 
current policy. 
 
I have copied this correspondence to the Regina Health 
District and also to the Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations, so the policy clarification may be 
disseminated system-wide. 

 
Mr. Minister, has this policy been clarified and the policy 
changed to reflect the same? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The department has discussed this with 
the Regina Health District officials, and the policy has been 
clarified. 
 
Basically Saskatchewan Health has no program to compensate 
individuals for private nursing services that they hire in 
situations where they are advised that it will not be paid for by 
Saskatchewan Health or by the district. And there is also no 
policy that requires the health districts to pay for such private 
services when families hire people. 
 
So Saskatchewan Health has told us that . . . Ms. Jackson . . . 
they will not be paying the payment for the private nursing 
services that they contracted. And my understanding is that the 
Regina district does not plan to pay for it either. 
 
The whole issue has been discussed thoroughly with Ms. 
Jackson and I’ve talked to her myself about it and basically said 
we will not be paying for the services. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
Hammond unit where Mr. Jackson resided had 13 residents 
with a staff of two special care aides during the day and one 
special care aide during the evening, making it impossible to 
provide Mr. Jackson the constant care he required. The family 
of Mr. Jackson feels very frustrated because of the lack of 
responsibility by the minister and by the Department of Health. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is how is the Hammond unit 
staff going to provide Mr. Jackson the constant care he 
required. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We’ve been advised by the Regina Health 
District staff that Jim Jackson was admitted to the Hammond 
unit at Pioneer Village after it was determined that he no longer 
required care in an acute care setting. And the health district 
staff also has advised us that their staff assessed that the 
Hammond unit staff could appropriately meet Mr. Jackson’s 
needs and that if it had been necessary to use any kind of a 

physical restraint as part of a care plan, professional 
management and supervision of Mr. Jackson while he was in 
the restraint would have been implemented based on provincial 
guidelines. 
 
The district staff also advises that their staff, both verbally and 
in writing, communicated to the Jackson family that the district 
would not be responsible for covering the additional costs of 
private nursing care should the Jacksons choose to hire such 
care, but rather that the family would be responsible for such 
costs. 
 
So this was what we’ve been advised. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, I would just like to quote from 
Mr. Erskine Sanderford, CMHA’s (Canadian Mental Health 
Association) director, a letter dated May 1 to Pat Atkinson who 
was then Minister of Health which states: 
 

Our association believes it is totally inappropriate to 
consider restraining mental health customers. This can lead 
to a great deal of fear on the person’s part and be 
counterproductive to care. We do not believe that any 
standard of care, which considers restraint applicable in 
these situations, is adequate or even modern and up to date. 

 
Mr. Minister, the family felt that they had no option but to hire 
private care because it was not . . . because constant care was 
not being provided to Mr. Jackson. My question to you, Mr. 
Minster, is why has Saskatchewan Health refused to reimburse 
the Jackson family for approximately $36,000 paid to Total 
Care Nursing Services for necessary constant care for their late 
brother, Mr. Jim Jackson, when this care was not available to 
them at the Pioneer Village which Mr. Jackson was moved to 
after being hospitalized? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The professionals who work for the 
Regina Health District assessed this patient and in their 
professional capacity made the decision that there was not a 
requirement for the private nursing staff. They told the Jacksons 
very clearly that if they wished to hire private nursing staff, 
they could do that, but they would have to pay for it themselves. 
They told them that verbally; they told them that in writing. 
And when the Jacksons did hire the staff, then the staff was 
allowed to be there — there wasn’t a problem with that. But it 
was very clear from the district that these extra people would 
not be paid for and that’s still the position of Saskatchewan 
Health. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would hope that 
you would look into this issue further yourself and verify 
whether this money should be paid to the Jackson family. This 
family is very frustrated and certainly are not willing to see this 
issue die. So I would hope that you would look into this further. 
 
I’d like to move on to another issue, Mr. Minister. I would like 
to ask you who commissioned the Omni plan for long-term 
care? And what was the purpose of this report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The Omni plan that you ask about was a 
study that was commissioned by four health districts, 
Battleford, Swift Current, South Central which is Weyburn 
area, North Central which is the Melfort area, along with 



1964 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation and 
Saskatchewan Health. Saskatchewan Health paid for the overall 
costs of the plan. The goal of the Omni plan was to assess the 
facilities in each of those four districts which were . . . had 
some ownership by SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) and basically the plan was to look at 
the long-term requirements of each of those areas. As the 
member would know we have announced the projects both in 
the . . . in Weyburn and in Melfort and those projects come out 
of the consultation with the local health districts and with 
SPMC and with the Department of Health. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, in light of this study, what is the 
minister’s plans for Souris Valley hospital in Weyburn? I’m 
talking about the structure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’ll give you a brief answer but you may 
wish to continue the questions of the minister of Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation because they own the Souris 
Valley structure. They have had or are continuing to have 
discussions with the community around other uses for this 
building. They have a formal process that they also will enter 
into when they deal with structures that no longer are being 
used for their original use, and I assume that at some point that 
process will start as well. But at this point, parts of it are still 
being used for some of the long-term care until the new 
long-term care facility is built in Weyburn. But as to the actual 
future of the structure, I think those questions would be more 
properly made of the Minister of SPMC. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, could you provide for me the 
reasoning for moving out of Souris Valley Hospital and 
building a new structure in Weyburn. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer to that is cost. 
When they looked at all of the long-term costs of trying to do 
renovations versus a new structure which was specifically built 
for the purposes that were required, the change was made by the 
committee working on this to go with a new facility because 
there were so many advantages to that. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well so that you’re 
aware, if you’re not already aware, there is great concern in the 
community of Weyburn about the closing of Souris Valley and 
how it’s going to be utilized. The building of a new facility 
which is going to cost somewhere between 17 to $20 million. 
And what we are going to have when this building is completed 
is a reduction of beds. Where we once had 300 beds in Souris 
Valley, we are now going to have 135 beds. It’s obviously 
going to mean a reduction in staff, which is very concerning to 
me because of the economic well-being of the individual 
workers as well as the economics for Weyburn and the 
surrounding area. It is also the plan to go to the Edam model 
which provides a totally different level of care for residents of 
Souris Valley. 
 
I have met with the staff on numerous occasions, and they are 
very unhappy with this level of care that’s going to be provided 
and find and believe that it is most inadequate for the residents 
that are housed in Souris Valley in Weyburn. I would like you 
to comment on the Edam model and how you see it being 

incorporated into Souris Valley in Weyburn. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The plans, as they are set out as far as the 
new building is concerned, do not dictate that it will go by the 
Edam model, or any specific model. There are options. The 
building will be structured in a way so that some of those kinds 
of decisions can be made as the project proceeds. 
 
I think the important point to note is that there are many people 
who have worked very hard at this project in the Weyburn area, 
and ultimately have come to the conclusion that the best way to 
provide for the long-term care is with a new facility. 
 
And we know that there has been some discussion in the 
community, but ultimately the best use of the finances as the 
local district board working together with the department has 
determined is to build this new facility, and that is what we 
have announced. And I saw that there are many people who are 
quite happy that we would proceed this way when I was down 
there for the official announcement. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. Minister, I 
would disagree with you that the model that will be used within 
Souris Valley can be determined as it goes along. Because the 
Edam model is built in such a way that it is in modules which 
are separate housing units. And once those are built and in 
place, there will be no option as to the type of care that is 
provided to the residents that will be in the new housing unit. 
 
And also I think that what should be of grave concern to this 
government is the job loss that is going to be incurred by going 
to this new model. It is my understanding that there will be a 
requirement of 1.5 FTEs (full-time equivalents) per module, 
and that is going to mean a great reduction in the amount of 
jobs in Weyburn, and also the level, the professionalism of the 
person required to fill those jobs. 
 
So I think it should be a huge concern to this government in 
light of the fact that we are losing jobs in many areas of our 
economy, and especially in the health care field. 
 
I’ll move on now, Mr. Minister, to another issue. My 
understanding is that this government is committed to providing 
adequate accessible health care no matter where we live in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, in light of this fact, I would like to talk to 
you about an issue that occurred in my constituency recently 
where a man was injured in a farm accident. His wife called 
911. He received central dispatch. Central dispatch relayed 
incorrect information. The people were en route to meet the 
ambulance. They required the use of cell service which was not 
available to them. 
 
When they reached the hospital the doctor had left in the 
ambulance, but upon the doctor coming back to the hospital was 
able to keep this person alive, and without the doctor’s care and 
attendance on the way to Regina hospital this person would not 
be alive today. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have inadequate health service . . . or cell 
service. We have a central dispatch which is not working 
properly in many cases. And we also are now moving towards 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1965 

 

reduction of health care services in rural Saskatchewan. And as 
we lose health care services and facilities we are going to lose 
even more doctors in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
What are you as Minister of Health doing in order to stop these 
inadequacies in rural Saskatchewan and provide adequate 
service to our residents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The specific case that you talk about, we 
don’t have any information about that particular case. But I 
think your question really relates to the plans that we will have 
for providing health care throughout the province. 
 
What we know is that we had an extensive study done of the 
emergency medical services last year and that study is now 
included in the discussion around the Fyke report. So we are 
looking at exactly the questions that you’ve raised about what 
will be the emergency services available? What will be the 
trauma services that are available? And how do all of these 
different pieces fit together? 
 
Clearly what we’re talking about is improving these services, 
not in any way diminishing them. And what we know is that 
many communities have said to us, we like the way our local 
emergency services are organized and how they connect with 
some of our regional and local facilities. 
 
And so we’re listening very carefully as we go to each part of 
the province. There are different solutions in different parts of 
the province. Our goal is to build on what local people have 
already to develop a better system. We also know if going back 
to my previous role as minister for SaskTel that the digital 
coverage in this province is probably as widespread as in any 
province in the country. Part of it has to do with our geography 
and no natural barriers, but there also is the goal to continue to 
expand the coverage for the province. And all of these things 
take resources and allocation of those resources in the places 
where there’s the highest use, and that is continuing. But clearly 
the goal is to provide good medical services, emergency 
services right across the province and a system that deals with 
the kinds of incidents that you talked about. 
 
Ms. Bakken: —Mr. Minister, I heard you mention that it is the 
government’s objective to provide cell service, adequate cell 
service where there is the highest use. 
 
I would like to say to you that where we need cell service the 
most is in the remote areas of rural Saskatchewan because they 
are the people that do not have health care at their fingertips. 
They are the ones that rely on this service the most. And so I 
would hope that it would be this government’s commitment — 
which I believe that they have been committed to for several 
years but have not fulfilled their commitment — to provide 
adequate cell service in remote areas of Saskatchewan to give 
some security to those people that do not have the services that 
we enjoy in urban Saskatchewan. 
 
These are the same areas that lost their health services or had 
them greatly reduced when 52 hospitals were closed some years 
ago. And so I would hope that this government would take that 
into consideration when they’re looking at where they’re going 
to provide an upgrading of cell service. 
 

Mr. Minister, just further on the whole issue of the EMS 
(emergency medical services) report. It is my understanding and 
from reading the Fyke report, that Mr. Fyke has endorsed the 
EMS report. And if this government is going to carry forward 
with that, his objective was to take away local control and to 
move the control to centralization. 
 
Is that the view of this minister, and is that your plan to 
introduce central control and take control away from local 
constituencies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer to the member’s 
question is that the department and Mr. Fyke for that matter 
support the thrust of the EMS report which is to have a better, 
broader service that works in a coordinated fashion with the 
good things that are already there and brings up the standards 
right across the province. 
 
And so I think the answer to your question is that we are going 
to work to build a better system, but we’re going to listen 
carefully to what the local communities have to say. And so 
those parts of any kind of report that talk about stepping in and 
taking over different parts, that’s not what the plan is. But we 
are listening carefully because in certain parts of the province 
the coordination directly into the health district works well. 
Other parts, contracting works well, and we want to build on the 
things that are working. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, I am glad to hear that because 
there is great concern in rural areas that the hard work and many 
dollars that they have raised to support their local ambulance 
services are going to be lost. There’s a great deal of mistrust 
because of what happened when hospitals were closed and local 
dollars were taken from local communities, and people are very 
concerned that this is going to happen again. 
 
And I agree with you that in some areas there is need for 
improvement, but in many of the areas they have a very well 
run and well equipped ambulance service, and I would hope 
that your government would continue to take that into account 
and let these local communities retain local control and run 
their own ambulance service. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would now like to ask a question about health 
districts. It is my understanding from some of our members that 
the funding has been cut to their local health districts. I would 
like to know if this is common across the piece or if this is 
isolated case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — To the member, there were no districts 
that received a decrease in this year’s budget. All health 
districts received an increase. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well my 
understanding is that the Southwest Health District is one that 
did receive a . . . that did have a decrease of 1.2 to 1.5 per cent 
in funding. And if you would care to verify that, if you can’t 
tonight, that’s fine, but if you would, or do you have the 
information now? 
 
(21:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I have the information here to answer 



1966 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

your question. And basically the funding for — was it the 
southeast or the southwest? — Southwest District, last year the 
restated funding after they had the money paid in for their 
deficit, was 12,088,658. Their funding for this year in the 
budget is 12,988,995, an increase of $900,000 or 7.45 per cent. 
And this does not include the money that relates to collective 
bargaining. So they actually have one of the highest increases in 
this year. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I will check that out. 
If that is indeed the way it is, I was misinformed by my 
colleague and I asked this question on his behalf. So I apologize 
if we misrepresented the facts. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would just like to go back for a moment. When 
we were speaking about the Omni plan and that study, would it 
. . . I would like to have a copy of that. Would you be willing to 
table that report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Just before I answer your specific 
question, I commiserate with the member who obviously got 
her question from the member from Swift Current who we 
know has a great deal of difficulty with numbers, so you may 
want to check that out with him. 
 
But as it relates to the Omni plan, we have one copy in the 
department. And the districts may have more copies than we do, 
and it’s quite big. But we can make arrangements to get a copy 
to you if you would like, but we don’t have it right now. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And just for 
clarification, it was not the member from Swift Current, it was 
the member from Thunder Creek . . . or the member from . . . 
oh, I can’t even think of his name. Anyhow, it wasn’t the 
member from Swift Current. So it wasn’t because he can’t add 
or whatever. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have another question about the emergency 
department, in specific the Regina General Hospital. But I 
believe that the emergency wards are taxed to the limit across 
this province. And we brought this issue up about the need for 
somehow to move people through the emergency department. 
And one of the gravest concerns and the reason that we have 
such a backlog in emergency is because of a lack of beds on the 
wards to move people out of emergency that are ready to be 
moved out. 
 
It was interesting to me that when the health district was 
questioned about this, that they said this only happened, you 
know, it was a very isolated case that this happened. My 
information from nurses that work on the emergency ward at 
the Regina General Hospital that this is not an isolated case and 
that it happens almost daily. And there is grave concern about 
patient care, about the stress and strain on nursing staff and 
their co-workers. And I would like to know what the minister’s 
plans are to alleviate this problem, especially in light of the fact 
that we’re now going into holiday time and we’re going to have 
even less staff and probably less beds available. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. In response 
to the member’s question, there are a number of factors that are 
involved. But basically with emergency medical services, and I 
think as explained by one of the senior people at the Regina 

Health District, there are often peaks in demand that do cause 
certain times of the year and maybe of the week to have greater 
demands on the emergency wards. But what we know is that the 
Regina Health District is trying to manage these pressures and 
they do that. 
 
But also one of the issues is the use by the public of emergency 
wards as a place where they can go in for the kinds of medical 
advice that maybe they should be getting by going to their 
family doctors or to some of the other walk-in clinics. So I 
know within the Regina Health District they are trying to 
educate the patients about when things should be going to the 
emergency and when things should go to one of the clinics or to 
the family doctor. So that’s one aspect to it. 
 
Another aspect is clearly the full pressure on the numbers of 
nurses that are available within the system. And that’s a 
national concern. We know that in other parts of the country 
this is even a greater problem than it is here. And what we’re 
obviously doing is quite a few of the things that we talked about 
last time in Estimates around the nursing profession and 
attempting to retain these people, recruit new people. Also there 
is a study that’s ongoing right now around the workload issues 
for nurses that’s being done within the Regina Health District 
together with SRNA and SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) 
and the Department of Health. 
 
And all of these kinds of issues attempt to address the question 
that the member has raised. But clearly any time that there is a 
overload in one of the emergency wards, it creates pressure 
throughout the whole system and the district is looking at how 
do we prevent this the next time that it’s going to happen. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well this is an 
ongoing problem and I think the minister should be aware, if 
he’s not, that this is an almost a daily occurrence in emergency 
wards especially in our cities. And I would hope that something 
would be done to address this serious situation, not only for the 
nurses and the support staff that work in these situations but 
especially for the people of Saskatchewan that are put in very, 
very unsafe and unhealthy situations daily because of the 
inadequate service they receive in emergency wards across the 
province. 
 
At this time, Mr. Minister, I will turn it back to my colleague 
from Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Minister. I 
would like to continue on with the theme of the EMS general 
report. 
 
Minister, in the EMS report they addressed a number of issues 
and I think that there has been some discussion, and you’ve 
alluded to this report and the fact that it’s going to be studied in 
terms of your ongoing look at the Fyke Commission, etc. And 
I’m sure you’re also aware of the response that the 
Saskatchewan EMS development project I gave through 
SEMSA (Saskatchewan Emergency Medical Services 
Association) to your office I believe. At least they released this 
report in terms of their response to the original report by Mr. 
Keller and Mr. Cross. 
 
Minister, there’s a couple of issues in there that I’d like to talk 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1967 

 

about and touch on a bit. First of all I think that in some of the 
discussions that I’ve heard in the EMS report is they talk about 
the idea of part-time, on call, or the fact that there isn’t 24/7 
coverage in many jurisdictions. And there seems to be a 
predisposition towards 24/7 is only really being considered to 
be in place if it’s a full-time person sort of sitting on duty the 
whole time. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say that in many of the smaller centres, in 
fact maybe the majority of them, there is 24/7 coverage even 
though it might be being done by volunteers. In almost every 
instance that I’m aware of the volunteer that is on call is on call 
24/7, and they might be indeed working in the co-op store in 
their local community, but when their beeper goes off because 
there’s an emergency they have arrangements so they can leave 
their place of work and attend to that call immediately, and so 
that service is available. 
 
Secondarily if they are in the evening time frame they’re on call 
as well and so when the emergency comes in they’re down at 
the location of the ambulance immediately and are dispatched. 
 
So it sort of sounds when I talk to people that there’s many 
people, SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations) people, people across the province who are 
saying this EMS report is going to deal with the issue the fact 
that there isn’t 24 hour/7 day a week coverage in this province 
and I want to sort of dispel the myth that that’s the truth. There 
is 24/7 and it is being provided not only with full-time 
professionals but also with the part-time people that are 
volunteering in communities. 
 
And I would ask the minister if he would agree with that 
assessment about the level of 24/7 coverage that we have in this 
province currently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer is yes. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I see we’re getting near the end of the day. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Minister. and I think that’s important to have 
on the record because I didn’t want the impression that this is 
not being covered. 
 
Minister, as well, another . . . a couple of important 
considerations in the response that I think need to be talked 
about, and that is some system that would deal with the cost of 
ambulance rates and things of that nature. As you’re aware, 
there is sort of a sliding rate scale; I’m trying to find it. I think 
this is it. As of February 1, 2001, the ambulance rate structure 
goes from a basic fee high of $250 and a low of $75; kilometre 
fee, a high of 225 and a low of 75; and waiting times, a high of 
$100 and a low of $40 per hour. 
 
And, Minister, I think that the concern is, is that there’s a great 
deal of difference in terms of what costs are actually incurred 
by an individual to access the ambulance system, is very much 
dependent on where you physically live in the province. If 
you’re more remote to a Saskatoon or Regina health facility, 
you could end up with an ambulance bill in excess of $1,000 to 
be transported, where if you’re right in the major centre that is 
different. 
 

And I want to ask you, Minister, one of the recommendations 
is, is that there’s a standardized set of ambulance fees that are 
charged. They might be on a break-even point of view or they 
might actually be on a different point of view. But are you 
considering the idea of an equalized ambulance fee, no matter 
where you live in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Clearly, some system of equalized rates is 
the goal that we have for the health system. I mean, basically 
we want to make sure that people aren’t in some way treated 
unequally ultimately in how they enter into the health system. 
But one of the difficulties is there are many different ways to 
achieve that particular goal, whether it’s setting flat rates or 
whether it’s setting some kind of standardized system. And so 
that’s under discussion. It’s part of our overall discussion. But 
clearly the goal is to move to some way so that people will be 
charged a similar rate. Or ultimately, if we have the resources, 
that that would not be a cost that our citizens would have to 
bear. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I think it certainly 
speaks to the accessibility of health care services no matter 
where you are in the province, and that’s important. 
 
As well, Minister, there are a number of recommendations in 
their report, and I won’t go into all the details of them, but first 
of all, and one of the most important things in their response I 
felt, was that they recommend the establishment of a provincial 
ambulance advisory committee and that this committee would 
be tasked to deal with changes of policies, to deal with 
standards, standards like the qualifications of EMTs 
(emergency medical technician) and paramedics, the 
qualifications and the criteria for the actual physical ambulance 
replacement that they would develop strategies of, you know, 
determining locations for strategic placement of ambulances, 
ambulance replacement policies, and all of these issues related 
to the EMS system. 
 
And I’m wondering, Minister, have you given consideration to 
the recommendation by SEMSA that there be a provincial 
ambulance advisory committee established? 
 
(21:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — To the member, and that specific question 
around a provincial ambulance advisory committee, at this point 
within the department we’re looking at Fyke’s broader 
suggestions and some of the broader issues. And so that very 
specific suggestion is one of the possible options that we’re 
looking at around this whole area. But practically we’re at this 
stage looking at some of the broader questions rather than the 
specific ones that are set out in the SEMSA suggestions. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Then would you 
explain to me how the whole EMS piece is going to fit into this 
broader discussion because I think the whole issue of 
emergency access and, you know, access to regional facilities or 
whatever may be all part of that broader discussion. But you’re 
still going to have to focus it down to deal with the 
recommendations in that EMS report in the first instance and 
how this is all going to fit together. 
 
So how are the issues that are addressed in both the EMS report 



1968 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

and in SEMSA’s response going to be addressed in this big 
picture methodology that you’re establishing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Basically what we’re going to do is look 
at the broader question of access to the health system and how 
that happens depending on where you are in the province or 
what requirements there are for transfer from one place or one 
facility in the province to another facility. And some of those 
broader questions we’re looking at will then allow us to respond 
more specifically to the EMS report and to the SEMSA report. 
 
They have many good suggestions in there about how this can 
work, how we can build on some of the volunteer systems, 
some of the private systems and some of the district-run 
systems. All of those pieces I think need to be affirmed for the 
good things that they’re doing, and then take some of their 
suggestions about how they can be improved and possibly 
coordinated and that’s how we will proceed. But at this stage 
we’re looking at a broader question about how the access to the 
whole system will take place and at what point do we start with 
the pubic funds paying for the costs. And as I said before, if we 
had the resources it would be right at the start so that there 
wouldn’t be a cost to our citizens. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, I’d like 
to move on to another topic now. I know the hour is getting on, 
but I think it’s important that we have this opportunity to cover 
as many of the topics as we can. 
 
The topic I’d like to discuss is now is the Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network or SHIN as it’s been known. And, 
Minister, I believe . . . and in this pile of papers I have on my 
desk, I’ve kind of lost it, but I believe that there is something in 
the magnitude of $10 million that’s budgeted this year for SHIN 
(Saskatchewan Health Information Network). Can you tell me 
Minister what is envisaged in terms of this year’s expenditure 
and this year’s program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, to the member, the department is 
adding $10.6 million to SHIN and the projects that are going to 
be worked on this year include integrated system 
implementation. This project involves the configuration training 
and implementation of a new system solution to support 
improved service delivery across many acute and home care 
program areas in the five mid-size health districts using 
consistent standards and interfaces to the other districts. So in 
other words it’s setting a common standard for the five mid-size 
health districts and allowing some integration with these 
districts, but also I think in connection to obviously the larger 
districts where some of the tertiary care is provided. 
 
Secondary where money is going to is a provider registry. And 
SHINs going to work closely with the western provinces on a 
shared system solution so that health providers can be 
consistently identified. This will facilitate future systems 
integration across districts to support teamwork between the 
professionals in referring and treating patients. So basically if 
you have a registry of doctors and other health care providers 
with a clear, common method of identifying them, then the 
referrals can go much more quickly and the information can go 
much more quickly because they all have at least common 
addresses. 
 

The third area is the implementation of the Sunrise Clinical 
Manager pilot program in Saskatoon district. And this will 
implement the Sunrise Clinical Manager electronic health 
record software in the emergency room at St. Paul’s Hospital. 
This is a pilot project to evaluate this particular product. 
 
The next area is a lab database repository development. And 
this will use common interface standards being developed by all 
the western provinces so that we will have a provincial database 
for electronic reporting of lab results so that this will reduce 
delays in reporting and also reduce the duplication in testing. 
 
SHIN will also expand its health desk . . . help desk operation, 
which provides help desk services to 20 health districts at the 
present time. It’ll also work together with the CommunityNet 
implementation. This is working with the districts and SaskTel 
to implement the next phase of CommunityNet utilizing a PKI 
(public key infrastructure) infrastructure to provide the high 
levels of security that are required for health information. This 
is especially beneficial to many of the rural health delivery 
locations. 
 
Another part of this money will go to a centrally host and 
integrated solution, and this is implementing central-hosting 
technology throughout the whole SHIN network to support 
cost-effective implementation of the integrated systems solution 
to the five mid-sized health districts. So it’s related to the 
previous project. 
 
And then the final area is physician implementation. This will 
be working together with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association. SHIN is planning to pilot a centrally hosted system 
solution that delivers on-line services and assists physicians in 
providing enhanced patient cares. There’ll be about 75 
physicians both urban and rural who will be able to utilize these 
new technologies so that SHIN can assess how we can best 
support them in providing quality care. 
 
So basically these are all the different areas where this money is 
going to be used to expand the kinds of things that SHIN does. 
And we think that it’s money well-spent in addressing a number 
of issues that have arisen around the sharing of information and 
the network solutions that are available. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I can tell that 
you’re just anxious that we get into the technical details of all of 
these projects that you’ve outlined tonight. 
 
But, Minister, what I would ask you in general, are these 
projects being undertaken by way of contract with third-party 
agencies, or what is the methodology for implementing these 
programs? Has SHIN got their own staff, or what’s the structure 
in terms of implementing the programs you’ve outlined? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — To the member, SHIN has a small core of 
staff that does some of these things. Operational assistance is 
provided by SAIC (Science Applications International 
Corporation) on many of the issues. Some of the projects use 
existing software, and this software is then obtained through 
normal sort of request for proposal process. And then those 
proposals that are brought forward by a number of the 
commercial operations are assessed by the Department of 
Health officials, the SHIN officials, and the district officials. 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1969 

 

Also some of the services that SHIN requires can also be 
provided by some of the technical people available in 
Saskatchewan Health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, I think that is either a ringing 
endorsement, or they’re trying to wake you up. 
 
Minister, in these processes where you’re hiring other 
individuals, is there a bid process that’s published across the 
province, or how do people that are . . . the ones that are in the 
technical expertise across the province, are they able to make 
proposals and bid on them? Or how is that process awarded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — To the member, the various types of 
software that are purchased sometimes from the national, 
international firms often require local people to be involved in 
that process so there would be some people that way. 
 
But when there are projects that are capable of being tendered 
out, then they do go out and then they go basically on the 
national system because of the Agreement on Internal Trade in 
Canada. 
 
And so I guess the answer to your question is sometimes that 
those things go out in a way that have a broad, open advertising. 
Other times it’s purchase of specific project after consultation 
with the people who are going to use it and then some of the 
local people in Saskatchewan who are the technical support 
work on that project. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, in the 
programs or the projects that you’ve outlined in the $10.6 
million that’s allocated in this year’s budget moves us arguably 
forward at some measure towards the final completion and 
implementation of a whole medical integrated data transfer 
system. 
 
Has your department or has SHIN estimated what more needs 
to be done and what the time line is as when we’ll actually have 
a system? What level of development will the system be? Can 
you give us a forward projection of where we are going and 
how much more it’s likely to cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — To the member, this is really an on-going 
process. As the technology changes, as the requirements 
change, as the kinds of information that’s available changes, 
these things are assessed each year and addressed in a priority 
basis based on sort of the Health budget and working together 
with partners in the district health or for example, with the 
medical association. And so what we see is that this goal of 
providing and linking information together is something that’s 
crucial in many ways but it’s going to be a process that’s 
ongoing. 
 
(22:00) 
 
A good example of that is that a number of our people from 
Saskatchewan are part of the national initiative around a 
Canadian health information network. And what we’re finding 
is that many of the problems that we’ve tackled, and tried to 
solve in a very careful way with using our funds in a very 

efficient and smart way, provide information and solutions to 
some of the national questions. And in many ways we have 
come up with some solutions that other places are looking for. 
 
So what we’re doing here in this whole area is continuing to 
work with the partners to move towards development of the 
sharing of the information in a way that protects the privacies of 
the patient but also serves the medical system well. And each 
year with new technology, with new information available, the 
definition of what is the solution changes as well. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Can you tell me when 
we started on the SHIN project and how much we have spent on 
it to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The amount that’s been spent up until 
March 31 of 2001, the end of the last fiscal year, was $38.7 
million; and then there’s this money of 10.10 million this year. 
And basically what was envisioned in 1997 when we started has 
had to adjust with the changes in technologies as we know 
certain kinds of things have become much cheaper, but another 
side, there has been other kinds of information that people have 
requested be included in the system. And one of the things that 
we are doing in Saskatchewan is being very careful to proceed 
in a measured fashion so that we don’t follow what’s happened 
with some of our neighbouring provinces where a lot of money 
has not been used all that fruitfully. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Yes, thank you, Minister. So we are up to 
around $50 million since we started. The question is I guess is 
that I appreciate the fact that it’s changing and evolving, but 
somewhere down the line you say we’re going to anticipate in 
three years and another $30 million, or whatever it is, that we’re 
going to have the basic operating structure in all our health 
districts or we’re not. Is it going to take another $50 million? Is 
this just a black hole that’s going to be an ongoing thing that 
every year we hear about new projects that are costing $10 
million and we’re no further away than implementing five 
mid-sized districts as a trial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — To the member, the first three years of 
SHIN has focused on creating a central network infrastructure, 
defining the information technology priorities within the health 
system, assisting all the districts to meet the Year 2000 issues 
and then implementing the first activities. 
 
I would say to the member that of the $10 million, $10.6 
million that’s in this year’s budget, approximately half of that 
relates to just operating what we’ve already built and then the 
other half relates to some new developments. 
 
But basically the things that have happened in the first three 
years include designing the central infrastructure for the whole 
network, including the sophisticated security features, the 
hosting capacity, the test lab, and then the integrated supports 
centre. We have also developed the help desk and all of the 
e-mail services to an increasing number of districts and then 
worked with them to make sure that all of those districts had 
Year 2000 compliant technology so that they could connect into 
this system. 
 
To date, the SHIN network links 27 health care organizations 
and 360 pharmacies. It provides help desk services to eight 



1970 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

health districts, the College of Physicians and Surgeons, the 
Department of Family Medicine, about 1,145 different users. 
 
SHIN also hosts seven different applications for various health 
care organizations. 
 
One of the projects that’s ongoing is developing a pilot network 
servicing the Southwest Health District which links 130 staff in 
physicians’ offices, in health centres, in hospitals, and the labs 
so that the information can be shared very quickly. This is a 
pilot project, and many of the bugs are being worked out there 
with the plan that that would then move on to other districts. 
 
There’s been a project with SHIN of integrating the provincial 
pharmacy network into SHIN so that we’ll improve services 
and reduce costs. So more than 360 rural and urban pharmacies 
are receiving support services; 180 urban pharmacies are 
connected by the SHIN network via high-speed network 
connections which means information obviously in much larger 
amounts can travel much more quickly. 
 
SHIN has been involved with implementing an electronic 
postpartum record in the Prince Albert Health District which is 
e-mailed from the hospital to the public health nurse. This 
allows then the public nurse to have the information 
immediately about new mothers and newborn children so that 
they can do the follow up much more quickly. 
 
SHIN has also been involved in transferring CT (computerized 
tomography) scan images over the SHIN network from Prince 
Albert down to Saskatoon when they refer to Saskatoon. And 
this reduces duplicate testing, and it’s obviously a pilot project 
for broader use. 
 
We’re also supporting a provincial physician registry and 
further automation of the triplicate program for the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons as it relates to double doctoring 
around drugs. 
 
And we’re also supporting the implementation of an assessment 
tool for long-term care facilities through a computer system. 
And as stated before, we’re assisting Saskatoon District Health 
in implementing the Sunrise Clinical Manager which is an 
electronic health record software into the emergency room at St. 
Paul’s Hospital. 
 
So those are some of the things that have happened over the 
first three years of operation. As I said before, as new 
challenges arise there are new requests that are put forward. 
SHIN works very closely with the technical people within the 
Department of Health and also with all of the districts and the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons and the pharmacists in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, that was a very comprehensive 
recap of what we’re doing for the $40 million and what we’re 
going to do for the 10.6. 
 
The question is, more specifically, how long will it take before 
all of the doctors in this province are connected to all of the 
health facilities in the province? How long will it be before we 
can digitally send X-ray or mammogram material from one 
jurisdiction to another, to a radiologist or whatever? When is 

the system going to be running up to at least its promised 
minimum capacity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That’s not an easy question to answer. But 
what I would say is that the rollout of the CommunityNet across 
the province and the Saskatchewan Health’s participation in 
that program is to further develop the ability for this rollout to 
go right over the whole province in exactly the way that you 
talk about, which is that the positions will work and be able to 
transfer their information back and forth. And what we know is 
that there are different parts of the system where that’s working 
now. 
 
Interestingly enough, the federal government’s budget, which 
includes $500 million for the Canadian health information 
work, is a part of what’s happening about building some 
common standards across the country. 
 
And so one of the reasons that we’re not moving quite as 
quickly as we might in some of these areas is that we don’t 
want to build a standard here in Saskatchewan that is out of 
sync with other provinces so that when we get there the 
information we have won’t connect in other places. 
 
Because of the work that we’ve done in Saskatchewan, as I’ve 
said before in a very careful, effective way, our people within 
Saskatchewan Health and at SHIN are actually some of the 
leadership in the whole country on designing the common 
standards because we’ve asked many of the questions that need 
to be asked. 
 
And so we’re hopeful that some of those decisions around the 
common standards will be made soon so that then we can focus 
our attention in building the network across the province. 
 
As far as the digital information that can be transferred, we 
know that some districts have that ability now and have made 
arrangements to connect with some of the networks that are 
available. And we’re obviously working together with those 
districts, and continuing to evaluate which systems work most 
effectively and which ones don’t. But there are some situations 
now where digital images, especially in the radiology side, are 
able to be transferred and analyzed by somebody in a central 
location out to some of the rural areas. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I can see where I’m 
not going to have enough time this night to get you to actually 
say that it’s going to be in three years or four years or five years 
and it’s going to cost X number of dollars. 
 
But in this indeterminate future when we have medical records 
that we’ll be able to transfer electronically across the province, I 
want to talk about sort of the issue of who owns those records 
and the issues surrounding privacy of those records. 
 
I would assume if I’m a client in this distant or indeterminate 
future, that I go into my local general practitioner, family 
physician, and by my presence at that office I then authorize 
him, if you like, to open my record, and access my record, and 
add tests to it or annotations to it. Likewise, if he sends me for 
some lab test and things of that nature, by my presence and 
presenting myself at that location, I am giving permission for 
those people to add those technical data, etc., to my record, etc. 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1971 

 

What I would like to do is to ask you, Minister, have you 
established a protocol as to how the records, the health records, 
of an individual client are going to be preserved, and how 
accessibility is going to be identified, and what that process is 
going to look like in this indeterminate future when the system 
is actually working? 
 
(22:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — To the member. On the technical side, we 
have the systems in place that provide the security that’s 
required around this information. But the more difficult 
question relates to the health information, and the privacy of 
that information, and how does one deal with personal 
information that belongs to a patient in a system. 
 
And this is a matter of debate on a national basis to try to set a 
protocol that would work across our country. It’s also even a 
bigger debate in the United States where you have so many 
private health insurance companies that work in that system, 
and how is the patient information get treated when it’s owned 
by a private company, or is it owned by a private company — 
all of those kinds of issues. 
 
One of the solutions that’s being discussed does relate to the 
consent of the patient about the use of information about them 
and how much information will be used about them. One of the 
basic tenets is that if you want to get the best advice from health 
providers who are using your information, then probably the 
best thing for you to do is to give total, open use of your 
medical information. And so what is happening now is that 
there is this exact debate. Our policy will be to design a system 
that recognizes that balance between the privacy of the patient 
but also the clear desire of a patient to get the best medical help 
possible and therefore share as much information as possible 
with the professionals who are providing the advice. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think I hear you 
saying that this is a work in progress, and I think that’s true, and 
it’s particularly important that we don’t go up to some blind 
alley, that we find that what we’ve developed and all the hard 
work we’ve done is really incompatible with what’s happening 
in Canada and in North America. And I think that that caution 
would be one that I would share with you and certainly support 
you on in terms of being careful about it. 
 
The other thing is though I think that it also is important that we 
put pressure or at least some impetus on the colleagues in other 
jurisdictions to get this work underway because I think 
everyone recognizes that this is a very important component of 
being able to really have a good health care system into the 
future. 
 
The portability and transferability and accuracy and all of those 
issues surrounding medical records is a very important one, and 
indeed in our next meeting I want to talk about the cancer 
agency and radiology and mammograms and things of that 
nature, and data transfer is a very important part of those whole 
programs. And so I think it’s important that we do our very best 
to make sure that we can use the technology to get that imaging 
data to the technical expertise that we need because it might not 
be in Saskatoon or Regina. Indeed the world is getting very 
much integrated in this way. And so if we’re going to get the 

very best advice and the very best radiologists reading some of 
these tests, it is important that we have the electronic support 
system in place. So I indeed would encourage you to make sure 
that this moves forward in a timely fashion. 
 
Minister, a colleague from Cannington has a couple of 
questions before we close this evening, but as this will be my 
last opportunity to talk to you this evening and to your officials, 
thank you for being here for two fairly long hours and covering 
a great deal of questions. I found that your answers were very 
useful and I appreciate it. Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister and 
officials, I’d like to welcome you here this evening. What I 
have been receiving over the last while is a number of letters 
from the people of southeast Saskatchewan concerned about 
health care. And I would like to read to you the letter and some 
of the comments they have made to them. And then I’ll table 
the letter and hopefully you will get the chance to see who has 
been sending these letters. 
 
The letter reads: 
 

Dear Sir: 
 

As a Saskatchewan taxpayer I’m very concerned about the 
possible closure of our hospital, Redvers, as well as the 
possible reduction in ambulance services in our 
community. If this in fact occurred it would present a major 
blow to an otherwise thriving community. Redvers and the 
surrounding district is presently serviced by a privately 
built hospital (1998) supplying a full spectrum of medical 
services. 

 
In fact, when that hospital was opened, Mr. Minister, the 
associate minister of Health at the time, the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast — no, Saskatoon Eastview it was — came 
down and did the grand opening of that new facility, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I carry on with the letter: 
 

Due to the presence of this hospital, the community is 
attractive to retiring seniors as well as younger families 
who are relying on excellent medical care. Redvers and the 
surrounding areas are agricultural communities who do not 
rely on any secondary industry to contribute to its 
economic well-being. Closing our hospital would 
negatively affect hundreds of families in this area. The loss 
of the hospital service would cause a chain reaction. School 
enrolment would drop. Job loss and population decline as 
families leave the area. 
 
The Redvers hospital services one of the area’s largest 
employers on a daily basis, the Redvers Activity Centre. 
The centre cares and provides for 35 severely mentally 
disabled individuals who require immediate medical 
expertise on a regular basis. Longer ambulance travel time 
in a distant health care would severely affect the well-being 
of these individuals. The hospital also serves the White 
Bear First Nation located in the area. 
 
A few major concerns I have with the closure of our 



1972 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

hospital is the all-out demise of rural Saskatchewan and 
how can the urban centre satisfactorily handle our medical 
needs when they cannot meet them now? Nurses from rural 
areas will not leave their families to work in the larger 
centres. 
 
The Redvers hospital was built with private funds by 
people who believe that rural Saskatchewan is a great place 
to live and raise their families. Hospital closure and 
ambulance service reduction to our community would be 
devastating and unfair. 
 
The Fyke report speaks of a team approach and a change of 
attitude. We already have the team and our attitude speaks 
for itself. 

 
They also included a quote, Mr. Minister, from Justice Emmett 
Hall in the letter, and I’ll read that. 
 

Our proudest achievement in the well-being of Canadians 
has been in asserting that illness is burden enough in itself. 
Financial ruin must not compound it. That is why medicare 
has been called a sacred trust and we must not allow that 
trust to be betrayed. 
 

Well, Mr. Minister, this particular letter that I read from was 
signed by the Redvers Centennial Haven auxiliary — a Naomi 
Olsen, Jeannine Gaudet, Simone Quenelle, Jean Lemieux, 
Denise Rousell, Myrna Pedersen, Aline Vinck, and Marion 
Jorgensen. These people, Mr. Minister, as you can tell, are very 
concerned about the future of health care in their communities 
just as members and people across Saskatchewan whether you 
live in a small town such as Redvers, a larger community such 
as Melville or Swift Current or Moose Jaw, or if you live in our 
major urban centres, Regina and Saskatoon. People have a great 
deal of concern about their access to health care and what kind 
of service and treatment they’re going to receive when they get 
to that health care centre. 
 
A number of the people, Mr. Minister, also included more 
personal comments when they signed their letters, Mr. Minister. 
This one says: 
 

We appreciate our doctor and nurses, our nurses and staff, 
our hospital. Don’t take it away from us, please. 
 

This one says: 
 

Please have a little compassion for us rural people and 
reject the Fyke report. Let us keep our hospitals and 
ambulance services. 
 

They also note on here that they sent the same letter to the 
Premier. 
 
This one says: 
 

Can you imagine if we have to drive to Brandon or Regina 
with one of the kids for a simple ear infection? Take a day 
off work just to do it. 
 

Another one: 
 

I have a sister-in-law who lives in Redvers and I hope the 
hospital stays there for her sake and many others — we 
need it. 
 
We cannot imagine Redvers without a hospital, doctors, 
and staff. That is a very busy, important part of a life in 
Redvers we cannot do without. 
 
As rural citizens of Saskatchewan we should be entitled to 
access equal medical care in our area as urban people do in 
theirs. We should not be made to travel hours just because 
of where we live. In some instances this could mean the 
difference between life and death. 

 
This is a particularly interesting one, Mr. Minister. It comes 
from Irwin and Mary Hainsworth. 
 

If it hadn’t been for our hospital in Redvers last November, 
Irwin wouldn’t be here to tell about it. Also Dr. Pesenti took 
very good care of him. 

 
And this one, Mr. Minister, affects a family with an accident 
that just occurred less than a month ago, Carmen and Franklin 
Toms: 
 

We know from personal experience of the loss of our son 
Robbie as to how important our hospital and ambulance 
services are to us. 

 
So, Mr. Minister, these people are very concerned. They have 
expressed their concern by sending letters which I would like to 
table now and hopefully, Mr. Minister, you will either get a 
copy or at least the addresses. 
 
No I wasn’t going to read all of them, although I know the 
minister would stay here until 3 this morning if he had to. 
We’ve actually done that although that was with a different 
minister at the time, Louise Simard. Not going to make him do 
that tonight. 
 
But the people of the Redvers and area community have 
expressed a great deal of concern about the future of their 
hospital. I was talking to one of the ladies in Redvers this 
afternoon and she was telling me that they have made seven 
submissions to come and make presentations to the Standing 
Committee on Health dealing with the Fyke report. 
 
They haven’t received a response yet whether they will be 
allowed to make that many separate presentations and to what 
times or when they would be allowed to do that. But I think 
that’s an indication of the concern they have. 
 
There was a meeting held down in Redvers just before the end 
of April and this is the Redvers New Optimist, April 30, and the 
headline is, “Fyke report not received well with over 500 
people.” Oh the minister has a copy of it. 
 
People showed up there, Mr. Minister, and had a lot to say. 
They certainly weren’t very happy with Mr. Fyke and they 
weren’t very happy with the government looking at Mr. Fyke’s 
report. I’d like to quote a little bit from what the chairman of 
the Moose Mountain Health District had to say: 
 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1973 

 

Allan Arthur, chairman of the Moose Mountain Health 
District explained that if the recommendations of the Fyke 
report were adopted the nearest acute care facility would be 
150 kilometres away. Without acute care beds medical staff 
would leave, he said. 

 
I think most people in Saskatchewan would feel that 150 
kilometres away from their nearest acute care facility is much 
too far. Now I’m sure that if you suggested to somebody in any 
of our cities that it would be acceptable for them to be 150 
kilometres away from their nearest hospital they would be up in 
arms. So you can understand why the people in rural 
Saskatchewan are also feeling that very same thing. 
 
Also some interesting quotes, Mr. Minister, from the doctor in 
the area. Dr. Jaco Greyling is a physician who works at the 
facility and he said: 
 

I think we have made a difference in helping people who 
are acutely ill. I can think of cases where it would have 
been life and death if the patient had not had access to the 
health services within an hour of when they did. 

 
Dr. Greyling said: 
 

A doctor without a hospital, x-rays, laboratories, and 
without a pharmacy is no better than any primary care 
worker. It would be frustrating for a doctor to work without 
auxiliary medical services — a doctor not able to admit 
patients to relieve physical needs, to get x-rays, would be a 
frustrating job. Doctors will leave. In that way, they are 
going to kill rural Saskatchewan. 

 
So I think you can tell, Mr. Minister, that the people, especially 
in Redvers, but not just in Redvers, in my own constituency, 
whether it be in Wawota, in Carlyle, in Arcola, neighbouring 
communities like Kipling are very, very interested in retaining 
their acute care facilities. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I guess my question to you: what assurances, 
what kind of calming effect can you supply to the people of 
Saskatchewan that their medical services will indeed be there, 
available for them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think that to answer your question 
to start off, I would quote quite a famous person from your part 
of the country. And here is what he said. He said: 
 

We are all equally important, no matter where we live. It is 
up to each and every one of us to step forward to make sure 
that our health care services continue. 

 
And basically that’s a statement that I agree with, and I would 
like to attribute it to the member opposite. This is what he said 
at the public meeting on April 25 down in that community that 
he was talking about. 
 
And I think that’s a pretty good summary of what it is that 
we’re doing right now when we talk about the whole health 
system for the province. What we’re saying is we have some 
challenges that relate to our whole system, but we have to work 
at it together to figure out what the solution is. 
 

(22:30) 
 
One of the things that we know — and we have to start from 
what we know — is that in many parts of the province people 
have sorted out and come to some very good accommodations 
around providing services for the people in their area. And what 
we want to do is build on these kinds of services that people 
have developed and provide better care and the kind of care that 
is accessible across the province. So the only way we can do 
that is by working with the people in the local communities. 
 
Earlier today I was out in the community of Moosomin, and 
basically had a similar discussion with the people there about 
providing care in that whole eastern side of the province. And 
the questions that you’ve raised obviously continue the 
discussion just a little further south in that part of the province. 
 
And I think the important point to remember is that we have to 
work together with the health providers — with the doctors, and 
the nurses, and the technical people, with all of the support staff 
throughout the hospitals. We have to work with the 
communities, the health district boards, and we have to design 
the kinds of solutions that will provide the day-to-day care that 
people need as well as providing the specialist care when some 
of the emergencies arise. 
 
And that’s the task that we’re doing through our Standing 
Committee on Health. It’s the task that we’re about within the 
department, working together with the districts and local 
people, and that’s the task that we’re going to continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I can tell that 
your partisans are trying to keep the fervour going there. But, 
Mr. Minister, the people in Redvers have provided for their 
health care. They provided the entire amount of funding, over 
$2 million, to build a new acute care facility, which was opened 
by the past associate minister of Health in 1998. 
 
They now want to have the ability to keep that facility open. 
They have gone out and hired the doctors and retained the 
doctors. They continue to hire and provide for the nursing staff, 
the technical staff available in that facility that services 
southeast Saskatchewan. As an acute care, that hospital is the 
furthest east and the furthest south in Saskatchewan. Estevan is 
further south, but it’s more towards the west. 
 
So that is the hospital, Mr. Minister, between Estevan and 
Moosomin that you were talking about. There is certainly a 
need for that hospital in the area and the people there are very, 
very concerned about it. 
 
They’re also very concerned about their ambulance service. In 
fact I wish to relate to you a story that just occurred here about 
a week and a half ago. There was an accident just south of 
Redvers. They phoned 911. They contacted the local ambulance 
services directly. The family only lived about five miles from 
where the accident site occurred. They were notified after the 
ambulance was called. 
 
By the time they got there, the ambulance from Redvers was 
already on site. But it took another hour and a half for the Jaws 



1974 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

of Life to get there because the 911 service sent it to the wrong 
place. They had been informed where it was exactly, but 
nevertheless it was sent to the wrong location. So the person 
that was in this vehicle was left laying there trapped in the 
vehicle for an hour and a half. The ambulance crew could not 
get him out. So luckily that young man lived, but he was 
injured, not severely enough to threaten his life, but certainly 
that he’s going to be laid up for a while. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, while communities have provided these 
services for themselves, the centralized service that you’re 
trying to provide for them now with 911, I’m hearing too many 
occasions, Mr. Minister, where it’s not working. Anecdotally, I 
know of another situation. This happened in a metropolitan 
centre where the heart attack occurred in a commercial venue. 
They phoned 911 and the ambulance was sent to the same kind 
of venue in another city. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, the system isn’t working right yet and it’s 
causing problems. Luckily in both of these cases no deaths were 
the result of it. But, Mr. Minister, I think that there is still a 
need to retain some services at the local level because our fancy 
equipment just doesn’t cut it yet. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what kind of commitment can you make 
tonight to retain access to those services on a local level that 
people can continue to phone to contact the ambulance, the jaws 
of life in their own areas to get those there on time rather than 
simply relying on a 911 system that I’m afraid isn’t up to it yet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The question that the member raises does 
go to one of the issues in the EMS report around central 
dispatch versus local dispatch, and arguably local dispatch is 
also central for a number of communities. So it’s kind of a 
relative question. 
 
But I think the question is province-wide versus the southeast 
corner of the province versus another part of the province. And 
the kinds of issues that you’ve raised cause concern for 
everybody because you don’t want to have a system that has 
those kind of problems. 
 
And basically what I would say from Saskatchewan Health’s 
perspective, and we have to remember that the question you’ve 
raised about the emergency responses includes local health 
districts, fire departments, police services, as well as health 
facilities. And most of them are coordinated through the 911 
program which is in our government located in Municipal 
Government and Housing as a department. So the specific 
questions around the operation of that I will leave for my fellow 
minister on that particular question. 
 
But Health’s concern would be to make sure that the 
connections are made as quickly and as efficiently as possible. 
And we are working together with our partners to make sure the 
health component is one that responds to all the needs of the 
people of the province. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I think 
what’s important is not that the connections are made but the 
patient who phones in, in an emergency, gets the service as 
quickly as possible. 
 

That’s what needs to happen. Now I don’t care how many 
computers and switches and things that they have connecting up 
their various offices, but how long does it take to get the 
ambulance and the Jaws of Life and other emergency services 
out to the emergency location from the time the call goes in. 
That’s the critical thing. An hour and a half in this case didn’t 
cost anybody their life but it’s still unacceptable, Mr. Minister. 
 
I don’t have any more questions this evening, but one of my 
other colleagues does have a few for you. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to my 
colleagues. Mr. Minister, just a couple of comments regarding 
ambulatory service and EMS services. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the Moosomin Rocanville area there was a bit 
of a controversy a few years ago because of the intensive work 
that at lot of the volunteer firefighting services have done in 
regards to the way they have prepared themselves for the 
paramedic type of services that they provide. And I am pleased 
to say that we were able to come to a consensus and agreement 
as to the level of care and the responses that would be given. 
 
And the concern at that time came about where the ambulatory 
service was felt they had the ability to get to an emergency even 
20 or 30 miles away, which would be 20 or 30 minutes, when a 
local group especially the group in Rocanville working at the 
mine had taken a lot of training and said well if there is an 
accident four or five minutes away where you’ve got 25, we can 
be there. And we had a bit of a controversy at the time and I’m 
pleased to say that we were able to arrive at an agreement as to 
how the responses would be met so that if a group could be 
there much earlier and then transport and, if you will, meet the 
ambulatory service coming out, I think that’s how the 
agreement was finally reached. And so again I guess what is 
shows, Mr. Minister, in a lot of rural communities there are 
services, and we need to coordinate them to indeed meet the 
need as quickly as possible to whatever emergency. 
 
But the questions I’d like to raise tonight are a couple of 
questions in regards to the Moosomin health facility. And as 
you did mention, Mr. Minister, you had the privilege of touring 
the facility today. I know that for the last number of years, 
probably about at least two times since your government took 
office, that there were promises made for a new facility. I know 
the former minister, just prior to the last provincial election, 
said that the funding was there and a facility would be in place. 
 
And I’m not exactly sure what message you left with the 
community today, Mr. Minister, but I would like to know 
exactly where things stand in regards to the facility in 
Moosomin, commitment to that facility. I think what you saw 
today, Mr. Minister, was also a . . . and it was probably brought 
to your attention the fact that an operating room has now been 
up and running for better than a year, and as I understand it has 
been functioning very well, being serviced very well. 
 
So with all the work and the effort that has been put into the 
facility in Moosomin, the area that it covers . . . I know when 
Mr. Fyke was sitting on the floor in front of us about a month 
and a half ago, in his report he talked about communities of less 
than 5,000 not being large enough to sustain a hospital facility. 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1975 

 

I’m not sure if you were informed of the 15,000 files that the 
physicians in Moosomin have in their office, which indicates 
the area and the level of service that is being offered. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you could just fill us in as to 
where we are and the long struggle that the community of 
Moosomin has had in addressing their health facility needs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — To the member, I was very pleased to 
meet with the local district health people and the local planning 
committee earlier today to talk about their plans and their ideas 
as well as see some of the needs that are there as it relates to the 
lodges and the hospital facility. 
 
Just in March of this year, the Department of Health provided 
another $300,000 plus for further steps in the planning process. 
And so what the people were telling me about was some of the 
work that they’ve been able to do with some of the consultants 
around addressing some of the needs that they have. 
 
The local committee has put together a proposal around the 
scope of the project, and as I’m sure the member knows, that 
there are many steps that a community and the organizing 
committees go through together with the Department of Health 
in the process. 
 
And so I guess what I would say is that the process is ongoing. 
The issues are being further defined. The community is working 
at raising funds there. The department is carefully examining 
the capital budgets that we have as to what the various 
possibilities are, but at this point we haven’t made a definite 
commitment as to time or plan. But the planning and the 
process of defining what kind of project is needed out in that 
area is ongoing. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, that sounds to me like 
it’s a way of skirting the issue of whether or not we’re really 
making a firm commitment other than a long . . . it seems to be 
a long planning stage. The community’s been going at it for a 
long time, as you did indicate. 
 
And I’m sure, Mr. Minister, as well, you are probably quite well 
aware of — even in the long-term care that’s available in the 
community — the facilities are fairly aged, and those facilities 
were built at a time when there was level one and two care, 
mainly, in the facilities. And versus the heavy care that is now 
needed and provided in those two facilities, and the facts that a 
lot of those patients are now in wheelchairs and those corridors 
just are not really compatible to the heavy care, and the needs of 
the . . . or the access down the corridors for wheelchair patients. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, while it does take a while, I believe there was 
a period, certainly through the ’80s there was a discussion, but 
10 years later since the election of your government we’re still 
waiting. And I guess what the community is wondering, exactly 
how long does a while mean. And I guess the other question 
that comes to the forefront, the communities in the surrounding 
area are very . . . working very deliberately, and very diligently 
to raise 35 per cent of the funding. There isn’t any other area 
that puts that kind of local funding into capital structure. 
 
It used to be, if I’m not mistaken, I believe it was 15 per cent at 
one time, and I may be misquoted on that. But 35 per cent is a 

fairly steep request of the local community. It’s almost like 
you’re saying, well if you can do that, then we might put the 
facility there. It’s almost, I guess what we’re saying, Mr. 
Minister, is a lot of rural areas are being discriminated against. 
We talk about medicare, we talk about equality and equal 
access to health care facilities. And when you are looking at 
facilities where you’re an hour and a half, two hours, almost 
two and a half hours away from some major service or 
communities that it would be appropriate that maybe if we’re 
talking of . . . as we heard Ms. Douglas yesterday talking about 
don’t let medicare die, and yet at the same time, we have to 
question whether or not it’s really working fairly for all 
residents. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, a question I would have to ask in regards 
to that, is it fair that smaller communities have to raise a larger 
percentage of the funds versus the large facilities? And 
secondly, I don’t know if you indicated your thoughts or 
whether or not you actually had an opportunity to observe the 
O.R. facilities in the hospital at Moosomin, which I might add, 
Mr. Minister, have been totally funded at the local level. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — To the member, just to clarify the 
percentage issue that the member has raised. Right now, the 
plan or the process is that the local communities raise 35 per 
cent. There was a slight difference related to the Melfort project 
for the member that’s sitting next to you, and the Weyburn 
project given the fact that those were SPMC properties that 
were included in the whole process. 
 
The old system was 15 per cent as it related to special care but 
funding for acute care ranged from 50/50 which was not as 
good a way as it is now, to sometimes, you know, a hundred per 
cent. So there was a variation. 
 
But basically what I would say is that we, as taxpayers in this 
province, have said there’s a certain amount of taxes that we’re 
going to contribute to the whole provision of services. And I 
know, clearly on your side of the House, you’ve said let’s 
collect less money so that we have less money for the services. 
We know kind of what the budgets were that you had set out in 
your ’99 election plan. They were substantially less than what 
we’ve actually have spent. 
 
What we are trying to do here with the increased budget that we 
have and the capital budget that we have is attempt to put the 
money out to the communities in as fair and as quick a way as 
possible. But we have to operate within the resources that we 
have and that means that we have to be very careful when we 
make the commitments. 
 
And so that’s why we’re wanting to work with the 
communities, make sure that the scope and the plans for the 
communities are accurate and reflect what the longer-term 
needs are and also so that we’re using the money most 
effectively across the province. And so we will continue to do 
that. 
 
I was pleased to be part of announcements in Melfort and 
Weyburn, but basically we’re trying to work with all of these 
things in a careful way. Those projects which are under 
construction are continuing. At this point those projects which 
are in planning, those ones are continuing. But all of these 



1976 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

things are being discussed and reviewed in light of what we’re 
going to do to respond to Mr. Fyke’s report. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, some hon. members on the 
opposite side of the House were actually encouraging the 
minister to be stampeded into an answer. 
 
We would certainly like to see the minister come out to 
Moosomin as he did to Melfort and I believe was it Weyburn 
and Melville, and make announcements as well that we finally 
. . . We’ve done a lot of the work and this project is a project 
worthwhile moving forward on, and it’s time to move forward 
on it. And, Mr. Minister, we trust in the near future that indeed 
we will have moved from this ongoing planning stage to a 
position of yes, it’s time to proceed. It’s not just time to give a 
voice of support to the project but indeed move ahead with the 
project. 
 
Mr. Minister, the reason I’m raising these questions as well is 
not just for the sake of the community, but talking to a number 
of people in the constituency and a letter from an elderly 
gentleman just most recently, really stressing the point and 
really concerned about what he was hearing from the Fyke 
report and whether or not as representatives we were paying 
attention to the health needs of individuals. 
 
And my colleague, the member from Cannington, talked about 
the fact that in communities where there are health centres, 
people do take the time, and as people retire, they look for areas 
or communities that they believe the health services will be 
available in. So it’s important that we give serious . . . not only 
serious consideration but start to move in that matter. 
 
Mr. Minister, last night as well — and with this I’ll wrap up my 
questioning unless someone else has a few more questions or 
we want to debate this a little further — but there was raised an 
issue from a family in Broadview who were quite concerned 
about the level of care and the type, the runaround they received 
at the time when the mother passed away and some concerns 
about how they were responded to and I was wondering, Mr. 
Minister, if you had a chance to follow up on that question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Perhaps you can give more information 
on this one. Is this . . . because I’m not quite sure this is the one 
that you raised with me last night . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Okay well I don’t have a response tonight on that one. But I 
know that I gave the information, and it’s being followed up. 
But I don’t have it yet. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. The light’s finally come on. 
Mr. Chairman, I believe at this time it would be appropriate if 
we reported progress on this. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:54. 
 
 


