















































Hansard: April 23, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 685 
 April 23, 2001 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 

The Chair: — The Government House Leader moved that we 
report progress on the estimates of the Department of 
Environment and Resource Management. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 

Subvote (PE01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Would the minister please introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I would 
be happy to introduce to the members of the committee the 
officials who are joining me here today for estimates for 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. To my left is 
Deputy Minister Neil Yeates. And seated directly behind him is 
Mae Boa who is the executive director of finance and 
operations. Directly behind me is Lily Stonehouse, and to my 
right is Wayne McElree, and both are assistant deputy 
ministers. 
 
I’m sorry. And I neglected to recognize — I was turning the 
wrong direction — John Janzen behind Mr. McElree, who is the 
acting executive director of the student financial assistance 
branch. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like to 
welcome the Minister and his officials here this evening. I have 
a number of questions that we can get started with in his 
department. I’m sure the number of questions that we would 
have on this side of the House will certainly take more time 
than this evening’s sitting but we can at least get a start on it. 
 
Post-secondary education, in our view, plays a very important 
role in today’s society. In today’s economy we hear the catch 
phrases of knowledge-based economy, life-long learning, and 
so on. 
 
I had the privilege of attending the function that the 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College put on last Friday over 
at the Centre of the Arts where they talked about their new 
building that they will commence construction very soon. And 
the First Nations people refer to education as their buffalo, their 
source of security, and that engine that will take them from 
where they are now to where they want to go. 
 
And I would take it one step further. I would think that it’s all 
of society’s buffalo in view of the changes that we see in the 
economies of the world and that sort of thing. I think also that 
we must no longer just think of post-secondary education as 
strictly in the educational aspect of things. 
 

I think in the past we’ve looked at post-secondary education in 
isolated thinking in terms of universities and SIASTs and 
regional colleges and those sorts of things. And I mean there’s 
many more things that happen in the post-secondary education 
field, particularly at the universities and SIAST perhaps to a 
lesser extent. The other institutions — I’m thinking more of the 
research activities and those sorts of things and the importance 
that they can have in today’s economy and the spinoffs, the 
economic spinoffs that can come from the basic research and so 
on. 
 
So with that I looked at what other jurisdictions are thinking 
about and I guess their goals and their visions. And when I did 
the research I came across statements and vision statements and 
those sorts of things, talking about providing their people with 
opportunities they need to learn and adapt and develop new 
technology and new skills. Other areas, you would see phrases 
like foster knowledge, innovation, and research technology 
across all sectors of their economy. 
 
And of course you didn’t have to do just too much research to 
come across phrases like expanding knowledge-based 
economies to include information technology industries and 
those sorts of things. 
 
Other jurisdictions, some of them, they talk about creating 
centres of excellence that would pertain to their area that they 
are responsible for. And I stated in the House earlier this 
session that I feel . . . that we feel that there is some 
opportunities for perhaps Saskatchewan to go down that route. 
We have some problems — whether it be in health or 
agriculture or highways — and perhaps through our research 
capabilities or the pool of knowledge that we have at our 
universities, we could apply that and perhaps turn them into an 
opportunity. 
 
I guess, Mr. Deputy Chair, my first question is, to the minister, 
is what is the minister’s government’s vision and goal for 
Post-Secondary Education and what are the plans to achieve 
those goals in the post-secondary field? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for his 
question. In many ways, it’s an all-inclusive sort of question 
that he asked. It’s somewhat akin to why is there air. And we 
can go forever I suppose in the answer, but I don’t think that the 
hon. member had in mind that we should go forever in the 
answer. 
 
But I listened to the reference of the hon. member, the 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training critic, Mr. Chair, 
and I think it’s fair to say that the two of us share, I think, a 
great deal in common. And I know that not just from the 
question but from our conversations that we’ve had over the 
past year and a half that we’ve been mutually engaged and are 
concerned about this particular area of function of government. 
But now the hon. member is getting some help there, Mr. Chair, 
which may be less than totally beneficiary, but I will do my best 
to respond to the question. 
 
It is appropriate when talking about Post-Secondary that we ask 
ourselves what is the vision statement, what’s the vision for 
Post-Secondary. And there is also, as you would say from your 



686 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

own research, there is a vision statement for our task here and 
I’m very happily put that on record and let me quote it, Mr. 
Chair: 
 

Through continuous learning, all Saskatchewan people 
have the knowledge, skills, and abilities to benefit from and 
contribute to society and the economic prosperity of the 
province. 

 
Now, Mr. Chair, that’s kind of a formal-sounding statement and 
it is. And maybe I can just make some comment to the pieces of 
it because the words are significant. 
 
Perhaps I can summarize that vision statement, Mr. Chair, by 
saying this: that in my judgment, Post-Secondary Education 
Skills Training is in the future business. That’s what we’re 
about. It is the responsibility of this department to take the 
resources that are provided to us by the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan and to use those as best we can to do two things: 
one to enable our citizens to build their own futures by 
increasing their knowledge and their skills and their 
qualifications to shape their own futures; and then secondly, 
collectively, through the use of those resources as well to build 
the future of our province. 
 
And so when we look at the vision statement and we say 
through continuous learning recognizing, as the hon. member 
has said in his opening statement, that it has been said for some 
time that we’re entering the world of lifelong learning. And I’m 
not sure just exactly when we got there, Mr. Chair, but the fact 
of the matter is the world of lifelong learning is not coming; it’s 
here. And so it is a process of continuous learning that 
Saskatchewan people will engage in in a number of different 
kinds of ways. 
 
When one goes to graduations across the province, one 
recognizes that you see people of all ages. 
 
But in addition to that, Mr. Chair, we see people engaged in 
learnings which are for a very practical application at times as 
well, and that’s extremely relevant in this rapidly changing 
world in which we live. 
 
So it is our vision that we would want to see Saskatchewan 
people engaged in continuous learning and that that would be 
facilitated through the actions of the department that all 
Saskatchewan people have the knowledge, skills, and abilities 
to benefit from and contribute to society. And in looking at that, 
Mr. Chair, and also to complete that — and the economic 
prosperity of the province — I would say this: it would be an 
objective of mine that what we would be promoting through the 
availability of post-secondary education and skills training is a 
representative workforce ultimately. 
 
So that what we are wanting to do is to see our citizens be able 
to take advantage of the use of education to overcome what 
barriers there are that are between them and gainful 
participation in the labour market here in Saskatchewan and to 
be contributing citizens. And that’ll mean a whole lot of things 
to a lot of different people and I think, Mr. Chair, probably 
enough said about the vision statement. 
 
Now in order to achieve the vision, the hon. member asks, what 

goals then would the department have to work towards 
achieving that particular vision. And in essence, Mr. Chair, 
there’d be four goals. And as we talk about goals these are goals 
that are arrived at through a process of ongoing consultation 
with the partners in the sector and should have . . . evolve 
measurable objectives to assist us in guiding as to how they are 
achieving . . . how they are being achieved. 
 
What are those goals, Mr. Chair? Well the goals would include 
things like a high-quality post-secondary education training and 
employment programs and services system. So quality is 
important to us that what people receive when they engage in 
education or training activities are valuable to them. As I say 
valuable in two ways, that they can use to shape their own 
futures or in shaping of the province. 
 
Also we would want to see a second goal within the sector that 
our activities . . . not just our activities. When I say, our 
activities, I mean not only government-funded activities, but 
recognizing in the world of post-secondary education and skills 
training there are many partners, many of whom are not 
government and many of whom are not receiving government 
resources to provide their services, but that the services that are 
being provided meet the needs of individuals and communities. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Again I go back to that vision statement that we’re in the future 
business. People being able to have access to the training allows 
them to shape their own futures, and then also in the context of 
communities. And so part of what we do would be supporting 
economic development, for example. 
 
Thirdly, a goal that the sector would meet the needs of 
employers and industry and contribute to economic growth. 
And again I come back to what I said earlier in talking about 
being in the future business, that it would be our objective that 
our activities and the activities within the post-secondary sector 
would support economic growth, and that it would respond then 
to the needs of industry here in Saskatchewan, because training 
which . . . Saskatchewan training for Saskatchewan people for 
Saskatchewan jobs I think makes a great deal of sense to 
Saskatchewan people who pay Saskatchewan taxes. And so that 
would be the objective there. 
 
And finally, that the sector contributes to the discovery, 
integration, and application of knowledge. And that certainly, 
Mr. Chair, talks about the kind of thing that the hon. member 
was referring to, which is a support for the creation of 
knowledge in which we oftentimes refer to research. 
 
So I apologize for taking so long in the answer. When the 
question is, so what are you doing, I find myself feeling that 
I’m really being quite restrained actually, Mr. Chair. But I’ll 
look forward to more questions from the hon. member, and try 
to be more pithy as long as his answers . . . or his questions are 
a little more pithy as well. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I listened intently to the minister’s 
answer, and I was pleased to hear the goals that he outlined. He 
mentioned quality of education as being important, and that is 
something certainly we heard when the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education and the Minister of Education 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 687 

 

conducted their hearings around the province last winter. It was 
an overriding theme that came through, at least every meeting 
that I attended, that above all else we should not sacrifice 
quality of education. 
 
I wonder perhaps could the minister outline a few initiatives in 
his department that would tell us what kind of steps he’s taking 
to ensure that we have a quality post-secondary education in 
this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for his 
question. We’re certainly starting with the big questions early 
here this evening and I appreciate that very much. In a nutshell, 
and I’ll be a little more specific as I expand to the hon. member, 
Mr. Chair. In a nutshell, the assurance of quality in our 
post-secondary system really originates in this room by virtue 
of authorities and requirements that occur by legislation. 
 
So let me give you three key and important and broad, 
sweeping ways that that occurs — our universities, SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
and regional colleges. 
 
Our universities provide degrees by virtue of legislative 
authority granted in this room, and it is part of the process then 
of ensuring the qualifications of the graduates or the students 
from those universities that they go through their own 
accreditation process and engage in peer and academic reviews. 
That’s an ongoing exercise and something that the universities 
will both do in order to ensure, on an ongoing basis, the 
credibility of the degrees that come from them. 
 
So in addition to the authority that they have to operate, of 
course funding is provided . . . and that’s what we’re doing here 
right now, is facilitating that. And that will be true throughout 
the piece. 
 
Moving on to SIAST and regional colleges, they will both have 
the statutory requirement of reviews. And in fact the hon. 
member may reflect back to about a year ago when both SIAST 
and the regional colleges had completed their reviews of their 
programs. And out of those reviews then, which were required 
by statute, there are a number of recommendations that the 
regional college system, including each of the . . . in each of the 
regional colleges themselves, and SIAST, use that as part of 
their work plan then in moving forward to meet the needs of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
So that will be . . . that’s a legislated requirement. Reviews are 
done; recommendations are made; and then the minister 
responds, which I did, by receiving those reports and the 
recommendations and directing them to SIAST and the regional 
colleges then to work to implement. So that’s the process of 
accountability to quality. 
 
Within the department itself as well, there will be program 
evaluations that we will do as part of on ongoing commitment 
to ensure the presence of quality in programs. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I wonder if 
the . . . in order for the minister and his department and his 
government to evaluate where they are, and you need to have a 
starting point of these and then set some targets, and I’d like to 

ask the minister some questions with regards to that area. 
 
I’d like to ask the minister, what percentage of today’s 
population in this province have some post-secondary education 
and training? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I’m advised by my officials that 
the percentage of the Saskatchewan labour force that has some 
post-secondary education would be approximately 43 per cent. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I wonder if the minister could . . . he indicated 
that about 43 per cent of today’s labour force, but I was talking 
of the population as a whole, whether that’d be retired folks, 
business people, members of this Assembly, and so on, the 
whole population. Would that be 43 per cent of the total 
Saskatchewan population, or is that 43 per cent of the labour 
force? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — The number I’ve given you, to the hon. 
member, Mr. Chair, is 43 per cent of the labour force. Included 
in that of course will not be any of those people who are in the 
K to 12 system or earlier. Obviously just by definition, they 
don’t have any post-secondary skills training. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I wonder whether, Mr. Deputy Chair, if the 
minister has statistics for our First Nations people. What 
percentage of First Nations residents in this province would 
have some post-secondary education or training? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, I’m sorry; 
my officials don’t have a specific number here with me this 
evening. But I certainly can speak to the essence of the question 
which I think is maybe the information you’re trying to glean. 
 
I first of all will say, Mr. Chair, that our Aboriginal population 
sectioned out from the population at large has a lower 
percentage of individuals with post-secondary education, and 
some post-secondary education. 
 
We will know from our demographics here in Saskatchewan 
that the lowest percentage of post-secondary education will be 
in the category that we would describe as First Nations people 
living on-reserve. There’ll be a higher percentage for 
Aboriginal peoples off-reserve. But both of those will be less 
than the population at large. 
 
And it’s in that context, Mr. Chair, that a very important part of, 
I think, responsible Saskatchewan planning for the future must 
focus. I know the hon. member will be aware of a demographic 
report which my department had commissioned and released — 
would have been, I think, in February or so of the year 2000, so 
a little over a year ago — which pointed to a tightening of the 
labour market here in our province over the course of the 
decade. 
 
Now why is that happening? Well, Mr. Chair, it’s happening 
here for much the same reason that it’s going to be happening 
just slightly later because of the relative average age in 
Saskatchewan. It will affect us just a little bit earlier here than 
the rest of the country, but really this is a phenomenon that’s 
occurring across Canada in this decade because the baby 
boomers are starting to retire or take partial retirement. The 
consequence of that, Mr. Chair, is that there will be an 



688 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

increasing tightening of the labour market. So in other words, 
that pool of educated and skilled people available to support our 
economy, compared to the demands, is going to get tighter and 
tighter. 
 
We have here in Saskatchewan, in my judgment, Mr. Chair, a 
tremendous opportunity, an opportunity that I think is 
meaningful to all of us regardless of the perspective we look or 
where we sit, and that is to develop in Saskatchewan a 
representative workforce, a workforce that is made up 
proportionate to the citizens that we have in our Saskatchewan. 
And that will become I think a very significant factor in terms 
of the inclusion of our Aboriginal peoples because, Mr. Chair, I 
do point out that Saskatchewan has a natural competitive 
advantage, you see, with the fading labour market that’s 
occurring because the baby boomers are going to start to retire, 
and so the number of people available in the labour market is 
going to start to decline 
 
(19:30) 
 
But our advantage is this, that in Saskatchewan here we have a 
mini baby boom — a mini baby boom of Aboriginal peoples 
who is coming right behind, and in fact will start to grow at the 
very time that our labour market starts to shrink. 
 
Now where is that mini baby boom? Right now largely, Mr. 
Chair, it’s in the K to 12 system. And the real challenge and the 
opportunity for Saskatchewan is this, is that if we are able to 
have our Aboriginal peoples find success in the K to 12 and 
post-secondary systems and skill training systems and become 
active participants in our labour market, come the end of the 
decade and early into the next decade, this will become 
Saskatchewan’s competitive advantage in the nation. Because 
we have access to a mini baby boom when the rest of the nation 
is wishing that they had the same. 
 
And because that mini baby boom is largely made up of 
Aboriginal peoples and because the success rate in terms of 
participation in post-secondary is not as high as it is for the 
population at large, therein lies our challenge, but with that the 
great opportunity for our province in the nation. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I listened with interest as the minister 
explained the demographics of our population. And I would say 
I would have to agree with him that we do have a mini baby 
boom that has occurred and will be continuing to occur. 
 
But my theory is that we . . . I haven’t seen evidence of 
initiatives and plans to bring a larger percentage of the 
Aboriginal students into post-secondary education and skills 
training. I think statistics will show that there’s a very high 
dropout rate in high school, although it may be declining, but I 
think we just can’t say that the way things are . . . have been 
going on in the past is good enough for the future. Because this 
is of utmost importance to our province that we bring these 
people, the First Nations and Aboriginal people, into 
mainstream society, and education is the major tool to do that. 
 
And I’d like to know if the minister has any special initiatives. I 
realize the commencement of construction on the new Indian 
Federated College building is certainly a huge step in that 
direction, but it’s not good enough just to finance and put up a 

building. We have to make sure that the students from the 
reserves and the cities get their K to 12 education and then 
move into those post-secondary education institutions that we 
have in this province. 
 
And has the department, has the minister got any special 
initiatives and plans to enhance that initiative? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I thank the hon. member for the question, 
Mr. Chair. He’s asking questions which I think are most 
appropriate to the challenges facing Saskatchewan. And I fully 
agree with him in the importance of addressing these kinds of 
things. 
 
In fact, the question is very timely because we are right, as we 
speak — literally — to the hon. member, Mr. Chair, we are 
engaging in consultation with our Aboriginal partners in 
post-secondary education and skills training. 
 
We’re doing that in order to facilitate the development of an 
accurate strategic plan that reflects within the strategic plan the 
work, not only of the department as one part of this sector of 
post-secondary education and skills training, but also other 
partners. And over the course of the next few weeks the 
assistant deputy minister will be engaging in consultations with 
many of the Aboriginal organizations and institutions, ensuring 
that we have as current an understanding of number one, their 
training plans for the future but also their identification for the 
training needs of the future. 
 
And that as much as possible we are engaging in synergistic 
kind of relationships and that we are complementing — not 
competing; not duplicating — but complementing our efforts to 
make the best possible use we can of limited resources in order 
to meet Aboriginal training needs. And it is . . . goals are 
important and as we undertake this consultation there are three 
goals that we’re attempting to achieve to assist in the . . . 
through the consultation. 
 
One is to achieve an Aboriginal representative skilled 
workforce. As I said earlier in my last response, that is our end 
objective. And I talked about the critical importance in the next 
decade for Saskatchewan to do that. 
 
Secondly, a post-secondary education and training system that 
supports Aboriginal people’s access and success in education 
and training. So access is an extremely important part of that, 
and certainly for some of our Aboriginal population — not all 
— then we’re talking about what initiatives that are providing 
access outside of our four largest campus communities, for 
example. 
 
And thirdly, the third objective is that Aboriginal involvement 
in decision-making and the design and delivery of 
post-secondary programs and services because it seems to me 
that if we’re doing this thing right, Mr. Chair, then this is not 
something that is being done for Aboriginal peoples, but is 
being done with Aboriginal peoples. Clearly I think anyone 
would assume that that’s the approach that has the greatest 
likelihood of success. 
 
So what are some of the things that are in this budget that is . . . 
We’re engaged here in estimates discussion, and quite correctly, 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 689 

 

the hon. member asks then what are the expenditures that are 
happening that contribute to this kind of achievement of 
objectives. 
 
And I point out first of all, Mr. Chair, that it must be, in my 
mind, there must be consistency and collaboration between the 
two departments of Post-Secondary and Education; the K to 12 
system and the post-secondary system surely must be operating 
from the same page. 
 
And in the budget that is before us . . . and you may want to ask 
some questions of the Minister of Education when the 
Education estimates are before the House. But a couple of 
things that are really, really important is the dedication of 
additional resources to community schools. We will recognize 
that the community schools in this province seem to be a 
vehicle that help to significantly increase the rate of success, for 
a variety of reasons I won’t go into, and I’m sure the Minister 
of Education would be happy to. 
 
So there is investment there and also an increased emphasis in 
the area of math and sciences. One of the areas of shortfall 
that’s seen in terms of that link between employment 
opportunity and skill training in order to access it is having a 
background in the maths and sciences, and so that becomes, in 
the K to 12 system, an area of increased emphasis. 
 
In the Post-Secondary area directly, just first of all a couple of 
things that are in this budget, in the estimates that are before us 
right now that support Aboriginal training . . . the hon. member 
will be aware that there is an increase in funding to the 
Apprenticeship Commission in addition to the 3.5 per cent that 
all of the institutions in Post-Secondary, that are funded by 
Post-Secondary . . . they all receive that same, standard 3.5 per 
cent increase to their base operating. In addition to that, the 
Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission received 
an additional $400,000 which is targeted to be used for 
apprenticeship training for Aboriginal persons. We would 
anticipate that that would increase by some 80 to 100 training 
spots for Aboriginal people through the Apprenticeship 
Commission. 
 
There will also be within the budget itself . . . and the member 
will recognize that when the Minister of Finance presented the 
budget, he referred to increased investment. I think the 
terminology he used at that time was in technology enhanced 
learning. He may have referred to the virtual campus. But 
whichever terminology was used recognizing, Mr. Chair, that 
what we need to do is to increase our investment through the 
use of technology through the development of on-line learning. 
 
On-line learning is in its relative infant stages but it’s growing 
very rapidly and provides the great advantage no matter where 
you live in the nation — whether it’s downtown Toronto or it’s 
Ile-a-la-Crosse — the ability to train any time but also 
anywhere. And large city or isolated community in northern 
Saskatchewan or rural Saskatchewan has the same advantage in 
terms of overcoming the barrier of time. 
 
But, Mr. Chair, it also has a significant advantage that is very 
important to us in Saskatchewan, and rural and northern 
Saskatchewan, and many of those communities specifically 
having significant Aboriginal population overcoming the barrier 

of distance. Access, affordable access to quality post-secondary 
education. 
 
I know the hon. member will remember, Mr. Chair, that the last 
year when we had those public meetings that over and over 
again people said that when thinking about financial access that 
it was extremely important to do what we could to address the 
cost of living away from home, and in many ways said that 
what they wanted to see their government doing is increasing 
the emphasis on bringing the campus to the student. 
 
On-line learning is the way of doing that and in excess of $4 
million that are in this budget dedicated to development of 
technology enhanced learning, promotion of on-line learning, 
there is also the inclusion of our First Nations institutions as 
part of that whole process. That’s very, very important to us that 
we’re addressing that area of access in a priority kind of way. 
 
I will remind the hon. member as well, Mr. Chair, that there 
was a decision of this legislature, although not before us now, 
but in the last session of the legislature providing credit 
granting authorities — the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technology. And that was certainly in support of a credible 
First Nations training institution, the ability to move forward 
and become a leader potentially in the nation. 
 
And he in his question referred to the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College, which in this province, I think we should all 
look at with a great deal of pride because we see there a college 
which has made tremendous strides in the successful 
completion of degrees held by First Nations people in our 
province, and an institution that I think is seen as not only a 
leader in the province but within the nation and in fact some 
would say beyond the nation. 
 
So again I promise . . . I apologize for being so long-winded in 
the answer, Mr. Chair, but it’s an important question and there’s 
a number of facets. The answer lies not in any single one or two 
things, but approaches in concert. But in the process we must 
always be consulting and trying to get the best synergies of the 
resources we’ve got available to meet the objectives of 
increasing the successful post-secondary education and skills 
training for Aboriginal peoples. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Mr. Chair, again I listened to the minister’s 
response to the question and I was pleased to hear of some of 
the initiatives. I’m sure there are a number of other initiatives 
that can be taken to achieve greater results in this area and I 
would urge the minister to look at all possibilities because this 
is a very important area that the well-being of the people of . . . 
all the people of our province depends on. 
 
Now if I can just go back to the some of the things I mentioned 
in a previous question with regards to the percentage of people 
in our population that have some post-secondary education and 
skills training. The minister indicated that 43 per cent of our 
labour force have some post-secondary education. 
 
I was wondering, Mr. Chair, has the minister set any targets. I 
notice in other jurisdictions that they measure where they are 
today, then they look a few years down the road and set some 
targets. And I would think in light of the government’s 
announcement today of a Crown corporation set up to celebrate 



690 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

our 100th anniversary that it might be fitting that his department 
would have some targets as to how many more people or a 
percentage growth in people involved in post-secondary 
education or . . . and that. I wonder if he would . . . if he does 
have those targets, would he share them with us. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the hon. 
member, I would say that this is an item that is coming soon to 
a legislature near you. Mr. Chair, I do totally agree that it is 
important to look at targets. We are, I think, within a short 
period of time of arriving at a specific target. 
 
One of the things that Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training is doing is we’re part of the whole Partnership for 
Prosperity consultations that have been going on around the 
province for some time, and have within them a number of 
different kinds of targets related to the development of the 
economy. And after that consultation has been completed, 
Post-Secondary will, together with Economic and Co-operative 
Development which is doing that, want to define a specific 
target for that purpose. 
 
While I’m on my feet and while I hear the hon. member say that 
— I think he’s implying that he thinks that Post-Secondary 
Education should have more resources than it does and I would 
simply say to the hon. member . . . say to the hon. member that 
I share his enthusiasm for that objective. But obviously 
resources are not unlimited. We’ll need to use them always 
most prudently and engage in partnerships in order to develop 
synergies to make the best use of the taxpayer resources that we 
have. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, in an answer to an earlier question, the 
minister, when he talked about the vision for Post-Secondary 
Education in this province, he talked — and how his 
government plans to achieve these goals — he talked about 
quality education and meeting the needs of employers and 
employees in the future to support economic growth and 
contributing to create new knowledge in those sorts of things, 
which are all laudable goals, no doubt. 
 
But when you look at this year’s budget and the number of 
dollars that have been allocated to Post-Secondary Education, 
one has to question the sincerity of this government. If you look 
strictly at the budget document, as we have before us tonight, 
and look at the estimated expenditure for the past fiscal year 
and the estimated expenditure for the current fiscal year, 
certainly there is an increase in allocation of funds to 
Post-Secondary Education. But that only tells part of the story. 
If you look at page 82 of the budget documents, you will see 
that the forecasted expenditures for the past fiscal year totals 
some $530.4 million. And yet this year’s expenditure is only . . . 
are estimated at $511.5 million, a decrease of almost $19 
million. 
 
Now is this the commitment that this government has for 
Post-Secondary Education, and quality education, and all those 
things that we talked about earlier this evening? To me it would 
appear that there is a lack of commitment to Post-Secondary 
Education, and I wonder if the minister would care to respond 
to that. 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Chair, the hon. member will be 
pleased to know that his question is in fact good news for 
Saskatchewan and for our partners in Post-Secondary 
Education. 
 
The difference, Mr. Chair, has to do with the fact that there was 
a special warrant that made it possible for us to address some 
one-time kinds of expenditures at the end of the fiscal year to 
take advantage of some unanticipated revenues. And that this 
came as good news then for some payments that we were able 
to make in advance to a number of our Post-Secondary partners. 
 
The operational expenses as forecast, Mr. Chair, come in almost 
bang on. And in fact this budget, budget-over-budget, provides 
for a three and a half per cent increase in funding to 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, at the time when 
I believe the economic forecast is a growth of the 
neighbourhood of 2.2 per cent or thereabouts. So the 
Post-Secondary increase in funding is about over one and a half, 
somewhere between one and a half and double the economic 
forecast. 
 
So if I could simply outline to the hon. member, Mr. Chair, and 
to the members of the committee, where the extra $36 million at 
the end of the fiscal year went, that we were able to provide 
payment — $21 million of that went to the University of 
Saskatchewan. That’s to pay in advance for capital 
commitments for the Thorvaldson and Kinesiology buildings. 
That’s in addition to the $7 million that was in last year’s fiscal 
year’s budget, and an additional $7 million in this year’s fiscal 
budget. 
 
So between the two fiscal years, Mr. Chair, what that meant is 
that we were able to make payment to the University of 
Saskatchewan in the amount of $35 million. So 21 of that extra 
$36 million went to the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) 
advance payment, and this is not according to an expectation 
that they had. We had committed ourselves to pay that for the 
next three years after the fiscal year that currently is before the 
House and to speed that up for them. 
 
That also provides them the added advantage of being able to 
save some $3 million in interest costs as well, so that’s got an 
immediate advantage as well in addition to the straight $21 
million. There was $2 million advance payment to the 
University of Regina for the chiller replacement project to keep 
them cool and comfortable, the students cool and comfortable at 
the University of Regina, Mr. Chair. And also an advance 
payment of 855,000 to the University of Regina for the 
Education Building; an advance payment of $155,000 to SIAST 
for technology enhanced learning, the whole matter of working 
towards a virtual campus that I referred to earlier; RC is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Regional college. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Oh, okay. I’m having a hard time reading 
my abbreviations . . . $100,000 to regional colleges, also for 
technology enhanced learning; $750,000 in advance to Parkland 
Regional College for the joint-use facility that’s being 
developed there; $1.2 million to assist SIAST in dealing with 
collective bargaining costs, and $10.265 million for the student 
aid fund. 
 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 691 

 

So as a matter of fact, Mr. Chair, that’s good news. That was 
$36 million that Post-Secondary was able to move forward in 
support of our system, some of it for students and student aid 
and the other in capital projects. 
 
So I think that very nicely explains that, Mr. Chair, and points 
out that that was the financial picture that the hon. member 
points to. It represents some very positive news and welcome 
news in our post-secondary sector. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I find it interesting that the minister 
would — but not unexpected — that the minister would term 
his budget good news for the new fiscal year. However I’m 
looking at the headlines in some of the newspapers after the 
budget was presented, and I see that some of our post-secondary 
educations don’t share the minister’s enthusiasm. 
 
I’m looking at a headline in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix where 
the president of the University of Saskatchewan says that the 
budget is a letdown. Another headline in Saturday’s 
Leader-Post where: “U of S tuition fees face huge hikes.” It 
puzzles me somewhat that this could be good news. I would 
refer to this budget and I look at post-secondary capital 
expenditures are down, estimated to be down $2 million from 
the previous year. Granted there was some one-time funding 
from the windfall, I would assume, some of the unexpected 
revenues from oil and gas and that sort of thing. 
 
But according to particularly the University of Saskatchewan, 
our oldest university with the largest capital investment and a 
large need to renew and renovate and do the necessary repairs 
to their buildings and infrastructure there, the 3.5 per cent 
increase in operations certainly is not . . . and the reduction in 
capital expenditures certainly would not be termed as good 
news. 
 
The minister indicated that a 3.5 per cent increase in budget, in 
the operating budget, is greater than the growth in the provincial 
economy, but is it greater than the growth in utility rates, for 
instance? I would think not, and I would suggest that these are 
some of the reasons we are seeing some of the headlines in the 
papers. 
 
Added to that, we’re all familiar with some of the not-so-good 
news coming out of the College of Medicine, and in fact I’m 
sure we’re all familiar, I’m sure the minister saw the headlines 
of a Dr. Roger Pierson, an award-winning researcher at the 
College of Medicine, who earlier . . . or this past month or 
earlier . . . indicated that if there wasn’t substantial funding 
increases to the College of Medicine, in fact a doubling of 
funding to that college, that we might be better off just to shut it 
down because we’ve reached a crisis level in that college. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, is this a sign of your commitment to 
post-secondary education where we’re having these types of 
headlines and an increase of only 3.5 per cent? It seems to me 
that if we’re going to have quality education, we’re going to 
have to fund it or else we’re going to have to make the difficult 
choices that come along with underfunding it. 
 
I wonder if the minister would care to respond to my question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thanks to the hon. member for the 

question. Mr. Chair, he’s asking the big questions tonight, and 
I’m afraid the answers take a little bit longer than just straight 
one-liners. 
 
I think it would be fair to say that our universities here in 
Saskatchewan share in common with every single university 
across the nation the desire to have more resources than are 
being granted, and I understand that. However, Mr. Chair, to 
put a perspective on the thing, I do point out that over the 
course of the last three budget years in combination, including 
finishing with the fiscal year before us — the estimates that 
we’re in right now — that funding to the universities have 
increased by in excess of 15 per cent over the last three years. 
And I think many would say that they’d like to have more. But 
also I think many Saskatchewan taxpayers would be of the view 
that that’s not a small amount of funding increase, in percentage 
terms, to our universities. 
 
Over the course of the last three years as well, we were talking 
about . . . in the last question the hon. member makes reference 
to the matter of capital. There has been an expenditure of $108 
million dollars in capital expenditure to our universities over the 
course of the last three fiscal years. These are not small 
commitments. And also I do point out that, when looking at 
things like the College of Medicine, it should be thought very 
clearly to be interpreted that the College of Medicine is seen by 
the province as an important part of our health care . . . or, 
excuse me, of our addressing of the health care needs in the 
future. Mr. Fyke, in his report, that we heard Mr. Fyke at the 
table here in the Committee of the Whole just last week talk 
about the importance of the College of Medicine, and certainly 
that’s part of what will need to be looked at for the future. 
 
A College of Medicine engages in three important activities. 
One is teaching, of course; it’s a teaching college. Secondly, it 
provides services, and thirdly it does research. And all three of 
those in combination are important to our health care system. 
There is an advisory council, as the hon. member will know, 
that is reporting to the U of S Board of Governors, that is 
looking at the College of Medicine. Post-Secondary is one of 
the participants, as is the Saskatoon Health District, the 
Department of Health, the university itself, and others; and 
we’ll be making recommendation, it would have to be taken 
within a context. 
 
(20:00) 
 
All of these things, Mr. Chair, have to be understood as well in 
the context of a nation, because I started by saying that our 
universities would wish for more money. Of course they do, I 
understand that. I wish that there was more money to provide as 
well. 
 
And what they’re experiencing, I think, are the consequences of 
some decisions made at the national level over the course of the 
last decade. We’ll all recall the withdrawal of funds from the 
CHST, the Canada Health and Social Transfer, back in the 
mid-’90s. 
 
And who did that hit, Mr. Chair? That hit the provision of 
post-secondary and health services. 
 
In the time since then, I’m pleased to say that Saskatchewan is 



692 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

one, in fact, one of the few provinces in the nation that 
backfilled the loss of funding from the . . . as the federal 
government backed away from that. And so we did something a 
little differently here than in some of the other provinces. 
 
However having said that, the federal government has never 
come back and restored that level of lost funding. And some 
would say, Mr. Chair, that there’s a legitimate question today 
when you look at provincial responsibilities like Health and 
Post-Secondary Education, and then the level of government 
whose resources seem to be growing — the fastest and the 
greatest being the federal level — that we’ve got a need to bring 
those to the good of all Canadians and all provinces closer into 
sync. 
 
And it would certainly be my hope that part of the response to 
training Canadians will rest with response from the federal 
government. We don’t say that post-secondary education in 
Saskatchewan is available only to Saskatchewan people and 
only . . . and because we do recognize that Saskatchewan people 
will move elsewhere as other people will move here. And that 
what goes on in the nation is that we’re training Canadians and 
that the federal government has some obligations. 
 
I do note with interest that Canadian ministers of Education 
have something in common with Canadian ministers of Finance 
who have something in common with Canadian premiers. And 
all three, over the course of the last two years, Mr. Chair, have 
all called on the federal government to restore, through the 
CHST, funding to provinces to assist in Health and 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training funding. 
 
We saw last year the federal government make a move in health 
care. And through the Council of Ministers of Education of 
Canada and other national bodies, our legislature in concert 
with others across the nation, we need to continue to work to 
increase that level of funding in support of access to quality 
post-secondary education in Saskatchewan and other provinces 
as well. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the minister indicated that by and 
large, the reason for underfunding at our universities is all the 
fault of the federal government. And that in fact may be 
partially true. Certainly both levels of government have 
responsibility in this area. 
 
But having said that, I don’t think it’s entirely acceptable for a 
provincial government to say well, the federal people have 
withdrawn funds, therefore there’s really nothing we can do 
about it and we’ll just kind of let the walls crumple around us as 
the College Building may soon do on campus at the University 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think we have to take . . . be proactive in this area and put into 
. . . develop plans as to how we’re going to deal with the whole 
area. Look at what our priorities are and make the plans and go 
forward. 
 
And I’m wondering if the minister has plans to deal with the 
lack of federal funding. I mean are we just going to go along 
and watch our post-secondary educations, particularly our 
universities and to a lesser extent, SIAST, just downgrade the 
quality of education that they are providing to our students? I 

would hope not, but I would like to know if there are plans to 
deal with this problem — the lack of underfunding from the 
federal government, if in fact that is the case. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Two parts to this answer, Mr. Chair. The 
questions are getting shorter and I think the answers are too. 
 
But first of all I do have to take a bit of issue with a statement 
made by the hon. member in his question when he says . . . 
refers to taking a position there is nothing we can do. Clearly 
that’s not true. 
 
And clearly it’s not true in the budget that’s before us that we’re 
talking about right now. I do remind the hon. member once 
again that there is 3.5 per cent funding increase to all of our 
institutions including our universities and there are some 
additional funds that will be made available when the formula 
for the . . . university funding formula is refined and concluded 
later this spring so there’ll be additional funds there. And as I 
pointed out to the hon. member, Mr. Chair, that over the course 
of just the last three years alone there has been $108 million in 
capital that has gone to our university campuses here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The hon. member makes reference to the College Building. And 
he’ll recognize I’m sure that, as requested by the University of 
Saskatchewan, the province has said that we would provide a 
third of the funding and, in the context in which it was 
requested by the University of Saskatchewan, to be matched by 
the university and the federal government. So we’re awaiting 
the federal government. Is there a bit of a pattern here, Mr. 
Chair? But the province is certainly prepared to be a responsible 
partner in the whole matter of funding as we work forward. And 
that’s true where we’re talking about the College of Medicine to 
be a willing partner. I refer to the consultations going on and the 
need to dovetail that with our plans for the future coming out of 
the Fyke report and so on. 
 
Now when you talk about what we’re doing at the national level 
to support the injection of funds from the federal government to 
the province of Saskatchewan and other provinces, the hon. 
member may be aware that the Council of Ministers of 
Education of Canada just met recently about two weeks ago and 
in fact addressed this very issue. 
 
Just for the information of the members of the committee, Mr. 
Chair, the Council of Ministers of Education of Canada is an 
important entity for all of our provinces because Canada is 
unique in the world in that we don’t have a national minister of 
education. And so on dealing on educational matters 
interprovincially or in a Pan-Canadian or international way, that 
becomes our vehicle for doing that and to find ways that we can 
work in concert towards common goals. 
 
And on the agenda of the Council of Ministers of Education of 
Canada, when they met a couple of weeks in Toronto, there was 
in response to requests from the premiers of Canada a decision 
to forward to them the advice and the report related to the needs 
of post-secondary education in the nation. And I expect that the 
premiers of Canada, when they meet later this summer — 
August in Victoria if I’m not mistaken — that they will see 
post-secondary education and skills training on their agenda as 
they speak hopefully with a united Canadian voice on behalf of 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 693 

 

all provinces to Canada. 
 
I think my judgment would be, Mr. Chair, that we are wisest to 
work in concert with our sister provinces and territories in the 
nation speaking to our national government with a united voice. 
National government has certainly made noises lately in terms 
of support for what they will refer to as the national skills 
agenda and have expressed interest in this sort of endeavour. I 
think we need to give the federal government an opportunity to 
be good for their word and it’s wisest if we provinces all speak 
together because yes, we have challenges here in Saskatchewan; 
so does British Columbia and Alberta and Manitoba and so on 
to the Atlantic provinces and our territories as well, and it is just 
in all our constituencies best interest when we speak with a 
united voice. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I would have to say that certainly it is 
important that we speak with a united voice but I think with 
some of the urgent situations that are facing us in this province 
that perhaps we may have to step to the forefront and take a 
leadership role in this area. 
 
I would like to at this time turn to staffing in the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education. I noted with interest that last year 
there was in the estimates . . . it was indicated that there was 
408.6 positions and that increased some by almost 33 positions 
this year to 442.5. I wonder if the minister could indicate: why 
is there an increase in staffing in the department and what is the 
reason behind that increase in staffing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Chair, and hon. member, there 
is more good news. 
 
The fact of the matter is that, as the hon. member will 
appreciate, the world of IT (information technology) is affecting 
all of us. And it’s probably fair to say that one of the 
departments, maybe even the department in which it has the 
greatest amount of play will be Post-Secondary and Skills 
Training. 
 
Over the course of the last number of years we have engaged a 
number of people on contract to be working in support of our IT 
kinds of developments. And I’m pleased to say, Mr. Chair, that 
we are able to convert some of those contract positions to 
permanent positions. 
 
This is not a small matter as the hon. member will recognize. 
The demand for IT specialists in the world in which we are 
living is growing. That’s why, by the way, in this budget we 
have also added a million and a half dollars in support of 
additional computer science training positions here in 
Saskatchewan. And so . . . we do that because we recognize 
that’s what our province needs. 
 
Now when we recognize that’s what our province needs we also 
have to recognize that those IT specialists that we’re using 
within the department are getting harder and harder to hang on 
to. There is the story in a nutshell. So I am very pleased that we 
are able to convert from contract to permanent positions those 
positions of people who are working in the IT area in support of 
our activities. That gives us a sense of stability, I think, both for 
the Department of Post-Secondary in terms of getting our tasks 
done and together with that the stability of employment for IT 

specialists who are moving from contract to permanent 
employment. 
 
So that’s by far the biggest explanation. There is also some 
areas where we’ve replaced secondments with permanent 
positions, which would be a smaller portion of the total 
explanation. So bottom line: it’s good news for Post-Secondary, 
I think, because it gives us more stability in our operation. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I was listening to the minister’s 
response, and I’m not sure whether he indicated how many of 
those contracted people are now full-time positions. But I did 
look at what the minister said in response to the budget and I 
believe he indicated that there were some 26 positions that were 
taken up in this area — in the IT area. If in fact that is correct 
that there is 26 new positions created in the department, I 
wonder if the minister could indicate what the cost of those 
additional 26 positions would be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I thank the hon. member for his question, 
Mr. Chair, and I want to make a correction. I’m advised by my 
officials, when I said 26 the accurate number is 22. There are 22 
employees who have moved from contract, so I appreciate 
being able to correct the error — it’s not 26, but 22. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Chair, I am advised by my officials in 
terms of total cost to the department in fact this represents a 
cost saving. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, would the minister have an estimate as 
to the cost saving that we would have. And I would imagine 
that there may be an immediate cost saving by going to 
full-time positions, but oftentimes we’ve seen in the past that 
positions are created and filled and sometimes they extend 
beyond their useful period. 
 
And I’m wondering — this would be one of my fears — 
certainly if certain skills are scarce it may be good to tie them 
down but somehow they have a way of just becoming part of 
the overall workforce of the department, and once the service is 
required it’s sometimes difficult to change those positions into 
more useful positions. 
 
And again, to repeat to the minister, would the minister have an 
estimate as to the cost savings by going this route? 
 
(20:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, I have more good news for the hon. 
member. That what will happen, Mr. Chair, is that for 
short-term activities — being sensitive to the kind of matter that 
you raise, that the hon. member raises, Mr. Chair — short-term 
contracts will continue to be used. But the emphasis now, we’ve 
been doing some redesign work, is on the maintenance and 
operation. And the good news for the hon. member and the 
people of Saskatchewan is that we estimate that the cost saving 
in this fiscal year will be in the neighbourhood of $400,000. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I would like to turn my attention at 
this time to the area of student loans. I understand that the 
current agreement that the province has with the Royal Bank 
will be coming to an end at the end of . . . in mid-summer, I 
believe in July is the deadline if I am correct. I wonder if the 



694 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

minister could tell us what plans his department has for the 
administration of student loans once the current contract 
expires. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there’s more good 
news. I’m sorry to have to say it, Mr. Chair, but there’s more 
good news. And I do deeply appreciate the question, and I know 
that it is an important question to our students here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
He’s quite correct, Mr. Chair, that the current agreement with 
the Royal Bank expires the end of July, and August 1 we go 
into a new student financial assistance year. 
 
What we’re doing right now, Mr. Chair, is engaging in some 
negotiations which are close to being completed and about 
which I hope to be able to make a specific announcement in the 
not too distant future. But the net objective of this, Mr. Chair, is 
to improve service, to improve efficiency, and to improve the 
program — all at the same time. And in fact, over the long run, 
I expect also to be able to save some cost to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. So I call that good news, Mr. Chair. 
 
And what we’re doing is discussing with the federal 
government the means of arriving at an integrated 
administration, an integrated student loan, here in Saskatchewan 
so that there would be one service provider for all 
Saskatchewan students who have student loans. They wouldn’t 
be dealing with two separate offices for the provincial loan and 
the federal loan. 
 
As the hon. member will be aware, when the Saskatchewan 
student takes a loan it will be roughly, when it’s granted, 
roughly 60 per cent federal, 40 per cent provincial, and they’re 
separate administrations. So by integrating that we see potential 
for saving administrative costs, and converting that 
administrative cost to improving the programs. 
 
I’d like to see us improve the protection for students who have 
difficulty repaying their loans after graduating in the area of 
interest-rate reduction and in the area of debt reduction. I’d like 
to see us make progress there for Saskatchewan students. I want 
to see Saskatchewan students be able to deal just with a single 
body in dealing with their loans. 
 
I’ve talked with the student association executives of the four 
SIAST campuses, both universities, and they find it being very 
desirable to have a single office — one student, one loan, one 
office — to deal with. And we anticipate that by doing this 
we’ll be able to take the administrative savings, translate them 
into improved loan protection for Saskatchewan students, 
provide a better service, higher quality of service that is met 
with greater favour by Saskatchewan students, and with some 
optimism that over the long-run that we’ll also be able to reduce 
the total costs even with the improved student loan program. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I’m as enthusiastic as the hon. member in 
bringing this negotiation to a conclusion. And I’ll want to do 
that substantially ahead of July so that it’s very clear to the 
students in Saskatchewan come August 1 in the new student 
loan year how we’re operating here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your comments. I 
too have met with some of the student bodies and they have 
expressed some concern about the administration of student 
loans once the current contract with the Royal Bank continues. 
That’s not to say that they are entirely happy with the present 
arrangement but they at least knew what they were dealing 
with. There was some concerns expressed that perhaps the 
service provider could be an off-shoot of a collection agency 
centred in other . . . in the US (United States) and those sorts of 
things. 
 
I wonder is the minister prepared to provide a bit more detail as 
to who actually will be providing and administering student 
loans after July? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Chair, I think we’re on a roll 
because there’s yet more good news. And in the . . . Arriving at 
an improved student loan system, as I said to the hon. member 
just a moment ago, we’re negotiating with the federal 
government. So Saskatchewan’s contract would be with the 
federal government, that’s who our contract would be with. 
 
Now the federal government has made its decision who the 
service providers will be so we know when we’re contracting 
with the federal government we know who the deliverers will 
be. And the deliverers will be two-fold: EduLinks which is an 
offshoot of CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) and 
will be the service provider for the public institutions . . . 
publicly funded institutions; and BDP which is an offshoot of 
the Bank of Nova Scotia will provide service to the students 
who are taking loans who are going to private vocational 
schools. 
 
One of the significant advantages, I think, of EduLinks — refer 
to them specifically — that say would differentiate them from a 
Royal Bank arrangement that students would have now, is that 
EduLinks does one thing and one thing only — one thing and 
one thing only, and that’s to provide service for student loans; 
that’s their business. So it’s not a part of their business, that’s 
their business. 
 
I was able to get for Saskatchewan students some testimonial 
about experience and give them names of students in other . . . 
who have had previous experience with these loan providers so 
that they can make their own consultations as well. 
 
However I should point out as well that there is a difference too, 
Mr. Chair, in that if we are able to successfully conclude our 
negotiations the loan would actually be made from the 
Government of Canada and the Government of Saskatchewan. 
So rather than it being a Royal Bank loan, service by the Royal 
Bank which is our current circumstance, this would be a 
Government of Saskatchewan loan, which is — and a 
Government of Canada loan — which is serviced then by 
EduLinks or BDP. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the minister indicated that there’d be 
an integration of student loans, yet he mentioned that the 
student would receive a loan from the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada. So would that 
mean then that students would have to fill out two application 
forms, deal with two separate loans, or is it all integrated? It’s 
somewhat confusing and I wonder if the minister would clarify 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 695 

 

the exact procedure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — More good news, Mr. Chair, one 
application form, one loan. And from the point of view of the 
students that’s the simplicity of it. The money — I’m simply 
explaining to the purpose of the House — because as a part of 
our Estimates we have money in student financial assistance 
because some of that money that’s made available in that loan 
would come through the approval of the Post-Secondary 
estimate and would come from the taxpayer of Saskatchewan. 
 
I do point out as well, Mr. Chair, that that’s a very important 
principle which I would not be prepared to give up because the 
approval of the application itself is done by Saskatchewan. So 
it’s the servicing that comes after that would be done by 
EduLinks and BDP if this contract goes through; but the 
approval is by the Province of Saskatchewan of Saskatchewan 
funds. 
 
And that’s extremely important to Saskatchewan students 
because we would have I think what many would consider the 
most generous bursary program and student loans in all of 
Canada sensitive to those with the greatest amount of economic 
need. 
 
Just by way of example, Mr. Chair, in the previous year of some 
$62 million of Saskatchewan loan, literally over $32 million of 
Saskatchewan loan was forgiven. And that’s an extremely 
important principle to Saskatchewan students to know that 
Saskatchewan will retain the right to make the decision about 
the approval for the loan and also that Saskatchewan students 
will continue to be eligible for the Saskatchewan bursary 
program in the student loans. That’s very, very critical and 
something that I would not be prepared to give up. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I noticed in the budget that the 
budgeted amount for student support programs increased 
marginally from 72.6 million to 73.2 million. In view of the fact 
that students may be looking at substantially increased tuition 
fees, does the minister feel that that minimal increase in student 
support will be adequate to service the needs of students? I 
think students are somewhat . . . are already apprehensive when 
they read today’s headlines and look at the budget and see that 
there really isn’t any extra money . . . no new money to help 
them with the anticipated higher costs. I wonder how does the 
minister and his department address this situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Chair, I know the hon. member 
will be pleased to know that there’s more good news. And, Mr. 
Chair, I’ll remind the hon. member of our early reference when 
we were talking about the special warrant and the extra funds 
that were provided as a result of the availability of the 
unanticipated revenues. 
 
The hon. member will recall that I referred to $10.2 million in 
that special warrant being added to the student financial 
assistance. And so there is, in addition to what we see here, and 
I thank the hon. member for raising the question, and to be sure 
that students will understand about the importance and the fact 
that there’s 10 million . . . $10.2 million more than you see in 
the budget here. 
 
I would point out as well, Mr. Chair, that in addition to that, that 

in the budget in support of the financial needs of Saskatchewan, 
that there was $500,000 in the budget for scholarships to go to 
our institutions for first-year scholarships based on merit to 
attract and retain some of Saskatchewan’s best students or 
post-secondary institutions. 
 
And that also the Minister of Finance, I’m pleased, was quite 
co-operative in approving the literal doubling of the education 
tax credit to students. So what that means is that for 
Saskatchewan students, full-time students, the tax credit that 
they have . . . the tax deduction is increased from $200 a month 
to $400 a month and for part-time students from 120 to $240 a 
month. When you put that together, Mr. Chair, what it really 
means is with the new Saskatchewan tax structure that we have 
now which is a tax on income, it would mean when you put that 
together just with the basic deduction that a full-time 
Saskatchewan student could earn, most would be able to earn in 
excess of $11,000 in a single year before paying a single penny 
of Saskatchewan income tax. 
 
And so that’s part of the support for the financial needs of 
Saskatchewan students as well. So the special warrant, 10.2 
million; scholarships, 500,000; and doubling of the tax 
deductions for students in Saskatchewan post-secondary 
institutions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chair, I move that we report 
progress on the estimates for the Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training, 
 
(20:30) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
 

Subvote (EM01) 
 
The Chair: — I’d like to welcome the Minister of Energy and 
Mines, and invite him to introduce to the House, to the 
committee, his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated to my 
right is our deputy minister, Ray Clayton. Immediately to my 
left is Bruce Wilson, executive director, petroleum and natural 
gas. Seated directly behind me is Donald Koop, assistant deputy 
minister of finance and administration. And off to . . . behind 
me and to my right is George Patterson, executive director, 
exploration and geological services. Straight behind me in the 
back row is Doug Koepke, manager, corporate services, and 
Trevor Dark is seated beside him, acting assistant deputy 
minister, resource policy and economics. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
welcome the department officials here this evening. Late as it 
is, we really appreciate their efforts and any contact that I’ve 
had with them in the past has always been very courteous, 
helpful, and I found them to be very competent as well. And I 
haven’t had the opportunity to face this minister in this forum in 
Estimates before. I also look forward to that. 
 
Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I understand that sales of Crown 
petroleum and natural gas rights have been going quite well 



696 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

lately. How much does the province expect to make from the 
proceeds of such sales this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — If the member wouldn’t mind, I’ll 
answer that question directly as well, but I wouldn’t mind just 
giving a little bit of an overview for you first as well. 
 
The Department of Energy and Mines’ mandate first of all is to 
achieve the full and responsible development of 
Saskatchewan’s energy and mineral resources to create jobs and 
sustain economic activity in the province and to optimize 
revenues to fund government programs and services. The 
department works closely with the oil and gas and mining 
sectors. The oil and gas industry in Saskatchewan is currently 
booming as you will know with record levels of natural gas 
drilling in 2000, record level of oil production in 2000, and over 
a billion dollars in revenues collected to fund government 
programs and services. 
 
As a government, we recognize that we must continue to attract 
new development and to spur activity in order to not only 
sustain the industry but also to expand it. In order to do this we 
are focusing on four main areas. First we are supporting the 
development of new technologies to improve recovery rates and 
reduce operating costs. The Petroleum Technology Research 
Centre at the University of Regina Research Park and the 
Saskatchewan petroleum research incentive are examples of this 
support. 
 
Second, we are improving our petroleum geoscience knowledge 
and information available to guide exploration activity. Thirdly, 
we are providing effective and appropriate fiscal regimes such 
as the recently introduced incentives for carbon dioxide 
enhanced oil recovery projects. And finally, we are continuing 
our consultation with industry to ensure that we are aware of 
and understand the issues that they face. 
 
One of the best examples of our consultative approach has been 
the development of the oil and gas well and facility orphan 
program, which we did a second reading on today. This 
program, which the industry requested us to consider, ensures 
that the oil and gas industry accepts its responsibility to protect 
the environment and accept full financial responsibility for 
cleaning up orphaned sites. The program also reduces the risk 
of wells and facilities that are no longer in use from becoming 
orphaned. 
 
The mining industry in Saskatchewan is also doing well. The 
uranium and potash industries in Saskatchewan are the largest 
producers in the world and the largest exporters to world 
markets, accounting for over 30 per cent of the world’s 
production for each of these commodities. The year 2000 saw a 
record level of potash production and value of sales. 
 
As a government we need to encourage more exploration and 
development to take advantage of our excellent geological 
potential. We have recently announced a series of measures 
designed to encourage exploration and development of our 
mineral wealth. These measures include mineral exploration tax 
credit that builds on the federal tax credit; and additional . . . 
additional funding, I should say, for northern geoscience to 
provide more extensive and up-to-date basic geological 
information in maps; reduced mineral permit and claim fees; 

and a new government industry committee to review 
exploration land use issues and making our geological 
information more readily available and useful to industry. 
 
Despite the relatively low prices for some commodities such as 
gold, base medals, and uranium, we need to actively encourage 
more mineral exploration and developments since it can take 
several years from the discovery of a deposit to the 
development of a producing mine. Although our diamond 
deposits are at an early stage of exploration, the results are 
encouraging. Saskatchewan has the world’s highest-grade 
uranium deposits and we are working with the uranium ministry 
on research that will improve our understanding of the potential 
for more uranium deposits in the Athabasca basin of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The department also continues to ensure that existing mining 
operators in the province are as healthy and competitive as 
possible. As an example, we offer a research and development 
incentive for potash producers. We recently announced a capital 
incentive to promote the installation of more effective, efficient 
I should say, production technologies in the sodium sulphate 
industry. And we maintain an excellent working relationship 
with the industry through open dialogue. 
 
And finally, the department has also engaged in several major 
policy issues including climate change, energy conservation, 
and electricity restructuring, that the government will be 
examining in the months and years ahead. 
 
I thank you for that opportunity just to give a little bit of an 
overview. The answer to your question is $50 million. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well for my second question, Mr. Minister, 
how much did the province make from such sales last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay, 55.3 million for the fiscal year 
just ended. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, and Mr. 
Minister, is the Department of Energy and Mines involved in 
any way with the government’s new wind power scheme as 
announced in the Speech from the Throne recently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes we do, and the amount that we have 
budgeted for that item is half a million dollars. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, how will that half a million dollars be spent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The money will actually be provided to 
SaskPower for electrical purposes for government so it’ll be . . . 
the money is funnelled . . . is through Energy and Mines but it’ll 
be provided to SaskPower and they’ll do the actual generation. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, can you give us some idea of the sort of investment 
that the province might expect to receive in this current fiscal 
year from the mining industry and how would that compare 
with the investment in mining last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m sorry, could you clarify the 
question? I think we’re trying to answer different answers I 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 697 

 

think than I think you asked us. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I’m trying to get a handle on the magnitude of 
investment that the department would expect Saskatchewan to 
receive from the mining industry during this current fiscal year, 
and last. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The total investment, including capital 
and exploration, would be in the vicinity of $50 million, we 
anticipate this year. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And last year, 
comparatively? 
 
(20:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The total investment last year was about 
$170 million. And just in anticipation of the question as to why 
it’s down substantially this year . . . is largely because there was 
a completion of a number of the uranium mines last year and 
that isn’t happening this year. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now I’m reading 
from a commentary in The Leader-Post dated May 25, 2000, 11 
months ago. It states that the mining industry will shy away 
from further northern development if circumstances do not 
change. These comments come from the president of the 
Saskatchewan Mining Association and he’s talking about 
provincial royalty fees and red tape. 
 
I’ve discussed this with previous ministers, Mr. Minister, and 
I’m curious what conversations you’ve had with the 
Saskatchewan Mining Association since then and what steps 
have been taken to alleviate this concern of theirs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — As I outlined in the beginning . . . if you 
like we can go through that again but just generally we’ve just 
actually had seriously the same discussions with the president 
of the Saskatchewan Mining Association and I think that they 
had legitimate concerns in direct response to that. Some of the 
things we implemented through the budgetary process, and in 
actually in advance of the budget process, in advance of the 
announcement of the budget, here are a couple of things. 
 
The mineral exploration tax credit which ties in with the federal 
tax credit; additional funding for northern geoscience to provide 
more up-to-date information; reduced mineral permit and claim 
fees; and also the creation of a new government industry 
committee to review exploration land use issues, and then also 
making our geological information more readily available and 
useful to industry and also reviewing of the uranium royalties. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Reviewing, you say 
reviewing of uranium royalties, I understand this is an ongoing 
review and I’m wondering when we could expect to see that 
completed and some action taken in that regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m told that the process started last fall 
and is moving along quite nicely. We anticipate it will come to 
conclusion some time later this year. First of all, any changes 
would be retroactive to January 1 of this year, and the intent 
though, which I should point out, is really to simplify the 
process of royalties as it pertains to uranium. Right now we 

have a very, very complex system of royalties for uranium that 
is I think frustrating for the industry. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, you state that the primary purpose is to simplify. 
Would there be anticipated reductions in uranium royalties as 
well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The primary focus both for ourselves 
and for industry here is simplification. There’s an agreement 
that this will largely be revenue neutral. I’m told that this will 
impact some companies. There will be fluctuations. You’ll see 
some increases and in other places of course you’ll see 
decreases. But there’s an agreement this will be revenue neutral. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In terms of the 
corporate capital tax on resource companies which is unique to 
Saskatchewan, what headway has been made on this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Let me say just generally — first of all I 
think this is more of an issue for the Department of Finance to 
respond to probably specifically — but generally speaking 
clearly in the meetings that I’ve had with all of the industry that 
is affected by this issue of corporate tax, corporate capital tax I 
should say, it clearly is an issue of substantial concern for them. 
I guess the difficulty for government is to try to balance off as 
best we can the need for revenues and at the same time trying to 
ensure that we still have an industry in Saskatchewan that we 
value very much and try and strike that balance. Obviously I 
think we’d like to see a lower corporate capital tax as well, but 
right now that isn’t necessarily in the . . . I don’t want to say in 
the plans, but it certainly isn’t in this year’s budget cycle. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another concern is 
always royalties. Saskatchewan has one of the most onerous 
regimes in the world. Last year you collected close to a billion 
dollars in oil and gas. Are you doing anything to change this 
condition? Are you working towards reducing oil and gas 
royalties or even simplifying them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think on the issues of royalties in the 
area you’ve just asked, simplification is not really an issue 
there. I don’t think industry or ourselves find that issue very 
complicated. The industry has views on the issue but they don’t 
find it complicated. 
 
Let me respond this way. In the meetings also that I’ve had, and 
especially with the oil industry, while we acknowledge again, 
much like the corporate capital tax, that this is an issue that I 
think we would like to make progress on, they tell me that while 
they have concern about it, that’s not their only issue. They 
appreciate the fact, as an example, that they can get issues dealt 
with very quickly here in Saskatchewan with the Energy and 
Mines department. They appreciate the fact that in a number of 
areas they have to deal with less regulation sometimes, so it’s 
not just a matter of royalties. 
 
But I acknowledge the concern that you raised and the concern 
that they have as well, and I know that we would want to move 
in that direction as well when we think we are able to 
financially. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 



698 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

Minister, I believe that Energy and Mines has been heading 
towards digital staking of mining claims for the whole of the 
province. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Apparently, it’s not correct. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Could you explain to me what progress has 
been made or what distance has been travelled along this road 
then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We have currently available digital 
claim maps, and we are making progress. But you will not be 
able to stake a claim that way for some time yet. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, is it 
your goal and the department’s goal to get there someday in the 
not-too-distant future? Is that something you’re working 
towards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m told you’ll be able to claim via the 
Internet, but you still have to stake on the ground for the 
foreseeable future anyway. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ve had several 
complaints from mining companies about the added prospecting 
costs because of this feature, and that’s why I asked the 
questions. 
 
But to move on, does your department have any plans to 
encourage increased investment in oil and gas and, if not 
through reduced royalties in the near future, through reduced 
taxes or incentives of any kind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you. In our budget this year, you 
may be aware there was provisions with respect to CO2 
projects. Also in the geoscience mapping that I referred to 
earlier, there was also a specific section that applied to southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(21:00) 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, regarding the 
920,000 I think that will be spent this year on enhancing the 
geoscience program, can you explain how that money will be 
expended, Mr. Minister, and what benefits we could expect to 
accrue from that expenditure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Of the money that you refer to, about 
half of it will go to the North, which is primarily for mining, of 
course. And in the South, the other half is largely for petroleum. 
We’re in consultation with both industries to determine the 
exact programs, I think, exactly the way they would want them 
implemented. But generally, we have found that for every dollar 
you invest or spend in this process, there is roughly $3 spent in 
exploration, so we see it as a good investment. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What are the 
government’s latest projections as far as oil and gas reserves 
currently in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Of the remaining reserves, it’s estimated 
that in oil there’s about 1.1 billion barrels. In gas, there’s about 
2.4 trillion cubic feet. 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. For my benefit, and 
others’ I’m sure, how is that calculated? Can you tell me if 
that’s just in known, in producing fields, or is there other areas 
that are expected to be producing areas in the future also taken 
into account? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — With today’s technology, these are 
largely just the proven reserves. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Regarding uranium 
mining in the North, can you tell us what the output in uranium 
was for the past year and how that compares to previous years, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — For the year 2000 it was 29.8 million 
pounds. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and compared to 
previous years — say the previous year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In 1999 it was 21.8 million pounds. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Do you foresee any 
major expansion, Mr. Minister, in the uranium industry in 
Saskatchewan anytime soon and particularly over the next year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I guess just an example, the Cigar Lake 
and the Midwest mines when they come into production, there 
will obviously be a significant increase but it will largely be up 
to world markets and obviously to these companies to 
determine when those mines come into full production and 
when they do there will be a significant increase. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, there’s been a serious glut of uranium on world 
markets for several years. Do you or your department have any 
handle on how we are doing at eating up that pile or do we face 
several more years of lower than normal uranium prices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think generally, unfortunately, and I 
qualify again by saying generally analysts would predict that we 
were probably several more years of oversupply before we 
reach a supply/demand that is . . . would see higher prices, I 
should say. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, do 
you expect potash production to be higher or lower in this fiscal 
year than last and some reasons to back up your answer please, 
either way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The markets have held generally pretty 
steady and we would project it to be about exactly the same this 
year as it was last year. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Okay, Mr. Minister. In an average year, how 
much potash is mined in the province? And as well, compared 
to the output that we used to expect 10 to 15 years ago. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — For the year 2000, it was 8.2 million 
tonnes, and just as an example, we’ve got . . . the numbers we 
have right here, 10 years ago it was about . . . That’s up; 10 
years ago it was about 6 million tonnes. 
 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 699 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, how 
much revenue is generated from the 15 cent a litre road tax from 
the oil and gas and mining industries from fuel used in off-road 
applications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Sorry, we don’t have that information. 
I’m sure the Department of Finance could provide that for you 
though. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you tell us how 
many new oil wells were drilled in Saskatchewan in the year 
2000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Twenty-four hundred and two new oil 
wells — 2,402. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, what 
was the total number of oil wells in production last year, in the 
year 2000 in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There were approximately 20,000 oil 
wells in production last year. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Was this much of an 
increase from the previous year, 1999? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It was about a 7 per cent increase over 
1999. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Gas wells, Mr. 
Minister, how many gas wells last year and compared to the 
previous year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In 1999 we had 9,332 gas wells; in the 
year 2000 there were about 10,483 . . . I shouldn’t say about, 
there were exactly 10,483 for a 12 per cent increase. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Do you have a 
forecast for the coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m told that for both the oil and gas we 
are anticipating a very similar year in the year 2001 to what 
we’ve just experienced in the year 2000. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How many people 
were employed in the oil and gas sector in Saskatchewan during 
the year 2000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m told to qualify this by saying for 
sure that this is an estimate. It’s for the oil and gas industry both 
direct and indirect; we estimate that we employ about 20,800 
people. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The price of a barrel 
of oil has been trending slightly lower recently; do you have 
any estimates as to how this will affect new drilling in the 
current fiscal year, or if it will affect new drilling? 
 
(21:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m told as long as we stay over the $20 
West Texas per barrel, you won’t see any significant reduction 
in the amount of activity. As an example, today we are 

apparently sitting right around the $28 mark, so we’re 
substantially above the $20 mark. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, how 
many applications for drilling have been received for the year 
2001, drilling for gas or oil? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The most recent figures we have, to the 
member, are to April 13 of this year. We had 962 licences 
issued for both oil and gas. That is down slightly from last year 
when we had at this point in time, to the middle of April as 
well, 1,103 licences issued. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And the total 
number of licences issued last year for both oil and gas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — 4,108. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Do you or your 
department have any prices, projections, formulated for the 
price of natural gas over the coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — For our current calendar year we are 
using $5.86 per gigajoule Canadian. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and any projections 
for the price of light crude oil over the next year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again for the current calendar year, we 
are using for budgetary purposes $25.50 per barrel. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The April 3, 2000 
The Leader-Post an article by Bruce Johnstone states that the 
oil industry says it didn’t get much on its return on its 
investment in the March budget. The quote from the president 
of the Flatland Exploration Ltd. of Regina states that: 
 

The only good thing is that the taxes are so high here there 
isn’t a lot of competition. 

 
Mr. Chair, my question for the minister is what is being done to 
reduce taxes for the oil industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m told that right now the average 
royalty tax rate amounts to 15.5 per cent, which means that of 
course there’s 85 per cent in industry’s hands. If the prices drop 
and the prices weaken, I should say, of course their percentage 
. . . this will go down, as the royalties are price sensitive. 
 
But having said that, again we acknowledge that this is an issue, 
the issue of royalties, the point that you make. And when we 
think that we are able to I think we would want to move in a 
direction that would continue to create an environment that the 
oil industry sees Saskatchewan as a good place to do business, 
and we would want to improve that situation for them if we 
could. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
Saskatchewan has the highest royalties in the country. That 
scares away investment. Last year when asked the question, the 
minister in charge, the member from Prince Albert Northcote, 
stated they would look into this. 
 



700 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, can you give the Assembly an update 
on what has been done to lower these royalties in hopes of 
attracting more business to Saskatchewan? And I think at this 
time, when the government has just collected at least $1 billion 
in royalties from the industry, I think surely this is a time that 
something can be done. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I guess I would respond by saying this, 
last year we had record oil and gas prices. We also had a record 
number of wells drilled last year. We would be of the view, and 
I think probably industry as well, that the time really — 
although we’re always sensitive to this issue — the time really 
to be considering reduction of oil leases is when prices start to 
soften and weaken and you want to keep the industry going. 
 
Again I say, we acknowledge that this is a concern for the 
industry, and I think it’s an area that we also want to make 
headway on if we are able to. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, I understand that it’s difficult to 
lower royalties across the board, but the Canadian Association 
of Petroleum Producers would like to see the government 
reduce royalties on new wells. What, if anything, is being done 
in that regard, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There were major changes, as the 
member might be aware, in 1998. In 1999 there was reduced 
royalties on high-water-cut wells. Of course this year we had 
the CO2 program that I just spoke of. Beyond that there aren’t 
any specific programs targeted at new wells. 
 
One of the things I would say as well, that in the recent 
SaskPower rate . . . when there was a rate increase we also took 
advantage of the opportunity to do readjusting within the oil 
industry because it was an issue for them. The power rates for 
them were reduced on average by 3 percentage points for the oil 
industry, for which they were appreciative and we acknowledge 
that we need to move further in that regard as well. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I acknowledge that, Mr. Minister. Can you tell 
me if there’s been any steps taken to facilitate cogeneration of 
power for oil fields, particularly in the southeast of this 
province where they are burdened with pumping large 
quantities of water in places? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — That has really nothing to do with 
Energy and Mines. That’s not their mandate to deal with that 
specific issue at all. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:32. 
 
 


