















































Hansard: April 18, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 565 
 April 18, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to present a petition signed by a number of my 
constituents from Rosetown-Biggar. It is in regard to the 
government’s Crown corporations, SaskPower and SaskEnergy 
both recently announcing significant rate increases for 
residential and business customers. The petition states: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 
government to use a portion of its windfall oil and gas 
revenues to provide a more substantial energy rebate to 
Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are from Lucky Lake, Birsay, 
Outlook, Beechy, Rosetown, and Saskatoon, and I’m happy to 
present them. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
to present today on the EMS (emergency medical services) 
report that was given to government: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Naicam and 
Pleasantdale. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the ever-increasing cost of 
utilities. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 
government to use a portion of its windfall oil and gas 
revenues to provide a more substantial energy rebate to 
Saskatchewan consumers. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
community of Melfort. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with proposed weight 
restrictions on Highway 43. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 
government to recognize the economic harm its plan to 
close Highway 43 to heavy traffic will do to south-central 
Saskatchewan and instead to vote necessary funds to 

upgrade Highway 43 in order to preserve jobs and 
economic development in the area. 

 
And the petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Vanguard, Pambrun, Aneroid, and Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people from across southwest Saskatchewan concerned about 
the state of their hospital. And the prayer of this petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the 
city of Swift Current, from Kyle, from Hazlet, from Ponteix, 
Wymark, and Stewart Valley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
who are concerned about the EMS development project. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Radville, Weyburn, 
Regina, Balgonie, Tribune, and Ceylon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present 
a petition to retain the Hafford Hospital. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take necessary steps to ensure the Hafford 
Hospital remains open. 
 

And this is signed by the good citizens of Hafford, North 
Battleford, and Maymont, and Speers, Saskatchewan. Thank 
you. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — A petition signed on behalf of residents of 
Moose Jaw and the surrounding area. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public place and workplaces, and to control youth access to 
tobacco products. 



566 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2001 

 

And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present a 
petition concerning tobacco use in our society. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-smoke in public 
places and workplaces, and to control youth access to 
tobacco products. 
 

And this petition is signed mostly by people from Moose Jaw, 
as well as an individual from Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition signed by a 
number of my constituents concerned about the high cost of 
power and energy rates. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The petitioners are from Bladworth, Girvin, Davidson, 
Langham and Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to table petitions in support of comprehensive tobacco control 
legislation. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places and workplaces, and to control youth access 
to tobacco products. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are from the city of Moose Jaw, 
from Marquis, and from Pense. 
 
And I do table. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to present a 
petition today on behalf of constituents. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 

to affirm its intent to improve the community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And signatures to this petition come from the community of 
Wynyard and Leslie. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the high 
energy rates. And the petition is: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 

And petitioners from Saskatchewan are from Leask, Mullingar, 
Spiritwood, and Chitek Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 
with a petition from concerned citizens reference the cuts at the 
Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, these come from throughout the constituency 
in all of southern Saskatchewan — Assiniboia, Willow Bunch, 
Shaunavon, Verwood, Redvers, Fir Mountain, Scout Lake, 
Flintoft, and Wood Mountain. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Petitions on the following matters: 
 

Ensuring the Hafford hospital remains open; 
 
The centralization of ambulance services; 
 
A new hospital for Swift Current; 
 
Funding to upgrade Highway 43; 
 
Legislation to protect children from tobacco use; and 
 
An energy rebate to consumers. 



April 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 24 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Social Services: does the province have 
any responsibility for administering any funds received 
from the federally funded Head Start program; if so, which 
provincial departments receive funding, and how much? 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on day no. 24 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation: how much municipal and school tax did CIC 
pay on the potato storage facilities to the RM of Rudy and 
to the town of Broderick; were there any grants in lieu of 
taxes paid, and what is that amount; what was the amount 
that the RM of Rudy filed on its tax notice to CIC for the 
potato facilities at the town of Broderick? 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 24 ask the government the following questions: 
 

Regarding Crown expenditures on external investment 
travel: how much was spent on travel outside of Canada by 
officials of SGI and its subsidiaries to investigate 
investments made or under consideration during the year 
1999? 

 
I have similar questions for the year 2000 and for the current 
year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on day no. 24 
ask the government the following question: 
 

How much was spent on travel outside of Saskatchewan 
but within Canada by officials of SGI and its subsidiaries to 
investigate investments made or under consideration during 
the year 1999? 

 
With again similar questions for each of the following years. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, a friend that I’ve known for, I guess it’s 
14 years now, Gunnar, Gunnar Passmore of the Sheet Metal 
Workers’ Union, in the west gallery. And I’ll ask all hon. 
members to join me in welcoming Gunnar to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and through to the Assembly, a gentleman and 
his daughter seated in your gallery, Mr. Glen Gardner and his 
daughter Lindsay. Mr. Gardner is the son of a former member 
of this Assembly, John Gardner, and we’re pleased to see Glen. 
 
And I think the idea was to give Lindsay a bit of a view of what 
the Assembly . . . how the Assembly operates, and so we want 

to welcome them this morning to the . . . this afternoon to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would 
like to join with the member opposite in welcoming Glen and 
Lindsay Gardner. Lindsay is enjoying her Easter break. She’s a 
high school student at Kennedy High School. She has very 
much an interest in politics, and of course everyone knows her 
dad, Glen Gardner who is my chief of staff. And Lindsay is the 
granddaughter of John Gardner, who is the former MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly). 
 
So I’d ask all members to welcome them to the Assembly 
today. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all member of 
the Assembly, my two daughters, Carla and Krystal. And they 
are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Carla is in grade 11 and 
Krystal in grade 8. 
 
And I think to avoid the possibility of becoming bored, Mr. 
Speaker, they both insisted that they bring their best friends 
with them on this trip. And Carla has as a guest with her, 
Jennifer Campeau, and I think a lot of members should 
recognize Jennifer’s name. Her father, Mr. Alvin Campeau, is a 
very, very well respected leader in the Aboriginal community 
and in Saskatchewan’s business community. 
 
And Krystal’s guest is Paige Logan, and Paige’s parents, Craig 
and Glenda Logan, farm in the Porcupine area. I would ask 
everyone to join me in welcoming Carla, Krystal, Jennifer, and 
Paige. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to introduce two friends of mine and guests in the 
west gallery. Allan Appelby has joined us this afternoon, and 
Colleen Richert. 
 
Allan has made a long-time contribution to environmental 
work, both working within SERM (Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management) and in the environmental 
movement for the World Wildlife Fund, and also for the 
Saskatchewan branch of the Canadian Parks and Wilderness 
Society. 
 
(13:45) 
 
And Colleen lives in my riding, and is executive director of the 
Saskatchewan branch of the Canadian Parks and Wilderness 
Society. 
 
I’ve enjoyed very much my association with both these fine 
people and I’d like all members to join me in welcoming them 
to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 



568 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2001 

 

gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and to all 
members of the legislature, two guests who have travelled from 
Saskatoon to attend question period. 
 
I’d like to introduce Mary von Dewitz and her daughter Brigid 
von Dewitz. Both Mary and Brigid are on a bit of an Easter 
vacation from school. Mary teaches at the Martensville School 
and Bridget attends that school. 
 
And just on another note, these two citizens of Saskatchewan 
come from a fine family. And they are related to Chief Justice 
Emmett Hall who was the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 
of Canada. And I’d like to welcome both of them to the 
Legislative Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the House, a 
young gentleman sitting in the west gallery, Brad Smith, who is 
a constituent and a sometimes neighbour when he’s not here in 
Regina attending university. 
 
Brad has always had a keen interest in politics and for quite a 
number of years has been very involved. So it’s good to see him 
here this afternoon, and I’d like all members to welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Lloydminster Border Kings Win Allan Cup 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 
congratulate the outstanding hockey achievement of the 
Lloydminster Border Kings in winning the Allan Cup last 
weekend in Sarnia, Ontario. As you might know, the Allan Cup 
represents the Canadian senior level hockey championship. 
 
During the four-team round robin play during the week, the 
Border Kings went undefeated and gained a place in the final 
game against Pretoria. The final score was 7 to 2 for the Border 
Kings. 
 
Special congratulations should go to head coach Bill Thon and 
the coaching staff, as well as a pat on the back must go to the 
team captain Merv Mann, and all the players, managers, and 
trainers. The goaltender, Jason Clague, was declared 
tournament most valuable player. 
 
Over the years a special association has evolved, Mr. Speaker, 
with the Allan Cup. Since the early part of the last century, the 
Allan Cup has represented the best level of amateur hockey in 
Canada. Many Allan Cup winners were chosen to represent 
Canada in world and Olympic competition. 
 
Some might remember names like the Toronto Marlboros, the 
Trail Smoke Eaters, Edmonton Flyers, and the Penticton V’s. In 
fact, no other Saskatchewan team has won this Allan Cup for 
over 50 years, so Mr. Speaker, I would ask the members to join 
in congratulating the 2001 Allan Cup champions, the 
Lloydminster Border Kings. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Western Producer Survey 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
we come back refreshed from our Easter break, I’m happy to 
bring to the Assembly news that should make us all feel even 
better — at least those of us who by nature and by evidence are 
optimistic about the future of the province. That is every sector 
of our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A survey commissioned by The Western Producer and released 
last Thursday says that 96 per cent of agricultural producers in 
the three Prairie provinces expect to remain in business in the 
coming year. Significantly 80 per cent of those surveyed said 
they plan on being around for at least the next five years. Most 
telling and most important, Mr. Speaker, 94 per cent of farmers 
under the age of 40 have the strongest sense of optimism and 
clearly expect to be still farming five years from now. 
 
As Glenn Caleval, marketing director for The Western Producer 
points out, this survey was taken in the first two weeks of 
March, a critical time at which farmers can expect to have a 
good understanding of their business position for the coming 
year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that prairie farmers are in the 
midst of a critical time and no one would minimize the serious 
economic problems they face. But these business people who 
have experienced the best and the worst that climate and 
markets can throw at them are not sentimental or unrealistic 
about their prospects. If they say they’re going to be with us for 
a significant time, I think we would be imprudent to question 
their optimism. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Investment in Ontario 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Well, more good news for Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Contrary to what some people thought, the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) does have a job creation strategy. The only 
catch is the jobs are in Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that Mr. Harris and his Tory government 
were thrilled to find out that this NDP government has 
confidence in Ontario as a place to invest, even though 
Ontario’s government and economy is now slowing. The 
government assured that this new investment will make money 
despite the fact it has fallen on hard times the last several years. 
Can it possibly be that the NDP is trying to divert attention 
from the fact we’re losing people to Alberta by losing people to 
Ontario instead? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the recent Liberal convention passed a motion 
saying we should not be investing through our Crowns outside 
of Saskatchewan. I call upon all Liberal MLAs to support that 
motion. If our Crown corporations do not have confidence and 
faith in the future of this province, how will anyone else have 
confidence? If our Crown corporations are determined to invest 
outside of Saskatchewan rather than inside, why would other 



April 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 569 

 

businesses have more confidence than the NDP has? 
 

New Hospital for Melville 
 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
discuss a very important concern in my constituency — 
something near and dear to those who live in the Melville 
constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The St. Peter’s Hospital replacement project is the endeavour of 
various boards and volunteers who have worked more than 16 
years to bring a new hospital to the area. This is a fulfilment of 
communities of people who have worked hard through setbacks 
and false starts to create a facility for not only Melville, but a 
dozen surrounding rural communities. 
 
These are communities who have and continue to work hard to 
raise the local share of the cost necessary for the hospital — 
community suppers, celebrity roasts, silent auctions, talent 
shows, and even the buzz cut promotion I spoke of last week. 
And these people are about to be rewarded, as Melville’s 
integrated health care facility will begin construction this spring 
and is underway. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I cannot believe that the member opposite, 
the so-called health critic, would take advantage of rural people 
to score political points, the way he did last Thursday. His party 
says they are sick of hearing us talk about their negativity, and 
yet he would try and play on the fears of people in my 
constituency. Shame on him, Mr. Speaker. Shame on the 
member for Melfort. The Fyke report will have no bearing on 
the construction of a hospital in Melville. The Melville project 
was in the works long before the Fyke report and its capital 
building project. 
 
I’d invite the member from Melfort for the ribbon cutting next 
fall, but he might be too busy hunting for white elephants. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prairie Region Cadet Honour Band 
Plays at Centre of the Arts 

 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last evening a capacity crowd at the Centre of the Arts was 
treated to a spectacular show of musical and artistic 
performances by the Prairie Region Cadet Honour Band. 
 
This band of 12- to 18-year old military cadets presented a 
salute to Canada’s peacekeepers. Twelve cadets from Royal 
Canadian Air Cadet Squadron 745 Porcupine were in 
attendance. They were Flight Sgt. Ryan Kwiatkowski, Cpl. 
Todd Sabean, Cpl. Ashley Harris, Cpl. Jeff Kwiatkowski, LAC 
(leading air cadet) Krystal Kwiatkowski, LAC Blaine Langdon, 
LAC Garett Langdon, LAC Raymond Gibson, AC Preston 
Langdon, AC (air cadet) Mellissa Messner, AC Cory Baron, 
and AC Amie Kurylowich. 
 
These cadets were accompanied by Second Lieutenant Carol 
Larwood, civilian instructor Jay Kwiatkowski, chair of the 
parent sponsor committee, Debbie Gibson, and many parents, 
grandparents, and volunteers. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Canada’s peacekeeping legacy began in 1956. 
Over the last 50 years, Canadian Forces personnel have faced 
difficult and dangerous situations as they continue to take on 
tasks such as military observers and peace agreement 
implementers. 
 
I would ask all members of the Assembly, of the legislature, to 
join with me and Squadron 745 Porcupine in thanking all 
peacekeeping veterans, current peacekeepers, and future 
peacekeepers for their commitment and valour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Chaplin Pulse Plant 
 

Mr. Harper: — More good news for Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. For years, the small town of Chaplin on the 
Trans-Canada Highway made a tiny little contribution to our 
provincial economy through its sodium sulphate plant — 
originally a Crown-owned asset but sold off by the Devine 
government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of Chaplin are going to make 
another contribution in another way, showing once again the 
entrepreneurial spirit which is doing so much to keep 
Saskatchewan humming. 
 
Construction began last week on a major specialty 
crop-processing plant. The plant will be built in the town’s 
existing elevator bought from the Sask. Wheat Pool. It will 
process and bag field peas, chickpeas, and lentils on a 
toll-processing basis for pulse marketing companies. 
 
The plant is expected to be in operation by August and will 
employ 22 people — for a town the size of Chaplin, no small 
number. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one producer who was interviewed for a TV news 
story said that the producers he knows have no intention of 
going anywhere but right here, at home. They have confidence 
in Saskatchewan and more to the point they have a deep 
affection for their home and have no desire to belittle it. 
 
There’s a lesson in Chaplin for all of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn Inland Terminal 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Twenty-five years 
ago, a group of farmers had a vision for the future. They were 
unhappy with grain handling and transportation on the prairies. 
They were looking for a way to do it better, fairer, and cheaper. 
 
They wanted a grain company to call their own and so the 
Weyburn Inland Terminal was born — the first farmer-owned 
terminal in Canada. The company was built on the philosophy 
of adding value to the crop, more returns for farmers, and 
creating jobs in Weyburn and area. 
 
Through the years several firsts have been accomplished at the 
terminal. They were first to do protein testing, first to clean and 
dry grain on the prairies, first to ship 100-car grain units, first to 



570 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2001 

 

pay farmers freight and dockage incentives, the first to show 
elevator tariffs on cash tickets, the first to construct and sell 
condo storage, and the first and only major grain company to 
assess tariffs on a net weight basis. 
 
Weyburn Inland Terminal is stronger now than ever, 
out-earning giants like the Wheat Pool and UGG (United Grain 
Growers Limited) in the year 2000 and paying record dividends 
to its shareholders. 
 
Today the Weyburn Inland Terminal is a debt-free company, 
has state-of-the-art assets, and a track record of profitability for 
its shareholders. Truly a great Saskatchewan success story, 
where people had a dream, where they were not afraid to invest 
their own money and to work hard to make that dream a reality. 
 
Congratulations on 25 great years, and many more successes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Globe and Mail Article on Economic Performance 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. On Saturday The Globe and Mail released its 
ranking of the 10 provincial economies. It’s an objective report 
card on economic performance based on seven economic 
indicators. 
 
And how did our NDP government score on this report card? It 
came in last — dead last. The NDP mismanagement here in 
Saskatchewan show that we have the weakest economy in all of 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time for the NDP government to take 
responsibility for its dismal performance, dismal economic 
performance, instead of blaming everyone else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why does this NDP government 
have the very worst economic record in Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d be very pleased to answer that question. 
 
And I want to begin by saying that the article is clearly 
influenced by the crisis that we have in agriculture in this 
province. The most recent statistics that we have will show that 
we’ve lost 13,800 jobs in agriculture, but those same stats show 
that we’ve increased in non-ag jobs almost 2,500 more. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say as well, that this article does 
give a quick snapshot in time. A year ago it showed 
Saskatchewan in tenth, six months later it showed us in fourth 
place, and now again in tenth. So it is a quick snapshot. 
 
What is important, Mr. Speaker, is that businessmen and 
women, working people in this province, are building a stronger 
economy, they’re building a more diversified economy, and 
their doing it, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the negative influence of 
members opposite. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well here they 
go again, blaming somebody else, blaming anybody but 
themselves. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has been in power for 10 
years. This is their record, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is the 
only province losing jobs and it’s not the only province with 
agriculture important in its economy. 
 
But further to that, Mr. Speaker, housing starts are down 18.6 
per cent — that’s the worst in Canada and that’s the NDP 
record. Retail trade has grown just 0.6 per cent, the worst in 
Canada — that’s the NDP record. This is their government, Mr. 
Speaker; this is their economic record. And it’s a disaster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the NDP doing to turn this around? Just 
once, can the Premier get through a whole answer or can his 
minister get through a whole answer without blaming someone 
else? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand the 
sensitivity of members opposite because they haven’t had a 
positive thing to say in this legislature or in this province since 
the inception of their new party. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what I want to say is that economists will 
know that this province has grown GDP (gross domestic 
product) eight years in a row; they know that we have led this 
country in growth. We also understand the problems in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, they live there. 
 
Members on that side of the House know what’s happening in 
the agricultural community and they know the negative impact 
that that is having on Saskatchewan’s economy. But in spite of 
that, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to grow this 
economy by decreasing taxes, by continuing to work with the 
business community, by continuing to grow and diversify this 
economy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they might not like the fact that this 
province is working and it’s growing, but I want to say to you, 
Mr. Speaker, they’re in the minority and they’re going to stay in 
the minority. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
minister totally ignores the fact that The Globe and Mail — this 
is not the mouth organ of the Saskatchewan Party, I assure you 
— The Globe and Mail has given the NDP a great big F for 
economic performance. And the comment section of the report 
card is even worse. And I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Saskatchewan’s economy has been hugely disappointing in 
recent months. It is the only province in which the number 
of jobs has actually fallen. Housing starts plunged by 
almost 90 per cent and capital spending is expected to fall. 



April 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 571 

 

This is the economic report card the Premier has brought home. 
And what’s his excuse, Mr. Speaker? The kids across the aisle 
are picking on me? Is that his excuse? Is that the best he can 
do? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are tired of excuses. This is 
the Premier’s government. It’s his record; it’s his mess. What is 
he doing to clean it up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want the 
Leader of the Opposition to think that we’re picking on him. I 
don’t want him to think that. But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
where was he when The Globe and Mail on November 6 of the 
year 2000, just a few short months ago, headlined 
“Saskatchewan emerges as star of the ’90s,” measuring our 
GDP growth, every other jurisdiction in this country, Mr. 
Speaker, we were leading. 
 
Where was he, Mr. Speaker, when The Leader-Post . . . or The 
StarPhoenix reports “Youth gaining in job markets,” saying 
things are good for the youth in this province, for young people 
in terms of the ability to find employment, the fact that we’re 
employing more . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would just like members to allow the 
statements and the questions and the answers to be heard. The 
minister may continue for another 10 seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, we’re only trying to 
point out that this economy in the last 10 years has been 
growing. Now you can pick out a one-day statistic and you can 
put that up in the air, as I have done with this article that says 
Saskatchewan leads the country. Mr. Speaker, what’s important 
is jobs and business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Rates 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the minister responsible for SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Saturday morning every SaskEnergy customer 
in the province woke up to a stinky gas leak, Mr. Speaker. 
Word had leaked out that SaskEnergy is preparing a 40 to 50 
per cent rate hike in the province of Saskatchewan, something 
we were talking about about two weeks ago. That’s about $400 
per year per residential customer and potentially thousands of 
dollars per year for municipalities, for hospitals, and for 
businesses. 
 
And it’s on top of a rate hike we’ve already gone through over 
the winter months from SaskEnergy of about 23 per cent. 
 
And what has been the NDP response, Mr. Speaker? The $25 
rebate that they announced two weeks ago. 
 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: does the NDP really think a $25 
rebate is enough to offset SaskEnergy bills that are going up 
hundreds and in some cases thousands of dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m certainly 
pleased to answer that question. Mr. Speaker, for some length 
of time I’ve answered questions like that in the House. Mr. 
Speaker, SaskEnergy currently sells at 4.52 per unit — which is 
a gigajoule — 4.52 they sell it at. We buy it at, today, checking 
today’s markets, $7.50, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Unless the markets fall through the floor, Mr. Speaker, unless 
they fall through the floor, it is logical that in the near future 
SaskEnergy will probably have to come before ourselves and 
the Rate Review Board. But they have not come before us with 
a proposal and recommendation for a rate increase yet, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, everyone understands that the price 
of natural gas has gone up around the world and SaskEnergy 
gains no additional money as a result of the rate hikes. 
 
However, however the government does gain additional 
revenue when the price of natural gas is skyrocketing — 
significant new revenue. In fact, last year they got about $500 
million more than they budgeted in windfall revenues from the 
oil and gas sector. That money is now sitting in the 
government’s bank account but they say they won’t share it 
with any of SaskEnergy’s customers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy is raising rates to recover its increased 
costs. Why won’t the government help Saskatchewan families 
cover their household costs, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in case the member 
has forgotten, and the public of Saskatchewan may not 
remember, in the 1980s when that member was a ministerial 
assistant in the Devine government, Mr. Speaker, who sold off 
the gas reserves, Mr. Speaker? Who sold off the gas reserves, 
Mr. Speaker? If we would have those reserves, Mr. Speaker, 
today, we would have a few more options than we do today, 
Mr. Speaker — a few more options. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. The member will 
continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That party 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, pleaded and begged for the government 
to move to a deregulated, market-driven economy, Mr. Speaker. 
Well news for them, Mr. Speaker — we’re here. We’re here, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they don’t seem to realize that now that we’re in a 
deregulated environment, now that it’s a market-driven 
economy largely because of the deregulation, Mr. Speaker, 
somehow they don’t want it anymore, Mr. Speaker. You can’t 
have it both ways. 



572 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — It’s true, Mr. Speaker. I worked for a government 
in the ’80s that was clearly becoming tired, old, and out of 
touch with Saskatchewan people. And you don’t have to look 
far to realize that history’s repeating itself today right across the 
way — right over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has no problem protecting the 
Crowns from high commodity prices. Those increases are 
simply passed along to residents and businesses. So far the 
government has ruled out even considering protecting 
Saskatchewan residents from this same problem, high prices, 
more than the $25 they’ve committed to. Even the minister’s 
own officials are at least trying to figure out a way to ease the 
blow of a 50 per cent rate hike. 
 
To the minister of SaskEnergy: will he at least commit to 
raising the possibility of an improved rebate plan for 
Saskatchewan people with his cabinet colleagues at the next 
earliest opportunity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, while I have just described 
the scenario, that is that we are selling heating fuel, SaskEnergy 
is selling, at four fifty-two and buying at seven fifty, I remind 
the member again that there has been no application brought to 
us with respect to a recommendation about an increase. So the 
member is speculating, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I want to again remind the public of 
Saskatchewan, that member, Mr. Speaker, would have us 
provide rebates, would have us provide large rebates. First of 
all, the province doesn’t have the resources to do it, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve spent money on roads; we’ve spent money on 
health care; we’ve spent money on education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, and I look at what our Crown has done, 
SaskEnergy, they’ve provided good, reasonable rates that have 
consistently — consistently — been 15 to 20 per cent below 
almost anywhere else in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this minister is turning 
the phrase minister responsible into an oxymoron in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker — shirking responsibility that he has to 
the taxpayers of the province and the customers of SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government seems to believe that the windfall 
revenue that they’ve generated from the oil and gas sector, that 
they’re raking in even today, belongs to the Government of 
Saskatchewan. It’s their personal stash. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe it is the people’s money. It belongs to 
the people of the province. We’re not asking the minister to 
announce additional rebates today. We’re simply asking him to 
consider something greater than the $25 pizza rebate he 
promised two weeks ago. Will he do that today, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, I’m reading 
from the Humboldt Journal of April 12 and there’s an article 
about . . . the title is “Julé (the member from Humboldt) defends 
her vote against the budget.” And in that article she says what 

they often say over there. They say that the spending for 
highways and education and tax cutting that we’re doing, she 
says, I don’t believe the budget is sustainable. 
 
So one day they’re saying we’re spending too much money on 
the highways and education and tax cuts. The next day they’re 
saying we should spend more, Mr. Speaker. And the problem 
with that is it’s the same old Stockwell Day inspired voodoo 
economics that got this province into trouble in the 1980s, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what it is. The reality, Mr. Speaker, is they 
want to get up and tell the people that this government is sitting 
on a bunch of money that could be given out. They said the 
same thing last year, and if we’d taken their advice last year 
we’d be in deficit now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We must not go back into deficit and debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Impact of Reassessment 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Municipal Affairs. In the 2001 
provincial budget, the NDP decided to spend $50 million 
making big government even bigger instead of increasing 
revenue-sharing grants to municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result municipalities across Saskatchewan 
will be forced to increase property taxes this year and add . . . 
except of course for government properties. That’s because 
property owned by the government departments and Crown 
corporations will pay grants in lieu of property taxes to 
municipalities and school divisions based on last year’s 
assessment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP forcing everybody else in 
Saskatchewan to pay taxes based on the new 2001 assessment 
while Crown corporations and government department continue 
to use the old assessment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
hopefully be able to clarify for the opposition the fact that 
government properties do not pay taxes. They pay grants in lieu 
of taxes. 
 
Four years ago and during the ’80s, municipalities did not 
receive any money for government property. The provincial 
government, like the federal government and other provinces, is 
exempt from paying taxes to municipal government. However, 
in 1988-89 the province made a policy that over a four-year 
period they would in fact pay grants to urban municipalities 
where Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation owned 
and managed properties. 
 
That commitment, four-year commitment’s been met. It’s gone 
beyond what the expectations would have been. It’s at 13.1 
million instead of just over 12 million. What do they want? Do 
they not want this government to help communities? What do 
they want? Not give those communities those grants? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 573 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
the same old story from this tired NDP/Liberal government. It’s 
one set of rules for the NDP and another set of rules for the rest 
of us. 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. The Assembly will 
allow the member to put the question. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
one set of rules for the NDP and it’s another set of rules for the 
rest of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Linda Walker owns a hotel in Val Marie. She says 
her property taxes are going to almost double this year thanks to 
reassessment. So she’s going to have to lay off staff to pay the 
tax bill. Mel Tweten is the owner of the Leader hotel. He says 
his new tax bill is going to mean layoffs at his business too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these two small-business owners want the minister 
to explain why the NDP government has the option of using last 
year’s assessments and last year’s tax rates, while everyone else 
is forced to use the new 2001 assessments and the new tax rates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess . . . I’m not 
sure how I can make it clear enough. We do not pay taxes, they 
are grants — g-r-a-n-t-s. Up until 1998 those grants were not in 
place for government-owned properties. There was an 
agreement for four years to achieve what we have to this year 
— over $13 million in grants. No taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t know what the . . . we’re not dodging reassessment or 
shortchanging local governments. In fact this year, as I said, the 
new approach has given those communities over $13 million in 
grants. And I’ll be happy to name some of the communities and 
the amounts they received, including this city and Saskatoon, 
and all the communities that received grants — grants, Mr. 
Speaker — in lieu of taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the minister, Mr. Speaker, 
that doesn’t get it. Taxes are increasing all over this province; 
grants in lieu are staying the same. That’s what we’re trying to 
get through to him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mayor of Swift Current says his city has been 
hit hard by the NDP’s double standard. Mayor Paul Elder says 
the NDP’s double standard is going to force many small 
businesses in Swift Current to close. 
 
According to the mayor some small businesses in Swift Current 
are facing property tax increases of 80,000 to $100,000 this 
year, thanks to the new reassessment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mayor of Swift Current wants the same option 
as the NDP government. He wants to be able to use the 2000 
property tax assessment to calculate the 2001 property taxes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what’s the minister’s response? Will he allow 

the city of Swift Current and all other municipalities the same 
option? Will they be able to use last year’s assessment to 
calculate this year’s taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I’m not sure how much slower I have to 
speak so they understand grants in lieu of taxes have nothing to 
do with taxes. And they have increased each year. They’ve not 
gone down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the first year of the program, $3.125 million 
and increments of 3.125 for each of the following two years. 
There was recognized the need to enhance those estimates on 
those properties and those grants were increased to an 
increment of $3.725 million in 2001 and 2002 fiscal year. 
 
I don’t understand. They’re receiving much more than the 
agreement had initially called for. How can they say that we’ve 
been reducing? They’ve been going up, even beyond the 
expectations of what these communities expected — Estevan, 
$69,000; Moose Jaw, 685; North Battleford, 178,000; Regina, 
7.488 million; Saskatoon, 1.261 million. 
 
What’s gone down? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP’s double standard is not impressing the Saskatoon Public 
School Board either. In fact, the Chair of the Saskatoon Public 
School Board says the 2001 property reassessment will also 
drive up education portion of property taxes this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP is driving up municipal taxes and 
education taxes across Saskatchewan partly due to 
reassessment. And yet, the NDP is saying that Crown 
corporations and government departments can use last year’s 
rates because it would be too difficult to manage the change in 
cost if they used the new assessment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why the double standard? If the government can’t 
manage to increase in cost due to NDP’s 2001 reassessment, 
why is the minister forcing municipalities and school divisions 
to also use the new 2001 assessment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, four years ago and through 
the ’80s, the municipal governments received no grants in lieu 
of. They didn’t receive any of that. 
 
There was an agreement entered into with SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) that there 
should be some recognition of government-owned properties 
and that’s when there was a four-year agreement entered into, 
Mr. Speaker, to pay grants, to restructure the grant programs for 
those municipalities where governments owned properties. 
 
We’ve lived up to that four-year commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
This year, it’s been exceeded; the expectations are beyond what 
was anticipated four years ago, from just over 12 million to 
over 13.1 million. 
 
Now I don’t quite understand how the reductions . . . why the 



574 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2001 

 

member is saying there’s been a reduction and that we are 
shortchanging municipalities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Declining School Enrolment 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Education. Mr. Speaker, since 1990 Saskatchewan school 
enrolment has dropped by 10,000 students. But the future 
projections are even worse. The Department of Education itself 
predicts enrolment will decline by another 30,000 students by 
the year 2010. This is devastating news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The media report says the Minister of Education is considering 
the impact of the declining enrolment of schools in this 
province. But is he also considering the impact on the 
community as a whole? 
 
When a school is closed there is a major impact on the people 
and on the businesses and on the community as a whole. What 
is really interesting, Mr. Speaker, is what the Minister of 
Education attributes these school closures to. He says the reason 
is out-migration. Imagine a member of the NDP government 
admitting that out-migration is a problem. 
 
He also says that it’s due to smaller families. Well smaller 
families are a fact right across Canada; out-migration’s only a 
fact in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the Minister of Education and his NDP 
government doing to deal with the out-migration problem and 
its effect on the enrolment in schools in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly I 
have relayed the details with regard to the decline in enrolment 
during the 1990s, of approximately 10,000 students in the 
public system. 
 
We also know that during that time there was an increase in 
independent schools. There was an increase in band schools. 
And if we look at the numbers compared to 1989 to the year 
2000, the number of students enrolled in the K to 12 system was 
roughly 205,000. So there really was no major decline. 
 
But the problem for the public system is we are seeing a 
decline. This is the system administered by the Department of 
Education and we are looking at projections for the next decade 
for a decline in the public system, of roughly 23,000 not 30,000. 
We’re also expecting an increase in the number of band schools 
enrolment. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is where our skilled labour . . . we need 
to have training within our K to 12 system. That group over 
there will not . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 210 – The Children’s Law Amendment Act, 2001/ 

Loi de 2001 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur le droit de 
l’enfance 

 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill 210, The Children’s 
Law Amendment Act, 2001 be now read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to stand on 
behalf of the government and table the answers to questions no. 
67, 68, and 69. 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to questions 67, 68, and 69 are 
hereby tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 8 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Lorjé that Bill No. 8 — The Provincial 
Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill, Bill No. 8, does appear to be fairly straightforward and 
non-consequential piece of legislation. And my colleague from 
Cannington gave a very interesting and engrossing response to 
this Bill just the other day. And I know that the members 
opposite enjoyed it as much as this side of the legislature. 
 
While this Bill really doesn’t go far in affecting the daily lives 
of citizens of this province, it will probably receive more 
attention in the media than 80 per cent of the Bills we pass in 
this session even though it does not have far-ranging impact on 
the life in this province. 
 
That being said, however, we do recognize the necessity for our 
province to have strong symbols, symbols such as our flag or 
our coat of arms. Now the choices made by the government in 
terms of the official provincial sport or the official animal may 
be subject for debate between the people of this province. 
 
I know the people of my constituency will put up a pretty strong 
argument that hockey should be the official sport, especially 
given the overpowering dominance of the Weyburn Red Wings 
have shown over the last few years in the SJHL (Saskatchewan 
Junior Hockey League). Their most recent accomplishment 
when they defeated Nipawin Hawks just last week for the 
provincial championship. 
 
However, it’s also true that many people in this province enjoy 
curling as well. And I don’t really have a major problem in 
declaring it the provincial sport, since Weyburn is also known 



April 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 575 

 

as one of the strongest curling communities in Saskatchewan. 
The curling hall of fame is there, the museum, which is the only 
kind in Canada, I believe. 
 
The people in my constituency may also argue about the 
white-tailed deer as the official animal, especially given the 
havoc wrecked in Weyburn over the winter months just passed. 
A lot of wayward deer found themselves smack dab in the 
middle of the city and in a few cases went through the windows 
of local businesses. But at any rate, I suppose that there’s no 
argument that the white-tailed deer is certainly now 
representative of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now as far as official grass, frankly I haven’t heard much 
discussion about this in and around my constituency. However, 
I do recognize this recommendation was made by the Prairie 
Conservation Action Plan Committee and I do respect their 
recommendation that this grass be designated the official grass 
of Saskatchewan. Why we need an official grass I’m not sure, 
but I’m willing to bow to their judgment. 
 
I appreciate the minister’s comments about the ranching 
industry being critical in environmental preservation, especially 
for the grassland. There are many ranches in my constituency, 
Mr. Speaker, and I know this to be true. Too often extreme 
environmentalists like to paint anyone involved in agriculture as 
enemies of our natural habitat. Anyone who actually knows 
people involved in ranching or farming knows the opposite is 
true. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to mention one such rancher in 
my constituency. Murray and Selena McGillivray operate a 
400-head cattle operation near Radville on a 5,400 acre ranch. 
Murray and Selena were recently recognized by EcoAction 
2000, Agriculture Canada, and the Saskatchewan Wetland 
Conservation Corporation for their stewardship of their land. 
 
Ranchers like the McGillivrays care deeply about the land and 
the plants and the animals it sustains. It is my hope that more 
people in this province and country recognize this fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day while declaring these three 
symbols will do nothing to address the major issues facing the 
province, such as the lack of job creation or out-migration or 
decreasing health care services — the topics we should be 
discussing here — I see little harm in declaring these symbols 
and I have heard much . . . and I have not heard much in the 
way of objection. 
 
Another aspect of the Bill allows non-residents of 
Saskatchewan to be made honorary members of the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit. The official opposition has no 
objection to this clause of the Bill. 
 
So always wanting to be a constructive opposition, I see no 
reason to hold this Bill up unduly. We will have some important 
grass- and deer-related questions for the minister when we get 
to committee, but at this point we’re willing to let this Bill pass 
through in the spirit of co-operation. 
 
(14:30) 
 
I hope that members opposite show the same spirit of 

co-operation by bringing forward some of the private members’ 
Bills the Saskatchewan Party has put in the order paper on 
behalf of the citizens of this province. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it would 
be remiss to allow this debate to go by without a mention to 
some of the also-rans, especially our humble friend the prairie 
gopher or, as I was corrected on the John Gormley show, the 
Richardson’s ground squirrel. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there was of course a citizen’s poll 
conducted and, as with the NDP leadership race, the fan fave 
was different than the eventual winner. The fan fave for 
Saskatchewan animal was the humble gopher. And I must 
admit, I kind of favoured the gopher myself because I knew it 
was our friend the gopher that got dear old mom through the 
depression. She tells me that, when they had no cash, she was 
sending gopher tails to the provincial government at the rate of 
2 cents a tail. 
 
I was then told that, as then provincial secretary, that by 
reminding the people of this there was a danger that my desk 
would be covered with a bunch of smelly gopher tails and I sort 
of rethought that one. 
 
It also occurs to me that the gopher, while cute, is not super 
bright and, in that sense, may not be an appropriate symbol for 
our province — lovable, but no rocket scientist. 
 
As we know, Mr. Speaker, the cute little gopher is always very 
curious. He is forever scrambling up on to the railway track or 
into the middle of the highway to see if by chance something is 
coming. And like as not, whoosh, splat, something is coming. 
Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, the propagation rate of gophers is 
such that notwithstanding their propensity for standing in the 
middle of the highway, there still seems to be no lack of them. 
 
I do not know where in our archives those gopher tails that got 
my mother through the depression are now being stored, but 
this is certainly part of the folklore of our province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we are close to the centennial of our 
province. All nations, all states, all provinces, need symbols to 
rally around, to raise our spirits, to give us pride. And as we 
approach the province’s centennial, it is clear that the job 
creation staff of this government will not create that pride we 
desperately need. Hopefully the declaration of these symbols 
will, and hopefully the majesty of the white-tailed deer and that 
all-important needle-and-thread grass will prove to be a rallying 
point, a rallying point for the people of Saskatchewan. And I 
sincerely hope that it will. 
 
But as we support and vote for this Bill, Mr. Speaker, let’s not 
forget the fan fave, the humble little gopher, the little guy who 
despite drought and cold and dark holes and railways tracks and 
highways that continually have things coming down them that 
are bigger than the poor little gopher is, they’ve still survived, 
they’re still with us, they’re still cute. 
 



576 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2001 

 

I support the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Rising as Deputy Government House 
Leader, Mr. Speaker, and I rise on a question of privilege. 
Earlier today in question period on two occasions, Mr. Speaker, 
it is the opinion of this government that the members did not 
provide accurate information to this legislature. 
 
Let me give you the two points. The member from Saltcoats, 
Mr. Speaker, when he was talking about grants in lieu of taxes, 
indicated clearly in the House that in fact grants in lieu of taxes 
had been cut in the fiscal year 2001-2002. I want to report to the 
House that grants in lieu of taxes went up $3.725 million. 
Secondly . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. This is not a 
question of privilege; it’s a matter of debate. I’ll proceed with 
the agenda. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I rise on a second question of privilege, 
Mr. Speaker. In question period earlier today, the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena indicated to the legislature, that the 
Department of Education was projecting an enrolment drop of 
30,000; in fact it’s 23,000. My point is, did . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. On 
a matter of privilege, the members are to address it by way of a 
motion rather than by way of debate. And I would just ask 
members to take a look at the way that it’s properly done. The 
order of the business will continue. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Partnership Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Partnership Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
In Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker, almost all enterprises can 
be conducted through ordinary business corporations. Owners 
and managers of a corporation are not subject to personal 
liability for liabilities of the corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this immunity of owners and managers from the 
general run of the company’s liabilities was often referred to as 
the liability shield. Ordinarily, Mr. Speaker, the corporate 
liability shield will protect owners and managers from personal 
liability for ordinary debts of the corporation, as well as for 
liabilities incurred by the corporation for defective products or 
services. 
 
The members of most professions including dentists, 
optometrists, chiropractors, lawyers, and accountants currently 
practice in partnerships. The Partnership Act provides, as most 
of us will know, Mr. Speaker, for unlimited liability of partners. 
 
This Act amends The Partnership Act to provide for limited 
liability partnerships, in which partners are not personally liable 
for obligations of the firm. However it’s important to point out 
that liability will continue to apply where a person suffered 

injury because of the partner’s own negligence or wrongful acts 
or omissions. 
 
This would include negligence, Mr. Speaker, negligence in 
supervising or failing to supervise another member or employee 
of the firm, or where the partner knew of the wrongful acts or 
omissions, and failed to take reasonable steps to prevent them. 
 
Thus, Mr. Speaker, the limited liability partnership structure we 
proposed here only shields the innocent members of limited 
liability partnerships from personal liability for professional 
malpractice claims. 
 
The members of a limited liability partnership will not be 
subject to personal liability for the negligence and wrongdoing 
of other partners, except to the extent of their share in the 
partnership’s assets. The partnership’s assets and its insurance 
coverage remain available to satisfy any claims. 
 
The legislation requires registration of limited liability 
partnerships, Mr. Speaker. Currently professional partnerships 
do not have to register under this legislation, and as a result of 
these amendments professional partners of the partnerships 
receive a benefit because they will be able to limit their liability. 
In return, Mr. Speaker, they will have to register the partnership 
to give the consumers notice and information respecting the 
limited liability status. 
 
The proposed legislation is based on a model Act drafted by the 
Uniform Law Conference of Canada respecting limited liability 
partnerships so as to provide consistency in this area in all 
provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation provides Saskatchewan 
professional partnerships with a benefit that already exists for 
professional partners in Alberta and Ontario. It ensures that the 
personal assets of the Saskatchewan partner cannot be used to 
satisfy a judgment that could be made against a partner in 
another province for that partner’s negligence or malpractice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of an Act to 
Amend The Partnership Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wanted to respond to the Bill just put forward by the Minister of 
Justice on The Partnership Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
When we look at liability and liability claims and the costs of 
liability to . . . and how it can destroy a corporation, a company, 
a partnership, whichever, if it moves to keep professionals in 
this province and makes their job easier in the future, we’d be 
all for that. 
 
He mentioned whether it was dentists or lawyers, and how they 
can be liable regarding a partner’s action, which would be a 
great concern. And you know, if other provinces have protected 
against this sort of things, we would be all for it. 
 
Although we do want to talk to a number of people that this Bill 
would be impacting on, and have a, you know, listen to what 
they had to say on that, because when you deal with liability 



April 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 577 

 

and the cost of liability, it’s a huge burden for anyone. 
 
And so we would like to adjourn debate on this and consult 
with the groups that we need to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Professional Corporations Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to move second reading of The Professional Corporations Act. 
 
You’ll recall, Mr. Speaker, that in the 2000 legislative session, 
this government introduced an amendment to The Medical 
Profession Act to allow physicians to incorporate their 
professional practices, and I’m pleased to rise today to talk 
about a Bill that will provide the same opportunity to all 
Saskatchewan professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will allow professionals who choose to 
incorporate to run their businesses in a way that is similar to 
other small businesses and professionals in other provinces. 
And I’m pleased to advise, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill will be of 
particular assistance in attracting and retaining professionals, 
particularly in smaller centres and rural communities. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, in a letter from the College of Dental 
Surgeons of Saskatchewan, the college points out, Mr. Speaker, 
that this will be an important step towards making 
Saskatchewan’s economy fundamentally more competitive in 
both Western Canada and increasingly in the global economy. 
And points out, Mr. Speaker, that this new policy amounts to 
enlighten preventative action that will help ensure the province 
has an adequate supply of dentists in the future. And I may say, 
Mr. Speaker, that that goes for other professionals as well. 
 
And I think the members opposite will find when they consult 
with professionals that this is, as with the last Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
a very popular and constructive move. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the introduction of this Bill is one more 
important step in this government’s commitment to business 
competitiveness and indeed, Mr. Speaker, to the insurance of 
rural revitalization because it’s particularly important in smaller 
communities and in rural areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Bill will further level the playing field by extending the 
advantages of incorporation permitted in other Canadian 
jurisdictions to professionals practicing here in Saskatchewan. 
It’s important to note that allowing incorporation doesn’t in any 
way impact on the professional’s responsibility and obligations 
to his or her clients. 
 
Whether or not they choose to run their business through a 
corporation, today, Mr. Speaker, the professionals will be liable 
to their clients or patients in the same way as before. They’ll 
also be subject to discipline by their governing associations in 
the same way as before. 
 
Any professional association that is governed by an Act may 
apply to the Minister of Justice to be designated. When an 

association is designated, Mr. Speaker, it’ll administer the 
application of the Act to its members. 
 
The association will pass bylaws that will govern the 
qualifications and procedures for registration of professional 
corporations. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to continue this government’s 
commitment to improving the competitiveness of Saskatchewan 
small business and improving the vitality of rural Saskatchewan 
and smaller centres, Mr. Speaker, by moving second reading of 
An Act respecting Professional Corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to also 
address Bill No. 17, The Professional Corporations Act, and the 
impact it’ll have in the province. 
 
We on this side of the House have been saying for a long time, 
and through the campaign, that what we need to do in this 
province is to help grow this province and to build this province 
and not see professionals, such as whether it’s lawyers or 
dentists or doctors leaving the province, which we have seen 
over and over and over again. 
 
And through our much conversation with a number of different 
professionals, they’ve said . . . they’ve identified this as one of 
the problems that we’ve had in our province. It’s one of the 
issues that we’ve pressed for a very long time and that we need 
to, in order to retain and also attract professionals which we 
need in our province, we need to give them some ability to 
avoid, I guess . . . not avoid but pay an appropriate amount of 
tax. And they feel, a lot of them feel by incorporating and 
having the ability to incorporate, it’ll make the province much 
more attractive for them to stay. 
 
So although we’ve already talked to a number of the 
professionals — we’ve talked to doctors and lawyers and such 
— I think that was off of a song, I remember that line. But 
we’ve talked to a number of them, but we haven’t been able to 
have the legislation in front of us when we have discussed it 
with those many professionals. So we’re going to look at 
dealing with a number of the professionals. 
 
And I’d like to let it go, but you know we want to make sure 
that all the bases are covered because that is our job. And so 
once we get the legislation and are able to distribute it to the 
interest groups that this will be affecting and hear their response 
back, then we’ll maybe let it pursue on further down in the 
legislative chain. 
 
And right now I’d like to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 



578 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2001 

 

Subvote (SS01) 
 
The Chair: — I would ask that the minister please introduce to 
the committee, officials with him here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, seated beside me is 
Bonnie Durnford, the deputy minister of Social Services. Seated 
behind Ms. Durnford is Shelley Hoover, the acting assistant 
deputy minister. Seated behind me is Bob Wihlidal, the acting 
assistant deputy minister. And seated behind Ms. Hoover is 
Darcy Smycniuk, who’s the acting executive director of 
financial management. 
 
And behind the bar are Marilyn Hedlund, the associate 
executive director, income support; Richard Hazel, the 
executive director of family and youth; Deborah Bryck, the 
director of child day care; Larry Moffat, the executive director 
of community living — no, he’s not with us yet — and Debbie 
Grant of income security. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to the 
minister and his officials to our discussion today regarding the 
Department of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Chair, I believe as we look at this department and, Mr. 
Minister, over the past number of years we’ve seen an increase 
in the number of cases, and then I believe over the last few 
years there’s been somewhat of a decrease in the number of 
cases that in fact in a news release back by Executive Council, 
December, 2000, there’s the discussion about the number of 
families on assistance in Saskatchewan dropping by some 17 
per cent, from . . . a drop of some 6,700 individuals. 
 
But, Mr. Chair, one of the issues . . . one of the concerns we 
have here is while we see a decline, we continue to see the need 
for assistance by non-profit agencies by organizations such as 
the Food bank, Souls Harbor. For example, Mr. Chair, we 
toured the Food bank, and Mr. Bloos took us for a tour of the 
Food bank, and talked about the work that the Food bank is 
doing not only here in the city of Regina but throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan, and the number of people that 
actually come and receive the services . . . and seek the services 
of the Food bank. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, when I see numbers that would indicate we’re 
supposed to be seeing a reduction which would mean fewer 
people on assistance, and yet we hear of organizations . . . we 
talk to the leaders of the Food bank program and they keep 
telling us that there are more and more people showing up at 
their door. And one has to ask why, Mr. Chair. For example, 
Souls Harbor is a good example. Souls Harbor feeds up to 250 
. . . almost 300 people a day, Mr. Chair. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, while we talk about reductions in numbers 
of people on social assistance — and this is certainly a laudable 
goal, I believe any government would desire to have a reduction 
of the people who are totally dependent on government — but 
the question has to arise: if indeed people are not being served 
by social assistance, or they’re leaving the system because 
possibly through job opportunities, or are they leaving the 
system because they’re just leaving the province of 
Saskatchewan, one has to ask themselves if indeed people are 
finding opportunities to provide for themselves. And in a more 

meaningful manner, why do we continue to have the need for 
agencies like the Food bank, like Souls Harbor, like other 
independent organizations throughout the province. 
 
Why are people continuing to look to others for assistance, Mr. 
Minister? Mr. Minister, is it because social services is just not 
meeting the needs of individuals out there? Certainly as we 
address the issues around social services, there’s a number of 
issues that have been brought to my attention most recently, that 
. . . where people are really questioning the types of services 
and whether or not they are actually being treated fairly by your 
department. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I think it’s important for us to recognize the 
fact that I believe more people would be better and more well 
served if they had the opportunity to really achieve for 
themselves and have full-time employment opportunities. 
 
But there are circumstances where people, through sickness, 
possibly through disabilities or other means, just the inability to 
really find appropriate work and as a result, with the families 
they have, that they’re unfortunately forced to come to your 
department and seek assistance. 
 
And at times they feel, at least the calls that come into my 
office, no doubt I believe even your office has had some of 
these calls, Mr. Minister . . . And while we will not raise 
individual claims specifically by individual, we’re certainly 
going to address some of the concerns that have been raised in 
regards to the department and how the department meets the 
needs or provides for the people of this province, people who 
are really in need at different times in their lives. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, let me begin by, first of all asking you, if 
indeed we have seen the declines that you are indicating we 
have, why do we have so many people still lining up to use the 
services of agencies like the Food bank and Souls Harbour? 
 
And as well, Mr. Minister, maybe we could expand that a little 
more and maybe I could ask you to give us a bit of an overview 
of where you see the Department of Social Services going in the 
not too distant future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I thank the 
member for the question. I can only speculate as to what is 
taking place with respect to food banks because food banks are 
independent community-based agencies. I can tell you that . . . I 
can tell the member that in fact caseloads, social assistance 
caseloads, have gone down and have gone down as most 
recently as last March compared to the same period for the 
previous years. 
 
And this has been going on now for more than six years, which 
is contrary to the understanding that the Leader of the 
Opposition portrayed during the last provincial election. And I 
believe that some of your members were communicating in this 
Assembly as late as last year that there was an increase taking 
place in social assistance. But as you now pointed out, in fact 
there’s a decline in the number of people on social assistance. 
That’s fact; the decline is about 17 per cent in the past six years. 
 
We have also seen a decrease in the incidence of child poverty 
in Saskatchewan. That’s not our measure; that’s a measure by, I 



April 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 579 

 

believe, Statistics Canada and as reported by a group called 
campaign 2000 who monitors the activities of various 
provincial governments in their efforts to reduce poverty. And 
we saw again last year in their most recent reporting period that 
there was a decline in poverty, and which was two years in a 
row that we’ve seen a decline in poverty in Saskatchewan. And 
that was a better record than we saw in many other 
jurisdictions. 
 
(15:00) 
 
With respect to food banks, the only real definitive work that 
we’re aware of that tries to draw some parallels or study the 
relationship between people on social assistance and food banks 
was done by the social policy research unit of the University of 
Regina. They published a study in 1991 entitled Social 
Services’ Clients and Their Food Bank Use in Regina, An 
Exploration. And they state that with respect to fluctuations 
with SAP caseloads, the Social Assistance Plan caseloads, they 
say on an overall basis there does not appear to be a meaningful 
correlation between changes in food bank use and changes in 
social assistance caseloads. 
 
They did point out though that the changes in the number of 
food bank visits appeared to precede by about two months 
similar changes in the employable caseloads in social 
assistance, that is to say people who come to us who are in fact 
employable but need short-term assistance. So it suggests that 
people who lose their jobs may be visiting the food banks to 
help tide them over in the belief that they’ll get a job shortly, 
and after a few months decide that they will apply for social 
assistance. 
 
But on an overall level there doesn’t appear to any real 
correlation between food bank usage on the one hand and the 
number of people on social assistance on the other hand. 
 
It may also be that some of the usage in food banks — I know 
the food bank in Regina is an example — does far more than 
simply provide food for individuals. The food bank is also 
involved in life skills training and other training type programs 
where they try to help people with cooking or budgeting, and 
you’ll know that from your visit there. And it might be that that 
increase in numbers is somehow reflected in increased usage at 
the food bank. I’m not really clear on that. 
 
Again I can’t speak definitively for the work of the food bank, 
but again based on the study done by the University of Regina, 
there does not appear to be a correlation in fluctuations in social 
assistance caseloads and food bank usage. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, that may be, may be 
true. I remember a number of years ago when the food banks 
began to appear and comments by the then opposition about the 
fact that when the government changed and a new role and 
direction was given that the food banks would disappear and yet 
10 years later we still have food banks in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the unfortunate circumstances . . . and you’re right, my 
colleagues and I when we toured the food bank . . . To be very 
honest with you, anyone who certainly seeks the services of the 
food bank, while they do a commendable job in the work they 

are doing, a lot of the parcels that they’re giving out certainly 
may be the types of things that a lot of people wouldn’t even 
take the time to shop for. 
 
And they certainly do a commendable job with what they 
receive, and the people of Saskatchewan have shown time and 
time again that they’re more than willing to give of themselves 
to provide for those less fortunate as well. So in that regard we 
compliment those involved in the food bank program or Souls 
Harbour for reaching out to needs of others. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you might be quite true in the fact that some 
of the social problems people face may be some of the reasons 
that the food banks are utilized. We find it, and we continue to 
run into statistics, and some of your colleagues will be aware of 
the special committee and the number of concerns that have 
been raised with our committee in trying to address the problem 
of child prostitution. 
 
And in listening to many of the witnesses, many of them 
brought out the point of poverty. Poverty was one of the biggest 
things facing them and the problems facing them. And that’s 
. . . in some cases they related directly to why, as a young 
individual, they may be on the streets, that they were just 
looking for something good to wear. Or even one of the 
testimonies was, I was just getting some money to go buy some 
. . . or so that I’d be able to buy some food and provide for my 
siblings. 
 
And what it’s saying, Mr. Minister, is while the statistics may 
indicate there are fewer people on social assistance, it just 
appears that the numbers really haven’t decreased that much, 
that there are still a number of people who are living in poverty. 
 
And I would like to know, Mr. Minister, if you can explain 
why, while your numbers of people on assistance are going 
down, why do we see it appear or it . . . we’ve run into 
individuals who continue to raise the fact that the problems 
they’re facing is poverty in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now if your department, and if the department is reaching out 
to help those who do not maybe have an adequate job at the 
time, one would have to ask if the department is meeting the 
needs of those without employment, why are we still running 
into so many people who just feel that they just don’t have 
enough and are living actually underneath what we would call 
the poverty line and having to seek the services of these 
non-profit agencies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, as I’ve indicated 
publicly, although we’ve made some progress in reducing 
poverty in Saskatchewan, and more so than some other 
provinces, we have not eliminated poverty and we have a lot 
more to do. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, that may work in here, 
but there’s a lot of people in the streets in Regina and Saskatoon 
who may not really appreciate the response, and possibly would 
suggest that you’re really not meeting that need out there. 
 
But be that as it may, I would like, Mr. Minister, if you can give 
us an idea of your overall view and the future direction of your 
department and how you intend to meet the needs of those who 



580 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2001 

 

unfortunately require the services of Social Services, as well as 
the building opportunities for people who are qualified or quite 
capable, with some training or whatever, to provide for 
themselves and actually find means of providing for themselves 
outside of seeking government assistance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, a few years ago, in 
1997-98, the government announced a change in the way in 
which we would approach income security in Saskatchewan. It 
was called the building independence program. The building 
independence program had a number of features. All of those 
features were primarily geared to provide opportunities for 
people outside the welfare system; to move people from welfare 
into work. 
 
The features were: (1) a provincial training allowance to 
support people outside of welfare to pursue basic training 
opportunities that then might qualify them for further training 
and education. 
 
It featured a child benefit jointly with the federal government to 
provide more substantial support for low-income families which 
would then be of more assistance for families who . . . 
low-income families who were working. That is to provide 
some income for them to help them meet the needs of their 
children. 
 
In addition to that we put in place a program called 
Saskatchewan employment supplement that people could apply 
for which was to recognize some of the costs associated with 
going to work, whether it’s child care or transportation or 
special clothing that someone might need. 
 
Those measures put more money into the pockets of 
low-income, working families so that there would always be a 
financial incentive to work as opposed to remaining on social 
assistance. 
 
So we took those steps and we’ve seen some results from that. 
Our estimates suggest that there has been a decrease in the 
number of families on social assistance as a result of these 
measures. 
 
Within the last number of months we’ve identified a need to do 
further work in the way in which we deliver social assistance so 
that it can have a greater impact on our clients. The member 
will be aware that I made an announcement in Saskatoon some 
months ago. 
 
Those changes were intended to do . . . to again to accomplish 
more of the same objective. We, one, want to recognize that 
still approximately one-third of all those who come to us come 
to us because of an unemployment problem. That is they’ve lost 
their job, they don’t have income, so they need income support. 
Those are in the main. 
 
Mr. Chairman, if I might say parenthetically, those would have 
been people who 10 years ago would have applied for 
unemployment insurance and would have received 
unemployment insurance to tide them over until their next job. 
But with the changes that were made in the then Unemployment 
Insurance program in Canada, many people, where they needed 
assistance, were pushed onto provincial welfare programs. This 

is a method of downloading by the federal government that I 
think all members will be aware of. 
 
But we want to first of all focus on the needs of people who 
come to us who are employable for whom training might not be 
an alternative, and having explored training opportunities, but 
who want to work. 
 
And we want to use our resources, that is to say Department of 
Social Services and the Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training through their Can-Sask 
employment centres, to work aggressively with those who come 
to us for reasons of unemployment, to work aggressively with 
them to see what we can do to also help them to find 
employment. Because they want to work. Their frustration is 
that they can’t find the work and they come to us for those 
reasons. 
 
And I might say happily that this has been decreasing over the 
years. I think something like a third of all those who are on 
assistance, we would consider to be fully employable. Some 10 
years ago, maybe one-half of all those who were on social 
assistance would have been there because of unemployment, or 
we would have considered them fully employable. 
 
So first we want to work with people who come to us whose 
major need is for jobs, is to help them focus on getting jobs. It 
may well be that they’ve exhausted all of their contacts in terms 
of finding work, but there might be something that we can do to 
help them find work, so we’re going to help them do that. 
 
Secondly, we want to focus more intensively with other 
clientele who are dealing with barriers to independence. And it 
might be that a mother with children — although she wants to 
work, is capable of working — it might be that child care 
presents a real issue for them. And therefore we will want to 
work with families to see what we can do to deal with that 
barrier. 
 
(15:15) 
 
It might be that another family might have problems, a health 
problem. It might be a drug problem or it might be an 
alcoholism problem. We then want to work with them to see 
what we can do to help them overcome those barriers so that 
they too can live independently of social assistance. 
 
Generally speaking, that is the direction that we have been 
taking in the last few years and that is the direction in which we 
are planning to go. We recognize that at the end of the day to 
reduce poverty, people are better served by us helping them to 
find work, meaningful work in a real economy, and in that way 
help them to work their way out of poverty. 
 
And that’s the approach we take, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I have 
just a couple of questions to ask you that maybe is off the topic 
that you’re discussing at the moment. 
 
But a number of times when we’re discussing programs, we 
hear the term poverty level or poverty line. And I’m wondering 
if your department has . . . first of all, what the level is and 



April 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 581 

 

what’s considered the poverty level here in Saskatchewan? And 
what criteria do you use to come up to that number? Could you 
give me an exact accounting of how we come up with the 
number of poverty line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the formula that’s most 
often used, and has been used by campaign 2000 when they 
assess their various jurisdictions with respect to poverty, is 
something called the low-income cut-off, which is also used by 
Statistics Canada to measure poverty. 
 
And they measure it by saying that you’re judged to be living in 
poverty if you spend more than 56 per cent of your income on 
basics such as food, clothing, and shelter. That’s my 
understanding of the formula that they have. That more than 56 
per cent of your income is spent on basics such as food, 
clothing, and shelter. And that’s the formula that Statistics 
Canada uses to measure poverty. 
 
There may be other measurements around that try to get more 
exact about how poverty might be measured in some 
jurisdictions as opposed to others, recognizing that rental costs 
in Saskatchewan are one thing but rental cost in downtown 
Toronto is something else again, that rental costs in Wadena 
might be one thing but that rental costs in Saskatoon might be 
something else again. 
 
But the figures that are most often presented are based on the 
low-income cut-off which is a formula used by Statistics 
Canada and was reported on in campaign 2000, and which, 
according to their figures, we’ve seen a reduction in poverty in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then there is a . . . 
this seems like it may be a little sort of a matter of opinion 
because if you decide that you need to spend more money on 
clothes than somebody else, then perhaps you’re considered at a 
different level. So is there any kind of a breakdown saying that, 
for a family of four, so much money should be spent on clothes 
and so much should be spent on food? If you have those 
numbers or that formula, could you send it over, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — No, I think the member is right, 
Mr. Chair. Statistics Canada would have some formula and say 
that if you’re a family of four, for example, our expectation is 
that you should be spending X number of dollars on clothing 
and X number of dollars on groceries. And that’s one of the 
frustrations that we have from time to time, that those measures 
aren’t very sensitive to local conditions. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, when it comes to the 
basic allowance, if there’s an area that I hear more often than 
not is it just doesn’t cover enough and that people in some cases 
are digging into what’s supposed to be their food and clothing 
allowance in order to supplement rental properties. In other 
cases, it’s situations due to maybe medical needs that people are 
digging into their basic allowance. 
 
And the concern, Mr. Minister, is what criteria do you use in 
making sure that there’s reasonable funds to cover 
accommodations, considering the fluctuating rental market that 
may be out there? 
 

And, Mr. Minister, what criteria does your department follow in 
the case of special medical needs or attention that people face in 
trying to address that concern so that they’re not robbing from 
the few dollars that they have for their food and clothing 
allowance? 
 
And maybe I could ask, Mr. Minister, as well maybe you could 
give us what would be the basic allowance that a single person 
should receive for food and clothing per month, as well as 
maybe a family of four. I don’t think I’ll ask you to try and go 
through whether it’s a couple or two children in the family or 
four children. But first of all, for an individual and then, 
secondly, what a family of four would expect to receive in an 
allowance for food and clothing over and above rental. 
 
And maybe as well, Mr. Minister, just give a breakdown of the 
other costs that would be covered, whether heat and light are 
part of the rental agreement or that’s an additional cost that the 
department covers. If you wouldn’t mind doing that, I’d 
appreciate that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, the basic adult 
allowance is $195 a month. If that adult is disabled, another $40 
can be added to that. Shelter allowance for a single employable 
person, it’s $210 per month. For a single unemployable person, 
that is to say someone who is disabled or for whatever reason, it 
would be $320 per month. 
 
In addition to that, we would provide for the cost of utilities 
where that person is expected to pay the utilities directly. In 
addition to that financial assistance, we of course provide 
supplementary health coverage for people in receipt of 
assistance. And in addition to that, financial assistance may also 
be provided for special circumstances such as special clothing, 
travelling expenses, special care for disabled recipients to 
purchase services to maintain a home, expenses for education of 
children, expenses for commencement of employment, special 
service telephone for those who are disabled, rehabilitation 
allowance, allowance for child care, household moving 
expenses, repairs to property, funeral expenses, and allowance 
for children visiting a non-custodial parent. 
 
So we do make allowance for special circumstances but the 
basic allowance is, for a single person is $195 and the shelter 
allowance is $210, and then their utilities are provided for, and 
then special allowance can be made for people with disabilities. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, your shelter allowance 
of 210 or 320 for a single employable, I’m not exactly sure 
whether or not those are high enough. I’ve been looking, 
certainly looking through the paper and just looking for some 
rental property and I haven’t found anything that’s even close to 
that level of allowance. In most cases it’s almost three times 
that amount. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what does your department do with recipients 
who come to you and need housing and they’re only offered 
210? Where do they find the, a part rental for that amount or 
what does the department do to assist people who may be in 
need of shelter and yet what’s available isn’t even comparable 
to what your department is offering for shelter assistance? 
 
(15:30) 



582 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2001 

 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, we certainly have had 
expressions of concern. We take the position that for single, 
employable people that they are always better off to be 
employed as opposed to being on social assistance. Even at 
minimum wage a single person potentially can have net 
monthly earnings of $900 or so, whereas on social assistance 
the total is $489. 
 
So we point out to people that they are better to be employed 
than to be in receipt of assistance. And with our redesign we 
hope to put more focus on assisting them to find work as 
opposed to being left to their own devices and in need of social 
assistance for any length of time. 
 
I think it’s one thing to come to us and to be unemployed for a 
period of a few months, to make do during that period of time 
until the person can find a job and to make ends meet. But we 
do recognize that shelter is an issue. But it’s also an issue in the 
sense that we know that we cannot simply increase shelter 
allowances. And for landlords to increase their rents that they 
charge, even if we’re able to have a positive impact on people 
on social assistance, what do we then . . . what have we done 
for low-income, working people who are competing for the 
same housing. 
 
That for people on welfare more assistance is provided, but if 
you’re not on assistance, all of a sudden you’re having to pay 
additional costs and then again you create situations where 
you’re better off to be on assistance than to be working. And 
our focus is on encouraging people to work. 
 
These are complicated issues. We’re entering into discussions, 
or we have had discussions with other government departments 
and community-based organizations as to how we might better 
approach this issue and to have some meaningful impact in the 
long run. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, has your 
department had a problem assisting people who are genuine and 
need assistance in finding — I shouldn’t say . . . genuine and 
need assistance but as well on assistance — in finding shelter at 
the current rates? Or does your department . . . is the person on 
assistance, is it up to them to actually find a place that they can 
rent for the value that they’re being allocated or does the 
department have a list of possible rental opportunities that 
might fit into that criteria? What avenue does a person pursue if 
they’re in that position of needing some assistance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the question of what 
shelter a person wants to rent, move into, is one of individual 
choice. There may be workers who try to assist clients who are 
having problems by referring them to community-based 
organizations such as the Welfare Rights Centre in Regina who 
might then be able to assist those clients to find shelter that 
meets their needs. 
 
But as a matter of course, we do not have a roster of homes that 
we will encourage people to go to. It’s a matter of choice. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, a question I need to ask 
before I forget about it. The member from Kelvington-Wadena 
would like some information passed to her regarding those 
standards in regards to what would be considered the poverty 

level and how that’s arrived at, if you wouldn’t mind having 
that sent over. 
 
Mr. Minister, when people come to your department, for 
example, they’ve been laid off and they’ve been relying or they 
would qualify for . . . what is it? Employment Insurance I guess 
it’s called now. But you probably receive those or re-receive 
them after a month and a half or whatever. That isn’t coming 
through and they’re all of a sudden struggling and they don’t 
know where to turn, and so the only avenue that I find that 
seems to work is to send them to see if they can get something 
to tide them over. 
 
But when they come to you, Mr. Minister, what avenues do you 
follow to determine . . . or the follow-up, I guess, that would 
provide the care. And would that assistance go back and cover 
that period of time that they’ve been without? And then the 
steps that would be followed so that when EI (employment 
insurance) does kick in that we don’t find ourselves in 
overpayment situations. And then you’ve got to go and recover 
funds from the individuals. And I think that’s a problem that 
arises on numerous occasions. And people are always asking, 
well every time I turn around I’ve got nothing left because 
supposedly I’ve got an overpayment back here. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to kind of know where the department 
goes? How do you address these concerns so that people aren’t 
left with very little in their pocket at the end of the day because 
of overpayments that may have developed — while they hadn’t 
intended to — just because of the overlap of the two programs 
and the fact that sometimes EI does take a while to kick in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, if people come to us in 
the circumstances described by the member, that is to say they 
qualify for Employment Insurance but have not yet received 
Employment Insurance, we will provide emergency assistance 
for a period of up to two weeks. 
 
But if a person is single, employable and comes to us, then we 
will provide that under the clear understanding that they will 
assign some of the benefits when they are received back to us to 
compensate us for the funds that we have expended. And that’s 
assuming, of course, that the EI cheque is more than what they 
would receive on social assistance and will meet their basic 
needs. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, in assuming that and 
requiring a repayment based on the funds being allocated during 
a period when EI would kick in, if EI happens to be delayed, 
does that kick-in time come from when EI kicks in to and they 
still may receive a cheque because it’s already moved out? Or 
does it go back and say, well EI was supposed to take place 
here but it never did, and then you require payments at that 
time? 
 
I just want a clarification on that to make sure that the funds 
that were actually the emergency funds met a need in a time 
period when there actually was no funds available and that they 
aren’t penalized for that. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, before I forget, you 



April 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 583 

 

asked me a question with respect to the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena, and we will undertake to provide her with 
a detailed description as to how these poverty levels are 
measured and including the various measurements, Statistics 
Canada and others that are being used, and will provide her 
with that information. 
 
Again with respect to assistance for people on unemployment or 
employment insurance, it’s not just single people, it’s all those 
for whom we provide assistance that we ask them to assign their 
cheques or that a portion of it that we had provided them with; 
pending the receipt of employment insurance, we ask them to 
provide that to us. If a cheque is for some reason delayed, the 
employment cheque is for some reason delayed, we will 
continue to assess their circumstances and to provide assistance 
accordingly, and then make arrangements with them to recover 
those amounts when the employment cheques are received by 
them. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the 
minister and your officials for being here today. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ve had some concerns where people that were 
on social services receive their allotted funds, but then they 
were fortunate enough to get off the Social Services’ program. 
Now they are just barely eking out a living, just money for the 
absolute necessities in life. 
 
In one case, the person has now received a letter from Social 
Services saying that they have overpaid this person by $425. 
Now there is no way that this person can repay this money 
without getting back on the program. What direction would you 
give a person in a circumstance such as this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, 
our department is certainly prepared to enter into negotiations 
or discussions, if you like, with people in circumstances such as 
those the member made us aware of. 
 
If, for example, there is an overpayment of $425, we know that 
it’s unrealistic to expect that such an overpayment would be 
repaid as a single lump sum immediately. We’d certainly be 
prepared to enter into discussions as to how that might be repaid 
over time. And if there is good will to do that, then we’ll accept 
that. 
 
The last thing we want to do is to destabilize that person or that 
family’s situation so that they’re forced back on to social 
assistance, we don’t want to do that. We will take their 
program, provided it’s anyway reasonable to repay. But having 
said that, once they undertake to do that then we do expect that 
they will live up to their commitments. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Minister, in one of the cases I’m thinking 
of, there was a breakdown in the marriage and upon getting off 
of social assistance the one partner was responsible to pay a lot 
of SaskPower bills, SaskEnergy bills before they could have the 
power hooked up in his or her name again. And right now this 
person is telling me, you know, I’ve talked to this person about 
a repayment program and they have said that with the money 
that was . . . or the responsibilities that was dumped on them 
because of the marital breakdown, where they were responsible 
to pay the power and energy bills before they could even have 

these utilities reconnected in their name, it’s just absolutely 
impossible. 
 
There are children involved. And, you know, so while I 
appreciate you saying that something could be worked out, you 
know, I just don’t know how feasible it is to insist that these 
people have to make a repayment on this at this time, given the 
circumstances, when there is children involved. 
 
Another area I wanted to get into, Mr. Minister, was assistance 
provided to single mothers. I have had two inquiries at my 
constituency office relating to single mothers currently living at 
home with their parents because they feel they cannot make 
ends meet if they move out on their own on the amount of 
assistance that is provided to them. 
 
Now if they moved out of home, their assistance would be 
increased, but by moving out, the mothers would have to look at 
hiring a babysitter. And would it not make more sense to allow 
mothers to live at home and increase the assistance rather than 
having to move out and pay for a babysitter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I’m not quite sure how 
to answer the member’s question except to say that people will 
have to make their own choices as to what is in their best 
interests. What we have tried to do is to construct a system that 
rewards people for working and makes it far more . . . makes it 
better to work and to live off employment income than to be on 
social assistance. 
 
For example, one adult and one child receiving social assistance 
and the maximum of a shelter allowance and the like would 
receive from us about a thousand dollars a month, $1,003 a 
month. But that same single parent with one child, assuming 
that’s a preschooler, working minimum wage and receiving the 
Canada Child Tax Credit, the National Child Benefit 
supplement, the Saskatchewan employment supplement, the 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit, child care subsidies and the like, 
would have an income of $1,673 a month. 
 
So I can’t vouch for that person’s choices in terms of whether 
they want to live with their parents or want to live on their own. 
All I do know is that we have constructed a system that 
certainly encourages them to work because we think, in the long 
run, that she’s better off working in terms of working their way 
out of poverty. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When a single mother 
wants to take a course and further her education, is there a 
standard policy that Social Services has regarding upgrading? 
Are there courses that they pay for or just don’t they pay for any 
upgrading courses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, there are situations 
under which we would provide assistance if there is some 
training program, particularly life skills type programs where 
they’re less than six weeks in duration, that we would continue 
to provide social assistance for that client while they took that 
training. 
 
But for anything longer term than that, and especially for adult 
basic education type programming, we would encourage that 
person to apply for the provincial training allowance — which 



584 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2001 

 

is a flat allowance and I believe is somewhat more generous 
than social assistance would be — so that they could then 
receive that allowance while they’re pursuing their basic 
education to, say, get up to a grade 12 level or whatever the 
case might be. 
 
Beyond that point we would then encourage people to, through 
a combination of work and through application to student loans 
and bursaries from the province, to provide for their own 
education after that point. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Minister, the longer-term program that you 
mentioned, the training allowance, who handles that? Is that out 
of the Department of Social Services or the Department of 
Education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I’m sorry, Mr. Chair, I should 
have clarified that. That is administered by the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. And they assess 
people for their participation in adult basic education programs, 
assuming that the institutions that they’re enrolling in, the 
programs they’re enrolling in, are acceptable, then they would 
then enrol them for a provincial training allowance. 
 
And again, the intent is to have those provincial training 
allowances to be somewhat more generous than social 
assistance, and also with greater flexibility than social 
assistance in the hopes that they can, in this way, be encouraged 
to receive their basic education which then might put them in a 
position to follow through on skills training classes at local 
community colleges or further academic education. 
 
And we believe we’re having some success with that type of 
approach to helping people achieve their basic education. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The training 
allowance, now is that separate from a student loan, as we know 
a student loan? It is? So if someone is on the training allowance 
and they are being paid out of Post-Secondary Education, so 
that would in turn . . . does that mean that your welfare numbers 
go down, your social services numbers go down? 
 
Okay. So then when they get through their education and if they 
don’t have a job and then have to go back on social services, is 
this what makes your social services numbers fluctuate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, any time it would 
be on an average of about 1,500 people in those circumstances. 
And 1,500 . . . I guess one could say that our social assistance 
caseloads are lowered by 1,500 as a result of the basic education 
. . . or the provincial training allowance as provided by 
Post-Secondary Education. 
 
Other provinces have similar types of programs. I know that 
Alberta, as an example, moved very aggressively in that area 
when the federal government downloaded responsibilities for 
income support for people who, until that point, had been 
eligible for Unemployment Insurance. They moved very 
aggressively in that area but then I suppose they had more 
resources to do that. 
 

But on any given day there’d be about 1,500 people. It wouldn’t 
account for fluctuations. There might be some small seasonal 
fluctuation that that might attribute to because some of those 
programs might not be as readily available during the summer 
months. But year over year there is no real fluctuation. What 
we’re seeing is caseloads go down and have been going down 
for six years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I move the committee report 
progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 

Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Chair: — Before we get underway, I’d invite the minister 
to introduce his officials with him here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
introduce you to the members that are here from the 
department. Seated to my direct right is the deputy minister, Mr. 
Gord Nystuen; to my left is Mr. Hal Cushon, who is the director 
of policy and planning development branch; and to my far right 
is Mr. Russ Johnson, who is the manager of operational 
services, admin services branch. 
 
Directly behind me is Susie Miller, who is the assistant deputy 
minister; and behind the deputy minister is Mr. Jack Zepp, who 
is the administrator of administrative services branch. And 
seated in the back row are Doug Mathis, who is the general 
manager of Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation; and 
Louise Greenberg, who is the director of inspection and 
regulatory management branch with the department. 
 
Those are my officials with me this afternoon, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, welcome to 
your officials here this afternoon. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, we wanted to focus on three or four areas 
this afternoon — on the AIDA (Agriculture Income Disaster 
Assistance), CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program), CSAP 
(Canada-Saskatchewan Adjustment Program), and various 
strategies in terms of a long-term safety net or agriculture 
stability type programs that are being discussed and talked 
about out there across the province these days. 
 
With respect to AIDA, Mr. Minister, and to your officials, I 
think it’s widely viewed in Saskatchewan that the program had 
many deficiencies. Of course any assistance from the federal 
government or from the provincial government, generally 
speaking, is appreciated. But this was a program I think, by 
many, many accounts in Saskatchewan, failed to meet the needs 
of Saskatchewan farmers, particularly the grains and oilseed 
sector of our economy, agriculture economy. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan as a whole, I think, felt that 
when the program was initiated that it may provide some degree 
of stability to the ag sector, and it probably raised more 
questions than it answered in terms of a safety net proposal. 
 



April 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 585 

 

And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you and your department 
would provide for us, here today, an update on the AIDA 
program, what numbers of producers have received benefits to 
date, what is the average payout, what is the maximum payout 
that any individual or corporation was afforded through the 
program, and what was the minimum amount of payments that 
people may have received? 
 
And most importantly, Mr. Minister, if I can get your attention 
for a moment, Mr. Minister, the most important thing that I 
want you to provide, with respect to the AIDA program, is do 
you and your department agree with the general philosophy of 
the program which was to attempt — and I say attempt very 
guardedly because it most certainly didn’t — but to attempt to 
identify need. And that was what the AIDA program was all 
about, was the attempt, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, of identifying 
need. And I think most people in agriculture circles would feel 
that it failed miserably in that attempt to identify need. 
 
And in addition to that, the concerns that many producers have 
with respect of a program that even goes down that direction of 
trying to identify need, particularly when commodity prices are 
low, whether you are involved in any area of agriculture, 
perhaps with the exception of the livestock industry. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, an update on the AIDA program in terms of a 
statistical analysis of where we’re at with it, and as well as the 
general observations in terms of the program delivery and the 
philosophy of trying to identify need. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, thank you very much, Mr. 
Member. I want to attach myself first to some of your 
comments because we hold the same view on the AIDA 
program without much question. 
 
As you well know, the program was designed in 1998 after 
considerable discussion I believe in Winnipeg where there were 
representation from all across the country of ministers of 
Agriculture and officials who needed to look at some way of 
addressing some of the disaster needs that agriculture producers 
were experiencing across the country. 
 
And at that time, of course, Saskatchewan was clearly on the 
record as saying that we were not supportive of this particular 
program, given the kinds of deficiencies as you’ve, I think, well 
articulated as it relates to the grains and oilseeds. But we, as 
you know, were one lone voice in the development of the AIDA 
program across Canada and so at the end of the day ended up 
with a program that we participated in. 
 
When you ask the question about the number of claims that 
have been paid out — and I’m using now the March 18, 2001 
statistical data to provide this information to you — the total 
claims that were paid, and this is the final number, were 12,300. 
And that’s for the 1999 tax year that I’m looking at. 
 
The number of claims that were received were 25,580. The 
average payment worked out to about $12,788. And the number 
of claims in progress, the finals are 2,490, almost 2,500 claims 
is what has been paid out to date. And that’s the interim, the 
final, and also the claims in progress. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The other part of the 

question you failed to answer, and that is whether you agree 
with a basic philosophy within that program of trying to 
identify need. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Member, and Mr. Chair, to the 
member. As I’ve said on many occasions, when you take a look 
at the margin and look at past margins and then look at what’s 
happened in the grains and oilseed sector in particular, we’ve 
seen a history over the last 30 or 35 years where we’ve seen a 
continued decline in the return that . . . what producers are 
receiving today for their grains and oilseeds. 
 
And clearly, this program, itself, does not address the kinds of 
differentials that we’re talking about today, and we see the 
kinds of slippage that we see in the grains and oilseeds over the 
period of time. 
 
So when, this year, we were confronted with the issue as you 
point out in your opening comments about now moving from 
the AIDA program, moving to CFIP, much of what we said 
over the last couple of months is that we have today a design of 
a program that’s by and large modelled in the same fashion as 
we had with AIDA. Only we have today an even smaller 
contribution that’s been provided by the federal government. So 
we find ourselves, as you can appreciate and I know that you 
know, in a similar situation that we were with the past program. 
 
Now the issues around how do you find a way out of that is that 
when we were in our discussions around CFIP — and you’ve 
asked me the questions on other occasions about what are we 
doing in terms of long-term safety net as it . . . to address itself 
to this particular issue — we shouldn’t forget that when we 
come out of AIDA in 1990 . . . or when we developed AIDA in 
1998 for a two-year period, over that two-year period you had 
all of the provinces in Canada including Saskatchewan that 
were busy trying to devise yet another safety net that would 
address some of the concerns which were . . . you’re raising 
with me today. 
 
And we said as we moved down that path that we would like to 
see something that would be more reflective to what our grains 
and oilseeds issues are in relationship to the margin and the past 
margins. And that we didn’t get a whole lot of support, I must 
say to you, from some of other provincial colleagues. 
 
And so at the end of the day we try to stand out there on our 
own, saying that we don’t like this particular program because it 
has too much association or identity to what’s happening with 
AIDA. But when you’re trying to negotiate an agreement with 
10 other provinces who have mixed administrations, as you 
know, and we have a huge grains and oilseed industry in 
Saskatchewan today, we stood . . . we stood on the side of that 
decision. But at the end of the day found ourself being in the 
same place as we were a couple of years ago when we 
negotiated the AIDA agreement. 
 
(16:15) 
 
So if the question to me is are we satisfied with what we have 
today in the CFIP program; the answer is that we’re not. The 
question is were you satisfied with the AIDA agreement; the 
answer to that is that we’re not. We weren’t satisfied with that. 
 



586 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2001 

 

And is there some room today to develop and look at building a 
better safety net program in Saskatchewan? For grains and 
oilseeds people, I think there is. And our interest, of course, is 
to move down that path and to try and get my colleagues and 
other provinces today to recognize the kinds of issues that we 
have in our grains and oilseed sector. 
 
Now how successful we’re going to be at that over the next 
seven or eight months — which is a timeline that we’ve 
established to do some of that review — remains to be seen. But 
I’m optimistic, at least in this last round of discussions with our 
other provincial colleagues, that we’ve been able to demonstrate 
that we have far greater hardship on the grains and oilseed side 
than some of the other provinces do in Canada and that, to a 
large degree, this particular program doesn’t work for us in the 
same fashion. 
 
And so, that’s the direction in which we’re moving now. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I wonder if 
you could confine your thoughts for a moment to the question, 
and the question was: does your department, yourself and your 
government, agree with what the basic philosophy, as I 
understand it, of the AIDA program was? And that was to 
identify need and then to attempt to make payments based on 
that identifiable need. 
 
And I think that that’s something that’s quite fundamental to ag 
policy, that we need to discuss here and get on the table so 
people in agriculture know what your government’s policies are 
apt to be now and into the future with respect to agriculture. 
 
The AIDA program, Mr. Minister, was an attempt by the 
provinces and the federal government, with your participation, 
to identify need. Are you in agreement with that? 
 
I don’t care whether you’re in agreement with the total program 
or not in agreement with the total program. I want to know 
whether you’re in agreement with the basic philosophy of 
identifying or attempting to identify need, which is what the 
AIDA program was, a very failed attempt to do but an attempt 
on behalf of the federal government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I say to the 
member opposite that if the question to me is whether or not I 
recognize that there’s a need to have a program in 
Saskatchewan today that supports our agricultural producers 
from a broad perspective, the answer to that is that I do. 
 
If the question is what kind of a program are we intending or 
are you suggesting or I may be saying to you do we need in 
Saskatchewan today to try to address the basic issues of our 
grain producers and oilseed producers or our livestock industry 
today or of the agricultural industry, and we have today in the 
province, we have three programs that are designed to do a 
variety of different things. 
 
We have the crop insurance program today that tries to insure 
the crop against loss and against risks. So we have risk 
insurance. And we have a NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account) program today that’s expected to provide some 
assurances today for farmers if in fact we have differentials in 
price. And today we also have a disaster program which is 

intended to provide some relief to people when in fact we have 
disasters in the province. 
 
So we recognized in Canada today, and in this province, that we 
need . . . or we should have three different kinds of programs to 
address the various different needs that are out there in the 
agricultural community, across the very wide broad-based 
industry where we have livestock and the grains industry and 
specialized livestock and specialized crops — a very, very 
diverse agricultural industry in our province. 
 
And so when we try to find a particular program . . . which I’d 
like to. I’d like to find a particular program which might have a 
simplistic delivery system or would have a simplistic 
application form, that would provide the kinds of price 
adjustments that farmers are looking for when you have 
differentiation in the marketplace. A program that can provide 
risk coverage when in fact you have a disaster in the province or 
if you have a loss because you have a disaster somewhere 
through crop insurance. I’d like to find a program where we 
might be able to do that for everybody. 
 
So if the question is, you know, do we need to provide some 
assurances to do all three of those things, the answer is that I 
think we do. But what is that particular program that we might 
be able to put in place, given that we have to negotiate the 
support to a program of that nature with nine other provinces. 
And that’s not an easy task, as you can well appreciate, given 
that there are some provinces today who have a different view 
on yours and mine as it comes to CFIP or AIDA. 
 
While we’re busy negotiating the agreement on CFIP or trying 
to work out other arrangements about signing the agreement, 
we have some of our friends in other parts of the country saying 
this program’s good for them. 
 
And so while here we are trying to realign, readjust, reconstruct 
a program that’s more suited to our needs, we have other 
provinces today who say this program works very nicely for 
them. And where you have peaks and valleys in the operation of 
the industry, CFIP and old AIDA worked. But in the grains and 
oilseeds side it did not work. 
 
And so if the question is do we have a need for a more 
comprehensive program that better addresses all of the issues of 
which our three programs in Saskatchewan or across Canada 
tried to address, the answer is that we do. But to try to develop 
that in concert with the entire Canadian agricultural industry has 
been an exercise that’s been hard to achieve, I have to tell you. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, do you 
believe in a program that should be universal in nature then 
rather than income tested? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, 
I think any time that we’re trying to develop programs across 
the country within the agricultural industry, the answer would 
be that we’d like to see universal programs. Clearly we’d like to 
see universal programs. 
 
But they also need to have flexibility within them to address the 
various different issues within each industry. And we need to 
also keep in mind that there are financial responsibilities here 



April 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 587 

 

also to maintain and sustain programs. And in this province, as 
there have been in other provinces, there have been caps in the 
past. 
 
Now my interest would be yes, we’d like to see some universal 
programs across our province, but to try to sustain some of 
those, some of those programs to achieve the kinds of levels of 
return that I think producers are looking for in this province 
today requires a fairly significant investment. And that’s why 
we’ve tried to do that in partnership with our federal friends, 
and we’ve tried to do it on the basis of what our financial 
abilities are within this province, and in concert with what 
producers are telling us across the province. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, would you 
provide for the legislature and all members and the farm 
community in general, what recommendations your department 
put forward at the beginning of the AIDA program, prior to the 
announcement of the AIDA program, with respect to what you 
felt a program should have in terms of program delivery, the 
type of program, whether it was universal in nature, or income 
tested? Would you provide for us what submissions you made 
at that table in Winnipeg when the negotiations were on for the 
AIDA program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’ve taken a bit of time to think about this, 
Mr. Member, because clearly when we were devising the 
program in 1998, I wasn’t at the table or hadn’t had the kind of 
influence on this particular program that I might have liked to 
have had. 
 
But I want to say to you that when the program was first 
designed, when AIDA was first designed in 1998, we in 
Saskatchewan were the first province to call for the design of a 
program. And we fully expected during that participatory period 
that we would be very much involved in the design of the 
program. 
 
Now I know that you might say that we had an opportunity to 
be more fully involved or engaged, and maybe we were not, 
would be your view. But I think on this side of the House we 
might say that to the degree of which we could be involved, we 
were involved. 
 
And clearly AIDA is a needs-based program. But if in fact we 
were going to look at devising a program in a more 
comprehensive fashion today, I mean I would be looking at two 
or three things. 
 
I’d be looking at general programs for all farmers through 
addressed production . . . (inaudible) . . . low prices, or for low 
prices, due to the trade wars and price cycles. So I’d want to 
have something that would address that particular issue. 
 
I’d want something that would be targeting programs to address 
more specific needs. And we talked a little bit about the areas of 
skill development, which I think today we have in some of our 
programming. 
 
And I’d want something for economic development types — 
programs that help the industry to grow and create more jobs. 
 
So I think there would be sort of three scenarios there that I 

would be looking at as we would go, to craft our programs. 
 
But outside of having said what I did in terms of the early days 
of the development of AIDA, much of what we wanted to see is 
a greater participation on the part of the province in developing 
that process. And I have to say to you, we felt to some degree 
that that didn’t happen in the way in which we’d like it to 
happen. And our sense is that in this round of negotiations, 
discussions on CFIP, that we’re going to be far more front and 
centre on it, as you witnessed. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. Did your department, Mr. Minister, 
put forward a submission or a position paper at those 
discussions, and if you did, would you provide a copy of it to 
the legislature? And if you didn’t put forward a formal position 
paper, would you provide us with a synopsis of what the 
position of . . . the official position of the Saskatchewan 
government and the Department of Agriculture was at those 
discussions in Winnipeg at the negotiations for the start-up of 
AIDA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, I want 
to say that my officials inform me, who were in around that 
process at that time, is that when they came away from the 
meetings in Winnipeg and returned back to their individual 
provinces, that within weeks there was a decision made — we 
were going to have what we had. 
 
So there was a federal announcement on this particular program 
with little or no participation by the provinces, including 
Saskatchewan. So this was a unilateral decision. It was made by 
the federal government to proceed with the development of this 
particular program, AIDA. 
 
Now I can say to you that the process is a little richer today than 
it was at that point. Because I know that in the development of 
what we have today in CFIP, that the officials from the 
Department of Agriculture and Food in Saskatchewan have 
been very much around those discussions. So the process has 
changed. I think the process has changed today. 
 
And so when you ask me to table something, what I can do is 
say to you that the Farm Support Review Committee, of whom 
there was some discussions in Saskatchewan with, there was 
some information and data that was put together at that time, 
and we’ll try to find that for you and make it available for the 
Assembly and for you to see. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. So I gather from that comment, Mr. 
Minister, that you did have a formal position, the Government 
of Saskatchewan had a formal position that you advanced to the 
Farm Support Review Committee for discussion on that 
committee. 
 
And I’m wondering if you could table that recommendation or 
table the government’s position and what the Farm Support 
Review Committee’s review of that amounted to, Mr. Minister. 
I think it would be useful in knowing . . . I think it would be 
useful for the farm community in knowing what your position 
was in taking it to the table. 
 
You know, you and I can debate here all day whether or not it 
was substantial enough or comprehensive enough. But I think 



588 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2001 

 

we can let the farm community judge for themselves. If you 
would simply just provide for the legislature a draft or a copy of 
whatever submission you made to the AIDA discussions, and as 
well what you had asked the review committee to look at, and 
what your recommendations were, based on that. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think what we’ll do, if it meets with the 
member, is we’ll find what some of those options that we put 
forward in the early days to the federal government when we 
were in fact moving down the path of AIDA. We’ll take a look 
at those submissions that we made and discussions that we had 
with the Farm Support Review Committee. 
 
But I want to one more time reiterate to the member that the 
package that we ended up with as it relates to AIDA, our friends 
in Alberta and Ontario were very high and keen proponents of 
the AIDA package and the AIDA program. So you should know 
that there wasn’t a great deal of discussion and debate around 
this issue with the provinces; that what you have today or what 
we had in the AIDA program was very much driven by the . . . 
particularly the two provinces of Ontario and Alberta in concert 
with our federal government. 
 
And so as much as we put together a position, Saskatchewan’s 
position and a number of options to the Farm Review 
Committee, much of the decisions around what we got in AIDA 
were already made for us in advance of making those 
submissions. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. While that 
well may be the case, I think we need to determine what 
Saskatchewan’s position was at that negotiating table and we 
can see and judge accordingly whether or not it was acceptable 
for the farm community. And I accept your position that you 
will be advancing that as soon as possible and we’ll be looking 
forward to that, and prior to the next occasion I would hope that 
we would have to meet in terms of estimates so that we can go 
through that a little bit more in detail. 
 
Now moving on to the next stage of program development, was 
the CFIP program. And I asked this same question. Do you 
generally accept the direction that CFIP was — and I think I 
know the answer to that, you don’t — but I would also like to 
know specifically from you and your department, what 
recommendations you advanced with respect to the 
development of the CFIP program and what changes you 
recommended from the AIDA program following through into 
the CFIP program? 
 
And I think we need to know that for a number of reasons, Mr. 
Minister. I think the ag community owes an explanation as to 
where Saskatchewan was at the negotiating table, what 
Saskatchewan’s position was. We just simply can’t, I don’t 
think, sit on the sidelines and say that we didn’t like what came 
out of it without saying what we were prepared to contribute in 
terms of advice or consultation, in terms of direction, where we 
want to go in it, in the program development. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, if you could provide us with what program 
development changes you wanted to see in the CFIP program 
for the farm community of this province. 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, 
what we can provide for you here is the more detailed, I think, 
accounting of the kinds of information that we put forward on 
the CFIP package. And we’ll do that; we’ll make that available 
for you as opposed to going through all of it today. 
 
But you should know that we were very much interested in 
addressing the whole issue of low margins and made a strong 
presentation around that piece as the negotiations were ongoing, 
and we wanted some adjustments to the base period, which 
were important for us in that discussion. 
 
But I need to say to you one more time that when you’re 
developing a program of this magnitude, where you have nine 
other provinces around the table, and as well there was some 
fairly sincere adaptation, I think, by some of the other provinces 
who’ve said that the AIDA program for them by and large was 
successful and they liked the way, in fact, it worked. And so the 
transition from the AIDA program to CFIP by some of the other 
provinces outside of Saskatchewan was an easy transition for 
them. 
 
And so we have today, to a large degree, an acceptance, as you 
can appreciate. Up until a month and a half ago Saskatchewan 
wasn’t in the program. Saskatchewan wasn’t in the program for 
some of the reasons, a couple of the reasons that I’ve mentioned 
to you already. But the other provinces were already in. The 
other provinces already signed the agreement, which gives you 
some sense of the acceptance that other provinces across 
Canada had to both AIDA and certainly the CFIP program. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I inadvertently left one 
question behind on the AIDA that we should clear up before we 
go any further. It’s with respect to negative margins. What is 
the province’s position on that? 
 
I understand a number of provinces have accepted the view of 
paying on negative margins. I think, and you can correct me if 
I’m mistaken, but I believe Saskatchewan is or may be the only 
one that is not paying on negative margins. And as a result of 
that, arguably many of the farmers, if you’re going to try and 
identify need, that might be where you would want to start, by 
looking at that as an option in terms of it. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, if you would provide an update as to which 
provinces are involved in paying on negative margins, which 
ones are not, and what the province’s position is with respect to 
negative margins. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Yes. Under the AIDA program, the 
negative margin, the only two provinces in AIDA that cover the 
negative margin were just PEI (Prince Edward Island) and 
Quebec. The federal government did, however, as well. 
 
Under the CFIP program, nobody is covering the negative 
margins. And I think some of the thinking around this was that 
it would be a disincentive to the purchase of the crop insurance, 
is I think the discussion that most of the provinces agreed on at 
the end of the day. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. Moving on from the CFIP program, 
we now are entering into CSAP Two. And I note that the 
Government of Manitoba has put out a press release today 



April 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 589 

 

outlining how the program will work in Manitoba. 
 
Do you anticipate it working similar to Manitoba’s, here in 
Saskatchewan? How soon will those program details be out? 
How soon will we see application forms? And what is the 
anticipated payout levels based on NISA contributions and 
payment dates, do you anticipate, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — To the member, the CSAP Two program, 
if you recall at all the way in which CSAP One worked, we’re 
going to use exactly the same process that we used last year 
with the payout of the CSAP One. 
 
The declaration forms, we expect to be out in the next two 
weeks to the producers across the province and we’re hoping to 
have a very quick turnaround on the application forms that are 
made. 
 
I think one of the successes that was given last year I think, or 
accolades that was given to this particular program, was how 
quickly it was turned around. And so our intention, of course, is 
to turn the program around with the same kind of expedience 
that we did last year, using the same model as we used last year 
to do the processing. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — What levels of payments do you anticipate? I’m 
under the impression that it’ll be based as well on net eligible 
sales of 125,000, approximately 5 to 6 per cent, 5.7 or 
something is a figure that’s being kicked around a little bit. 
 
Is that the anticipated payment levels, which would be roughly 
$7,000 maximum, and what the average payment will be? 
 
And I’m sorry; did you indicate when the payments are likely to 
be received at the farm level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — As soon as the application forms are 
received, we’re going to have the cheques flowing. And we 
expect that by the middle of May we’re going to see producers 
with, you know, with money in their pockets. We’re going to 
pay out at about five and three quarter per cent, which is I think 
the number that you might have been using. And that the 
average payment will be around 35 hundred, with the largest 
payout being around seven thousand, I think is the numbers that 
you were using. And those are the ones that we think they’ll be 
around. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, we receive a number of questions 
from farmers in Saskatchewan about these types of programs all 
of the time. I’m anticipating that you will have an advertising 
campaign to alert farmers with respect to this. 
 
And in addition to that, will you also . . . what is the process for 
farmers that are not involved in the NISA program? We get 
questions about that frequently, and perhaps you and your 
officials could outline to . . . for anyone that is not in the NISA 
program, what the process is to gain access to the CSAP 
program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We’re, Mr. Chairman, we’re hoping to 
have . . . we’re not hoping, but we’ll have a brochure out for the 
end of April so that producers will know the process in which 
they can make their applications and how they should intend to 

receive their payment. 
 
The application forms for those who are not in NISA will be in 
two places. They’ll be at the crop insurance offices so that 
producers can pick them up there, for those who aren’t in NISA, 
or there’ll be a toll-free number which they could call and then 
we’ll make sure that they get their forms available to them. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, with respect 
to that program . . . so you’re anticipating it working exactly the 
same — an initial payment, and a follow-up later on. How 
much later do you anticipate that being, and what kind of total 
benefits will be available to Saskatchewan producers in this 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the final payment 
would be the end of August, and this year we’ll be paying out 
the federal and provincial portion, 200 million. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to turn our 
attention now for a while, this afternoon, to the various 
strategies revolving around, loosely called, agriculture 
stability-type programs. A number of them are out there. I’d 
like to know what your views and your department’s views are 
on a number of these that are out around the province these 
days. 
 
And I think everyone is looking for some ideas in terms of what 
the direction of your government is with respect to these. 
Specifically on ideas like the focus on sabbatical, farm corp, 
cost of production related-type formulas that are being talked 
about by various farm groups in Saskatchewan these days. And 
if we could, if we could look at, in isolation, each one of them. 
 
Let’s start with the focus on sabbatical. I’m sure you’re 
acquainted with it. I have a basic understanding of the program. 
It’s an attempt to manipulate the market, shall we say, a little bit 
in terms of price strategy by removing land from production. 
 
I want to know what your department’s view of it is; if you’ve 
done any kind of an analysis of how successful a program of 
this nature might be? What kinds of costs are associated with it? 
And what kind of take-up would your department anticipate a 
program of this nature might be? And the general, shall we say, 
philosophy of a program of that nature — what your 
department’s views on it are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, first of 
all I want to say that producers today are looking for all sorts of 
ways to try and find a solution to be able to be more profitable 
in the agricultural industry or in the farming industry. And so 
anytime that you have people who are putting forward ideas and 
suggestions as this one is, I also, I also support that concept to 
continue to look at ways that we might be able to enhance the 
amount of return that producers today can get from the industry 
that’s so important to our province. 
 
What my, what my commentary on this has been, both on a 
number of, on a number of venues that I’ve been at, is that if 
we’re going to get involved in a sabbatical program of this 
nature, that we need to have participation in the international, in 
the international world. It works, in my view, not unlike what’s 
happened here with the, with the subsidy wars that we’re 



590 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2001 

 

involved in today on the grain prices. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Today in the marketplace of course, as you know and I do, that 
European and American farmers today get two sources of 
income for the work that they do in producing food. One they 
get from the marketplace in the US (United States) and 
certainly in Europe, and the other they get a cheque in the mail 
from the national government. And that makes it very difficult 
today for Canadian/Saskatchewan producers to try to make a 
living in the competitive marketplace in the global world, where 
in fact you’re disadvantaged by one particular or two particular 
large, global players in the industry. 
 
And so when we’re talking about a program like the sabbatical 
program, then we need to have participation in my view 
internationally. Because what will happen in my view is that we 
can take land out of production in Saskatchewan or in Canada, 
and what will happen is that if you don’t have that kind of 
participation/support in the international marketplace, you’ll 
have other people simply sliding in there and growing more 
commodity in those other countries. 
 
So I think that there’s value in this kind of discussion and 
there’s value in this kind of thinking. But how you get the world 
to participate in this kind of an event in my view, will be the 
issue. And it’s interesting today, of course I think starting on 
Friday in Quebec City, we have the huge discussion that’s 
going to be going on today on international trade. 
 
And it’s interesting to see that one of the areas of which is 
going to get very little attention in those discussions is the 
whole piece on agriculture. And I say to you that if we’re going 
to be entertaining, and I say to producer groups and 
organizations, if we’re going to be entertaining these kinds of 
concepts or these kinds of options, that what we need to say is 
that we need to try to get the international marketplace to 
participate in this. And that would be my view. 
 
I think that there’s merit here to do this kind of work, but 
clearly it would require an international . . . it would need 
international participation in my view. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. Has your department looked at what 
kind of impact a program of that nature would have on the 
livestock industry in terms of prices? 
 
We know that the livestock industry is always very sensitive to 
feed costs. And a program, while it benefits one side of 
agriculture, there’s always the reverse impact on other sides of 
agriculture. And what kind of impact that may have in terms of 
reducing supply in an industry where . . . that depends upon 
supply, such as the livestock industry, and what kind of impact 
that may have. 
 
And whether or not you and your department have looked at 
whether a program of that nature would be a program that 
would be acceptable in terms of trade negotiations, considering 
the fact that by attempting to reduce supply, you are attempting 
to in essence manipulate the marketplace to some degree. And 
what kind of impact that may have on future trade negotiations. 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, we’ve 
had some . . . we’ve done some work on this case and we’ve 
had some discussion with them. Most of it has been with the 
department and the university, of whom we’ve done some joint 
work to look at what the repercussions or what the benefits 
might be of implementing a program or a notion of this nature. 
 
I think clearly one of the things that we see immediately, as I 
think you’ve pointed out on the livestock side, is that they 
would very quickly put up the price and the costs of the feed 
grains. It sort of rises to the top the minute that you start having 
this kind of discussion. 
 
But we have not done, within our own department, an extensive 
sort of evaluation and cost analysis of entering into a program 
of this magnitude outside of the discussions that we’ve had 
primarily with the university and the academia at the university. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — What were the results of those discussions? I’m 
assuming it was ag economists at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan). What were their thoughts on the program? 
 
I see in various farm publications some economists not looking 
all that favourably on a program of this nature. I’m wondering 
whether you got that same kind of reaction from the ag 
economists that you spoke with and what their 
recommendations were as far as a go forward type of approach 
from your government? 
 
Is it something that you are continuing to analyze and look at or 
is it something that you have essentially discarded at this point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well this is a timely question. I just spoke 
to one of the classes at the university not more than two weeks 
ago, of which I also had a discussion with Mr. Rasmussen or 
Rosaasen, sorry. And of course as you know, or may know, that 
they’ve put a paper out on this whole piece. 
 
In my discussions with them privately on this whole issue, I 
mean the question is, is that if you can get the cartel to 
participate in this, and the land set aside, then of course it has 
some merit and it has some ability to work. 
 
But if you don’t get that kind of involvement internationally, 
then it becomes far more difficult for that kind of a program to 
work. And furthermore, it needs to have a fair amount of 
support — financial support — in order for it to work. 
 
And those financial dollars need to come, in their view — I 
think Mr. Rosaasen’s view and his paper and his students’ paper 
— was that it would be a large injection by the federal 
government in order to set land aside in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now an interesting discussion that I recently had with Mr. 
Vanclief, I mean he says it’s wonderful to design programs but 
who’s going to put the money? And any time that we try to do 
this kind of programming on our own, this is the costs that we 
can’t bear on our own without any question. And I think the 
university and the students at the university the other day said 
the same thing to me. 
 
It’s a wonderful concept and it works. It could work, but it 
requires a significant investment in terms of layout, in terms of 



April 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 591 

 

cash layout. But more appropriate it would work if you could 
get the international community to participate. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. I think we agree with you with 
respect to the international involvement and how important it 
would be for a program of this nature to work. 
 
You indicated that there is a substantial cost. Can you provide 
for the Assembly here this afternoon what kind of substantial 
cost we are looking at for a program of that nature on a 
provincial basis, just in Saskatchewan — on a national basis we 
recognize it’d be considerable more — but on a provincial basis 
what the costs of that type of program would be for 
Saskatchewan? 
 
And what kind of participation would we be in a position to 
afford that cost-sharing which would be a normal 60/40, or is it 
something that you would want to negotiate differently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Deputy Chair, what we can do 
is provide for the member some of the work that’s been done on 
this piece because there has been some work done. I’ve recently 
received a presentation or a document paper from APAS 
(Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan) who are 
recommending this is a model that we could look at, and 
certainly would want to make that paper available to you. 
 
I’d like to also make available the documentation paper that 
was provided to me by the university just recently by the 
student body and by Mr. Rosaasen. And we have some work 
that we’ve done as well in terms of costing and looking at what 
the Canadian model only would look like and what the value of 
a program of that type would require. And then certainly could 
break that down into the kinds of participatory percentages that 
you would expect people to make. 
 
I wouldn’t be supporting on this side of the House for sure, if 
we were going to move down this path, the 60/40 arrangement 
with the federal government. I think most people believe that 
the federal government has abdicated a large part of its 
responsibilities in terms of agriculture, not only in 
Saskatchewan but in Canada. And so any time that we’re 
looking at changing a framework or developing a new program, 
that we should be looking at different percentiles in terms of 
participation, and we’d be happy to provide you with some of 
the work that we’ve had access to or some that we might have 
done ourselves on this particular area. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I rise to ask for 
leave to introduce a motion with respect to allowing Mr. Fyke’s 
staff to accompany him for tomorrow’s proceedings. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hearing on the Commission on Medicare 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Regina Lakeview that: 
 

By leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker to issue an 
invitation to Mr. Patrick Fafard and Ms. Kathryn Dotson to 
attend before the Committee of the Whole at 2:30 p.m. on 
Thursday, April 19, 2001 in the Legislative Chamber in 
order to assist Mr. Ken Fyke with respect to questions 
concerning the final report of the Commission on 
Medicare. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 16:59 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 202 - The Holocaust Memorial Day Act 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I consent to this Bill. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 17:00. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:01. 
 
 
 


