















































Hansard: May 23, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1241 
 May 23, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today on behalf of constituents and people throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan who would like to see Bruno 
telephone exchange become part of the Humboldt telephone 
exchange. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to allow 
Bruno to be part of the Humboldt telephone exchange. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have another 55 signatures to this 
petition from the communities of Bruno, Wakaw, Wilkie, 
Lloydminster, Cudworth, Saskatoon, and Cut Knife. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
to present today from residents who are concerned about some 
of the recommendations in the Fyke report. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure the Wadena Health Centre be 
maintained at its current level of service at minimum with 
24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral services 
available, as well laboratory, public health, home care, and 
long-term care services, to users from our district and 
beyond. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the condition of 
Highway 339. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

 
And the petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Briercrest and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
concerned citizens in southwest Saskatchewan who have signed 
a petition regarding the Swift Current Hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
And the prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of the city 
of Swift Current. In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, residents of 
Ernfold have signed this petition, as have people from Herbert, 
Waldeck, and Kyle. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the citizens of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are concerned about the possible closures of 
hospitals and health centres in the Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take the necessary steps to 
ensure that services are maintained at least at their current 
level at Weyburn General Hospital, Bengough Health 
Centre, Radville Marian Health Centre, and Pangman 
health centre in order that accessible health care services 
are available to residents of the Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency and beyond. 

 
And this is signed by residents of Bengough. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present 
petitions on behalf of citizens of the province regarding the 
EMS (emergency medical services) service. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance service. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Fairlight, 
Redvers, and Bellegarde areas. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available, as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to the users from our district, 
southeast Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and 
beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Carlyle, Alida, 
Redvers, Wauchope, and Antler areas. 
 



1242 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2001 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
today to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular service in the districts of Rabbit Lake, 
Hafford, Blaine Lake, Leask, Radisson, Borden, Perdue, 
Maymont, Mistawasis, and Muskeg Lake. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Blaine Lake and Saskatoon. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to present today opposed to the possible 
reduction of health services in Kamsack. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that health care services in the 
Kamsack Hospital be maintained at its current level of 
service, at minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, 
and doctoral services available. 

 
The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of 
Kamsack and Pelly. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with 
citizens concerned about the high rates being charged by 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Loreburn, Strongfield, 
Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition today 
to present on behalf of constituents concerned with 
centralization of ambulance services. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition come from the communities of 

Wynyard and Wadena. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition 
regarding cellular telephone coverage: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Spiritwood, Medstead, Glaslyn, Leoville, Chitek Lake, Big 
River, Canwood, Debden, Shellbrook, Parkside, Shell 
Lake, Duck Lake, and Macdowall. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are signed by 
citizens of Glaslyn, Leoville, Spiritwood, Medstead, Mayfair. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by citizens of this province who are concerned about the 
high energy costs. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks from Unity and 
Lloydminster. I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with a petition from concerned citizens reference the 
cuts at the Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Mossbank and Gravelbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

The first petition is for raising wages at Rail City Industries 
in Melville and as well in other community-based agencies. 

 
And 11 other petitions that are addendum to previously tabled 
sessional papers. 



May 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1243 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Brkich: —Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
46 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister for Sask Water: what was the total amount 
of fees collected from producers for the sale of water for 
irrigation purposes during the 2000-2001 fiscal year? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce a group of students 
sitting in the east gallery. These students are from the Maymont 
School, from the town of Maymont, Saskatchewan. There’s 23 
students sitting in the gallery. And I’d like to welcome their 
teachers, Austin Harpham, and Martin Hoehn 
 
Please join me in welcoming the Maymont students and 
teachers to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it 
certainly is my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 
this House, Derwyn Crozier-Smith up in your gallery. And he’s 
well known to this Assembly, having come here to see 
proceedings before. But the reason he’s here today is probably 
not well known by most members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 10 years ago with assistance from the provincial 
government, Saskatchewan teachers, working together with 
their education partners, established the Dr. Stirling McDowell 
Foundation for Research into Teaching. The McDowell 
Foundation is an independent charitable foundation that funds 
teaching and learning research in our public, elementary, and 
secondary schools. 
 
In true Saskatchewan spirit the McDowell Foundation brings 
together a wide range of education stakeholders and provides 
them with opportunities to work in support of our young 
people’s education. To date the foundation has raised 
approximately $1.3 million in support of educational research. 
 
This year the McDowell Foundation is celebrating its 10th 
anniversary. To mark this important milestone, the foundation 
recently awarded in excess of $90,000 towards research grants 
that will benefit children in schools throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
In the gallery today, Mr. Speaker, is Derwyn Crozier-Smith 
who is the president of this foundation. On behalf of the 
government and all members, I would like to welcome him and 
extend our congratulations to the McDowell Foundation on its 
10th anniversary. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition I would also like to pass on congratulations 
on the 10th anniversary of the Dr. Stirling McDowell 
Foundation. 
 
I’d also like to also welcome Derwyn Crozier-Smith into the 

gallery today. The McDowell Foundation brings together 
partners that help shape our education system through 
supporting the continued education of the stakeholders involved 
in learning. 
 
Research is essential in all walks of life to ensure the positive 
progress into the future. Our teachers hold in their hands the 
future of our province through our children. Their determination 
to ensure our children will always have the best education 
possible is one of the brightest lights of hope for the future. 
 
On behalf of my colleagues I’d like to congratulate Mr. 
Crozier-Smith and the McDowell Foundation. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 20 students from the great community of Lashburn. 
They’re from the Lashburn High School, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
sitting in the east gallery this afternoon. They are accompanied 
by their teachers, Tracy Doering and Allyson Best. Their 
chaperones are Brian Cote, Linda Amundrud, Marlene Stieb, 
Dorothy Pilon, and Louise Krissa. 
 
I see, Mr. Speaker, that they’re scheduled for an MLA (Member 
of the Legislative Assembly) visit at 2:30 and it would be my 
pleasure to be able to sit in on this afternoon and be able to do 
that for you. As you’ve noticed, I’m doing this on behalf of 
someone else. They are unable to attend today. And it would be 
my pleasure to meet with you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please join me and all members in welcoming the 
20 students from Lashburn. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Nexans Power Cable Plant Expansion in Weyburn 
 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I bring to you word of a great 
development for Saskatchewan and the people of Weyburn. 
Nexans, an extended power cable plant in Weyburn, has 
completed their $20 million expansion project with a grand 
opening that took place on May 18 of this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project included a 40,000 square foot building 
expansion and the addition of 13 pieces of top-of-the-line 
manufacturing equipment. This brings the total investment by 
Nexus in the Weyburn plant since 1992 up to $35 million. It is 
expended that up to 60 new jobs will be created as a result of 
this expansion, once the plant is producing at the new capacity 
level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new facility will position Weyburn as a North 
American leader in the manufacturing of a full range of power 
cables. Nexans Canada Inc. is also the largest company of its 
kind in Canada and one of the largest in North America. 
 
(13:45) 
 
This project is a great example of how good it is to do business 



1244 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2001 

 

in Saskatchewan. When the wire and cable company first 
opened its doors in Weyburn in 1956, it was due to the 
negotiations of our former premier, Tommy Douglas. The first 
plant was located in a huge old hangar at Weyburn airport that 
had been held over from the days of World War II. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve come a long way in the days between. It’s a 
great day for Nexans, for the people of Weyburn, and the 
people of this province. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Aboriginal Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May 21 to 
26 is Aboriginal Awareness Week across Canada and I’m 
honoured to rise in the House today to speak to this very 
important event. 
 
As we move on into the 21st century, Mr. Speaker, we look at 
the many wonderful contributions that Aboriginal people have 
given us. We also know that to build on that tradition and to 
encourage growth, it is imperative that access to education, 
employment, and business opportunities for First Nations 
people continues to be a priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must remember that this province will be 
facing a severe labour shortage within the next few years. To 
replace this group, the workers of tomorrow must be educated, 
trained, and given the resources necessary to grow 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know how important Aboriginal people are to 
the province’s future. Today one-third of students entering 
grade 1 are Aboriginal. Nearly 40 per cent of the province’s 
total student enrolment including university and trades training 
are First Nations. Population predictions put the province’s 
Aboriginal numbers at more than 200,000 in just over a decade 
and that number will continue to grow. 
 
During Aboriginal Awareness Week, Mr. Speaker, we 
recognize and respect not only what First Nations people have 
given our province, but also what great things they have yet to 
contribute. We look forward to a long and successful 
partnership with them as they continue striving towards 
capacity building and full participation in Saskatchewan’s 
growth. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Funding for Provincial Tourism Projects 
 
Mr. Addley: — More good news for Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. This time the news comes in the form of $922,000 in 
funding for tourism projects, which will provide increased 
opportunities for job creation and boost economic development 
in areas throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Birding Trail Strategy will receive 
over $400,000. This money will be used to link the expertise 
and resources of several diverse organizations — wildlife, 
tourism, economic development, and community organizations 
— in order to create birding tours of regional, national, and 

international quality. 
 
The Duck Lake Historical Museum Society will use its new 
funding of $335,000 to revitalize the 10-year-old Duck Lake 
Museum, allowing it to remain viable while playing a 
leadership and coordinating role for tourism and marketing 
initiatives in the Saskatchewan Rivers heritage area. 
 
The Trans-Canada No. 1 West Association is a not-for-profit 
association that has a mandate to promote economic and 
tourism development for communities and business along the 
Trans-Canada Highway. The contribution of over $100,000 to 
this organization will support several innovative initiatives to 
increase tourism along or adjacent to the Trans-Canada in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Ecotourism Society of Saskatchewan 
was given funding of $67,500 to be used to cover the cost to 
complete the accreditation process for known economic 
ecotourism operations, plus others such as traditional outfitters 
who decide to convert to eco-tourism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tourism is one of Saskatchewan’s most dynamic 
industries. Building on our many attractions will create more 
jobs and increase tourism to our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Outlook Defenceman Selected in WHL Draft 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to talk 
about a young man from the town of Outlook in my 
constituency who’s made a major accomplishment in the 
sporting world. 
 
Fifteen-year-old Logan Stephenson was the first player for 
Saskatchewan to be selected in the WHL (Western Hockey 
League) bantam draft held on May 3. He was selected sixth 
overall in the first round by the Tri-City Americans, who regard 
the young defenceman as a very talented hockey player, with 
the potential to one day be a team leader and a franchise player. 
 
What makes this accomplishment even more remarkable is that 
his older brother, Shay is already playing hockey in the WHL 
with the Red Deer Rebels. Indeed the pursuit of hockey 
excellence runs in the family as Logan’s father, Bob 
Stephenson, also played professional hockey with Toronto 
years ago. 
 
Following his hockey career, Bob and his wife settled in 
Outlook where they’ve raised their family, presently own a 
business in this community which Bob also serves as mayor. 
 
Logan speaks highly of his parents as they taught him many of 
the fundamentals of the game and spent time with him in his 
early years to help him develop his skills. They’ve always been 
there for me, offering me support; I just really have to thank 
them more than anyone for getting me where I am now, recalls 
the youngster. 
 
This coming year, he will attend the Americans rookie camp 
that’s scheduled to take place on August 24. He then plans to 
return to Notre Dame where he will try out for their midget 



May 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1245 

 

AAA team. In the meantime his future looks very bright, as he’s 
taken a huge step in pursuit of a dream that many young 
Saskatchewan hockey players have in their mind. 
 
I believe this bright, young defenceman will do very well, and 
hopefully one day will be playing in the National Hockey 
League. While he may have a long road ahead of him yet . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 

Cathedral Village Arts Festival 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If you had 
been in my neighbourhood on Saturday, you would have seen 
several examples of very moving art. But, when I say moving, I 
mean in motion, not emotion. 
 
These were cars that were decorated for the art car parade, 
which was the preface to the Cathedral Village Community 
Association annual picnic and arts festival. 
 
And this year, Mr. Speaker, it’s better than ever. It’s taking 
place as we speak. Festival 2001 will attract more than 25,000 
visitors to the various events up and down the boulevard or up 
and down 13th Avenue, which I may say is our business district 
as well in the neighbourhood. 
 
We have our traditional events like Films Under the Stars, the 
Poetry Slam — nobody gets hurt during that — numerous 
concerts, choir performances, face painting, and sidewalk 
painting. 
 
This year we’re adding a First Nations Showcase, a DanceFest, 
and Theatre in a Shu-Box. The event culminates on Saturday 
with the 13th Avenue street fair and outdoor concert. There’s 
food and drink galore, all quite reasonable. And there’s 
something for everybody, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Regina Centre is in the heart of urban Regina, but it shares 
many of the virtues of village life. We are a very diverse 
community of performers, artists, small-business people, 
community volunteers, and just generally citizens who delight 
in diversity, proving once again, Mr. Speaker, that culture 
builds community. 
 
I want to quickly congratulate Gerri-Ann Siwek, festival 
chairperson, and all the volunteers who make this a yearly 
success. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fundraiser for North-East Health District 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today and tomorrow paramedics Lyle Moffat and Mark Ollinger 
will test their endurance in a run-and-bike race through the 
North-East Health District to raise money for disaster 
equipment. 
 
Today the two will relay-jog from Choiceland to Nipawin 
where they will join a fundraiser at the ambulance base. Then 

they will continue on by bicycle from Nipawin to Carrot River. 
 
Tomorrow, the 24th, they will leave Carrot River, cycling to the 
Arborfield/Zenon Park area, then will complete the final leg on 
foot back to Nipawin. The total distance is approximately 160 
kilometres, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a project under the Disaster Management Committee. 
The ultimate goal is to raise $30,000 to provide disaster 
equipment that would be used in caring for victims in the event 
of a mass casualty incident within the health district. The 
Disaster Management Committee is an umbrella group, which 
under all emergency agencies in the district operate in the event 
of a disaster. 
 
Proceeds are to go towards the purchase of equipment such as 
backboards, spine boards, and bandaging supplies. When and if 
funds permit, the goal is as well to purchase a trailer to house 
the equipment so that it may be moved to a disaster site. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me 
in congratulating Lyle and Mark on their tremendous effort in 
fundraising for the North-East Health District. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Registered Psychiatric Nurses Recognized 
 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all know the 
importance of nurses to health care in Saskatchewan, and many 
of us have experienced a nurse’s compassion and expertise 
first-hand. 
 
Recently the Registered Psychiatric Nurses Association 
gathered to pay tribute to members who have demonstrated 
excellence in the field of nursing. On May 15, the association 
held their President’s Award banquet to honour those who have 
made exemplary contributions to the profession. I would like to 
quickly mention those who were honoured by the Registered 
Psychiatric Nurses. 
 
Lynde McKinley received the Duke Leflar Award, an award 
that recognizes the graduate who has achieved the highest 
standing on the RPNAS (Registered Psychiatric Nurses 
Association of Saskatchewan) registration exam. Donald Yates, 
RPN (Registered Psychiatric Nurse), received the Award for 
Community Service, and Sue Myer, RPN, received the 
Psychiatric Nursing Education Award. 
 
Appreciation awards are given to registered psychiatric nurses 
and members of the public who accept leadership positions 
within the organization and play a pivotal role within the 
organization through their volunteering. 
 
Appreciation awards were given to Carla Bolen, RPN and 
President of RPNAS; Ellen Jones, RPN and member-at-large; 
Edie Montgrand, RPN, and member-at-large. 
 
Congratulations to all the award recipients, and a thank you to 
all the registered psychiatric nurses for the contributions they 
make to the health care sector and to society. 
 
Thank you. 



1246 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Termination of Employee of Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Speaker, on May 8 
during question period, Government House Leader was 
responding to questions regarding allegations of bribery made 
by the member of North Battleford. And the Government House 
Leader said, and I quote: 
 

If any member of this legislature or any member of the 
general public has any, any, any evidence to suggest . . . 
inappropriate activity, they have a responsibility to forward 
that to the proper process, which is the police. 
 

Mr. Speaker, does the Minister of Justice agree with this 
statement? Do government officials have a responsibility to 
take evidence of wrongdoing to the police? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the member raises the 
question of the obligation on the part of anyone who finds out 
about wrongdoing to report that matter to the police. If the 
member is referring to the member from North Battleford 
having an obligation should he feel it necessary, then he should 
indeed take the matter to the police. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
problem is, government officials are sometimes reluctant to go 
to the police with evidence of wrongdoing for fear of being 
punished by that government. The Saskatchewan Party has been 
calling for whistle-blowing legislation to protect government 
workers who come forward with evidence of wrongdoing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Minister of Justice think that government 
employees should be punished if they take evidence of illegal 
activities to the police, and if not, will the minister support our 
whistle-blowing legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, at the time the member 
talked about moving whistle-blower legislation, I indicated that 
the government would look seriously at his proposal, and of 
course the government will do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, under 
section 76 of The Police Act, the Minister of Justice has the 
authority to appoint special constables. Could the minister 
please explain what is a special constable and what duties and 
responsibilities does a special constable have under The Police 
Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a special constable 

is appointed for various reasons — sometimes at the request of 
the chief of police — and the special constable will fulfill 
whatever duties are designated to him or her in the minister’s 
order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Section 78 of The 
Police Act says that a special constable is in effect a police 
officer . . . a peace officer. They’re required to fulfill the duties 
of a police officer as prescribed by The Police Act. They swear 
the same oath as any police officer to prevent crime and enforce 
the law. 

 
Mr. Speaker, would the minister agree that a special constable, 
perhaps even more than ordinary people, has a duty to uphold 
the law, to co-operate in police investigations, to provide any 
evidence of illegal activity to proper authorities. Would the 
minister agree with that statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, my next question is for the 
Minister of Liquor and Gaming. Mr. Speaker, why did the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority fire Joe 
Dosenberger? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a matter 
of course, I think the members opposite would know when 
we’re talking about internal personnel matters, we don’t 
comment on individuals within the Assembly. 
 
In this one, on a personnel issue, there was a thorough external 
review of some of the employment issues and a course of action 
was taken by management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that’s all that I am able to supply to the 
member opposite in the Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well a bit of 
information. Mr. Speaker, Joe Dosenberger was a 28-year 
veteran of the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police). In 
1995, he went to work for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority as their superior of investigations and 
security. In 1996, he was appointed as a special constable by the 
Minister of Justice to help him fulfill his investigative duties 
with SLGA(Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority). 
 
In every performance appraisal Joe Dosenberger received from 
the SLGA, he received, Mr. Speaker, the highest possible rating 
in every category of his job performance. Yet on July 6, 2000, 
he was fired with cause and without notice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I ask the minister: why did the NDP 
government fire Joe Dosenberger? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1247 

 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the 
member opposite would know that this matter would be before 
the courts very soon and we’re not able to talk about internal 
personnel issues and individuals within the Assembly. 
 
I don’t think it suits that individual or the matters before this 
House to be able to speak about individual personnel issues, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think that I would want to say that I would 
respect that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well very soon 
isn’t now, to start off with. And secondly, the good question is 
why is he there? 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to an article in the July 12 Leader-Post 
SLGA CEO (Chief Executive Officer) Kathy Langlois said that 
a security official — presumably Joe Dosenberger — was fired 
for leaking a cabinet briefing note to John Gormley. But, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s not the real reason. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has obtained a copy of Joe 
Dosenberger’s letter of termination from the same Kathy 
Langlois. In her letter, she says Mr. Dosenberger was 
terminated for providing the cabinet briefing note to the RCMP, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Joe Dosenberger is a 28-year veteran of the 
RCMP. He was a special constable. He was a supervisor of 
investigation for the SLGA. He was a lead investigator on the 
SIGA file, and he turned that into the RCMP. For that, he was 
fired. 
 
Why did the NDP fire Joe Dosenberger for assisting the RCMP 
in an ongoing criminal investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we would 
all know within this Assembly, you can say what one side of an 
issue might be or another side of an issue and it does not benefit 
the individual involved to bring individual personnel issues to 
this Assembly. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, after a thorough external review of some 
employment issues, management took a course of action in the 
case of Mr. Dosenberger. We do not discuss individual 
personnel issues within the Assembly, and if they’re becoming 
an issue that will be the course of legal action or before the 
courts, it’s not up to us to discuss these matters within this 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we’ll make a 
few comments about what Mr. Joe Dosenberger has to say 
about this incident. One of his written statements, Mr. Speaker, 
was written on June 26, 2000, the other one June 29, 2000. 
 
Mr. Dosenberger clearly states that the only person he provided 
the cabinet briefing to was Sgt. Mike Morrisey of the RCMP. 
This is not disputed by this government. Joe Dosenberger’s 

letter of termination clearly states that he was fired for sharing 
this information with the RCMP. Yet Kathy Langlois told the 
news media he was fired for leaking this document to John 
Gormley. 
 
So Joe Dosenberger provides important information to the 
RCMP and he gets fired, Mr. Speaker. Kathy Langlois fires him 
and then lies about it, and she gets a promotion from this 
government. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I would just ask members 
to not use language that is unparliamentary whether it pertains 
to a member or somebody . . . a civil servant who cannot defend 
himself. I would ask the member to withdraw his statement 
about lying and then take 10 seconds to make the question. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I’ll withdraw the word lying 
from my statement. Kathy Langlois does what she does and she 
gets a promotion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did Kathy Langlois do this talk about firing 
with the news media? Was it her idea, or was she directed by 
that minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member 
opposite knows this line of questioning is inappropriate, and the 
answer would continue to be the same. There is only one side of 
an issue that comes forward like this, Mr. Speaker. And 
employment issues are complex. After an external review of 
employment issues in this case, a course of action was taken by 
management. 
 
There are other courses of appeal or repeal for this person to 
take. And I would say that such matters when they’re looked at 
as an internal employment issue within Liquor and Gaming 
Authority should remain there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The question just asked, Mr. Speaker, was if 
that firing had the support of that particular minister, which she 
is refusing to answer at this point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s easy to appreciate the difficult position that 
Joe Dosenberger found himself in. On one hand as a 
government employee, which is what he was, he was expected 
to maintain confidentiality of certain government documents. 
On the other hand, as the inspector and special constable under 
The Police Act, he was required to uphold the law and 
co-operate fully with the RCMP and its SIGA investigation. To 
his credit, he did not see a conflict between those two goals. 
 
In his June 29 statement he said, and I quote: 
 

The objectives of the government and its agency should 
never be in conflict with the proper administration of the 
law. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Dosenberger clearly believed he was fulfilling 
his sworn duty under the law, but the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) fired him for it. 



1248 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2001 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is this: is the government saying that 
Joe Dosenberger should have withheld this information from 
the RCMP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I would stand behind the 
House Leader who says if there is an employee who knows of 
criminal wrongdoing or criminal action, they have the right and 
the responsibility to take that information to the police. 
 
In this issue, Mr. Speaker, after thorough review of all sides of 
an employment issue, with an external review that took place, 
management made a decision. If they’re asking if this 
individual was the instigator of that investigation or the 
management’s decision, I would say no. If you’re asking if I 
will support the decisions of management taken at 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, Mr. Speaker, the 
answer is yes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Support of that decision then, Mr. Speaker, 
says that that minister supports firing someone for bringing the 
information to the RCMP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP seems to be saying that the government 
is above the law, that cabinet secrecy, Mr. Speaker, takes 
precedent over criminal investigation by the RCMP. When Joe 
Dosenberger saw this cabinet briefing note, he obviously 
thought it contained information that would assist the RCMP in 
the investigation so he provided it to the RCMP. 
 
My question is this: what should he have done? That hasn’t 
been answered. Is the NDP government saying the proper 
course of action would have been to withhold this information 
from the RCMP? Is this government in the practice of 
withholding evidence of criminal activity from the RCMP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already said to the 
member opposite, if anyone — including members of 
government, including members opposite, including anyone in 
employment — knows of any criminal action or wrongdoing, 
they have a responsibility and it is their right to take that to the 
RCMP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I would say with an internal personnel issue, 
it does not benefit anyone to have a one-sided discussion of 
employment issues before this Assembly. There is a proper 
channel to take and that is going to be occurring, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The proper channel, Mr. Speaker, is when the 
government does something wrong, it’s for the opposition to 
hold it accountable and that’s what we’re doing. 
 
Here’s a question, Mr. Speaker, the minister can answer. Mr. 
Speaker, who approved Joe Dosenberger’s firing? Who directed 
that he be fired for sharing information with the RCMP? 

Specifically, did the minister approve the decision to fire Joe 
Dosenberger? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, personnel issues within 
the Liquor and Gaming Authority are taken by management 
after a thorough review of all of the issues involved. In this case 
there was also an external investigation that was done and, as 
part of that, information that is provided through management 
to the decision making in this instance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this does not come up then to the minister for a 
decision on the operation or human resourcing of an individual 
area such as Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister said it 
didn’t come up for her decision so obviously that department is 
out of her control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one other part in Joe Dosenberger’s June 
29 statement that’s very troubling. And he says and I quote: 
 

As much as we don’t like it, high-level employees do 
commit criminal offences or attempt to cover up offences 
committed by their friends. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as far as we’ve all been led to believe the current 
criminal investigation focuses on Dutch Lerat and possibly 
other members of SIGA. But here is SLGA’s lead investigator 
on the SIGA file referring to criminal activity, Mr. Speaker, and 
cover-ups by high government officials. And one week later — 
one week later — he’s fired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what was Joe Dosenberger alluding to? Why was 
the lead investigator on the SIGA file referring to criminal 
offences and cover-ups by high-ranking government officials? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
at the time that there was much emotion and much information 
and much information around the SIGA issue, there was the 
release of some documents, Mr. Speaker, and the actions that 
were taken. 
 
And I would read from The Leader-Post at that time, actually 
July 13, 2000, when a member of the Assembly: 
 

D’Autremont (I’m quoting from The Leader-Post) said he 
agrees that cabinet confidentiality is very important and 
that dismissal of an employee is probably the appropriate 
course of action. 

 
Now if we’re going to get into this kind of a discussion within 
the Assembly, it’s highly unfair to that individual. It’s a 
personnel issue that should be handled within the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority, a constituted regulator. They look at all 
sides of the issue and then that employee has a recourse that can 
be taken through the courts, Mr. Speaker, and that is underway. 
 



May 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1249 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re not here this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to hold The Leader-Post accountable 
. . . but that minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have to wonder: was the NDP really trying to 
get to the bottom of this whole SIGA mess or were they just 
trying to bury it? It seems awfully strange that just a few weeks 
after this whole thing becomes public, they fire their own lead 
investigator for co-operating with the RCMP. It seems awfully 
strange that this is supposed to be an investigation of Dutch 
Lerat and SIGA, and here the SLGA’s lead investigator is 
talking about criminal cover-up and criminal activity by high 
government officials. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP is really determined to get to the 
bottom of this matter, why would they fire their lead 
investigator right in the middle of the investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that this 
issue has gone into a totally different area. We have spoken 
before this Assembly about the issues at SIGA. All of the 
information was provided. There was a detailed external audit 
by our auditor. That report was released. All of the information 
has been made available. All of the information has been made 
available to the Justice department and that is currently under 
review. 
 
So it’s interesting now that this is taking this twist, when we’re 
talking about the issue of employment and how people conduct 
themselves through employment. I would quote again The 
Leader-Post who says: 
 

D’Autremont said he agrees that cabinet confidentiality is 
very important (and it’s very important to the operation of 
any government, and it goes on to say) and that dismissal of 
the employee is probably the appropriate course of action. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that will be determined. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That minister has 
been dodging around a number of questions. Part of them are 
the responsibility that she has for her department. And the 
question that is there — and it still is there and the people of 
Saskatchewan have a right to have that answer today — is are 
you aware of that . . . 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I just remind the member to continue all his 
remarks through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Is she aware of that letter of firing; was she 
aware of it before it was mailed; and what were the contents of 
that letter of firing from her department? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
would understand from his member when we’re talking about 
cabinet confidentiality. But he should also understand — if he’s 
wishing to be a person who’s also responsible for an area of 
government one day — that there’s also responsibilities that 
management has in the day-to-day operations and the running 
of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. With all of the 
information that’s provided to them, it’s up to them to make 
decisions and to be accountable for them. 
 
And yes, they would let me know what that decision is. But I 
would not have a role in taking that decision. They would look 
at the external review that was provided, they would look at the 
employment issues, they would look at cabinet confidentiality 
— as the member opposite said, they should be taken very 
seriously — and with that in mind they would look at all sides 
of the issue. It’s very inappropriate then for me to comment on 
individual personnel decisions that are taken with this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tuition Increases at Universities 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education. Mr. Speaker, the University of 
Regina announced yesterday that tuition fees for the coming 
academic year will be going up almost 9 per cent. That means 
that students will have to put out another $300 in tuition this 
fall. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan has already announced that its 
tuition fees will be increasing by some 15 per cent for the 
upcoming year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, both universities are working hard, in spite of this 
NDP government, to deliver quality education. Meanwhile the 
NDP government is spending and losing millions of taxpayer’s 
dollars on ill-fated business ventures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where are the NDP’s priorities? Why is the NDP 
wasting millions on failing government businesses and forcing 
universities to hit students with massive increases in tuition 
fees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. 
member for the question. And I remind the hon. member, as I 
know he understands, that the universities have the autonomy to 
make decisions in the best interest of the university and the 
students, taking into consideration access and affordability and 
the operations of university. I’m including in that, tuition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the hon. member wants to talk about is 
funding. So, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk turkey; let’s talk Sask Party, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there would be some who would say 
that the $200 million to universities in this year’s budget is a 
pretty fair amount of funding for our universities. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, there are some who would say that 15 per cent 
increase over the last three years funding to our universities is 
not too shabby. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there is one group that would say that the 15 



1250 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2001 

 

per cent increase in funding to universities over the last three 
years is too much and, Mr. Speaker, they’re in this room and 
they’re sitting on that side of the House. The Sask Party, Mr. 
Speaker, if they had their way would rip $17 million out of 
funding to universities, Mr. Speaker. That’s their position and 
we’re not going there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about a 15 per 
cent increase in university funding over the last number of 
years. In fact this year it’s 3.5 per cent which is woefully 
inadequate. 
 
It’s the same old story from this arrogant and lifeless NDP 
government. They say one thing before the election and do 
something exactly opposite after the election. 
 
In the last provincial election the NDP promised free first-year 
tuition to every university student. The Liberals got into the 
game by promising a thousand dollar discount on tuition for 
four years, Mr. Speaker. But once the Liberals and NDP got 
together after the election, what happened? They forgot about 
their promises. The coalition government continued . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The member will 
continue. 
 
Mr. Hart: — The coalition government forgot about its 
election promises, Mr. Speaker, and they continue to dump 
millions of taxpayers’ dollars into failing businesses. IQ&A for 
example lost $2 million. Clickabid chopped up another $2 
million loss. SecurTek, a $2 million loss. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP dumping millions into failing 
businesses while students struggle with rising tuition fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I note with interest 
when the hon. member talks about election commitments 
there’s one party he left out. He did not talk about Sask Party 
election commitments to post-secondary education, Mr. 
Speaker. You know why? Because there was none. There was 
none. 
 
The most you could possibly get them to suggest was that they 
would increase funding by the rate of inflation — less than 6 
per cent. Less than 6 per cent over the last three years, while 
this government has increased funding by over 15 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They had a chance to change their story in the by-election in 
Wood River. They stuck to their story. They had a chance to 
change their election in the by-election in Elphinstone. They 
stuck to their story and they lost. They had a chance to change 
their position in an election in Riversdale. They stuck to their 
story and they lost, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s their story. Less than 6 per cent funding; $17 million less 
to the universities if we follow the Sask Party policy. That’s 
their story; they’re sticking to it. The people of Saskatchewan 
are not going there and neither are we. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 203 — The Whistleblower Protection Act 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to move 
first reading of Bill No. 203, The Whistleblower Protection Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
the west gallery we are joined by 15 students, grade 9 students, 
from the Joe Duquette High School in Saskatoon. They are 
accompanied by their teachers Rob Regnier and Shirley 
Gardiner. 
 
I know that the students are going to be touring the legislature 
between 3 and 4, and I’ll have an opportunity to meet with 
them. And I’d ask all members of the legislature to welcome 
these students from Joe Duquette in Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member for Canora-Pelly also like 
leave to introduce guests? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Yes, with leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, seated in your gallery are a number of people from the 
community of Hyas, Saskatchewan, in the Canora-Pelly 
constituency, specifically from the North Star Christian School. 
 
I’d like to introduce eight grade 7, 8, and 9 students and their 
chaperones, Rodney and Aldine Goossen, and Ken and Alta 
Penner. I’d like all members to join with me in welcoming this 
group to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca; why is 
he on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to introduce guests as 
well. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. I just want to join my 
colleague from Saskatoon in welcoming the school from 



May 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1251 

 

Saskatoon. I understand that one of the chaperones is Shirley 
Gardiner and Shirley is from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I believe the 
principal of the school is also from Ile-a-la-Crosse, Mr. Duane 
Favel. And of course Ile-a-la-Crosse is my home community, so 
I want to join all the colleagues in welcoming the students from 
Joe Duquette High School. Thanks. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Membership of Standing Committee on Health Care 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise today to speak to this motion that will establish 
members of the Legislative Assembly to the Standing 
Committee on Health Care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I think it is time that this 
legislature was served by a committee that deals with health 
care. Many of the committees are not as active as some, but I 
want to say I think this is one that is timely and it’s very 
important that we establish this committee and this committee 
function, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues that I think have been 
on people’s mind, on the minds of the general public, not the 
least of which, Mr. Speaker, is the report that was crafted by 
Mr. Ken Fyke dealing with health care and the circumstances 
with respect to health care that we find ourselves in here, in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the forum, and a proper forum, for discussing and 
listening to people’s comments with respect to the Fyke 
committee, is that of a standing committee as it relates to health 
care. And that’s certainly part of the mandate of this particular 
committee. 
 
Now I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we were hoping that members 
of the opposition — and are still hoping that members of the 
opposition — will join with us in hearing the stakeholders and 
individuals across this province who have expressed concern 
that they be allowed to respond to Mr. Fyke’s 
recommendations. This government, Mr. Speaker, has indicated 
quite clearly that it’s our intention to hear what people have to 
say and to report those findings back to the Legislative 
Assembly and to cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s one of the most important debates that 
we in this province will have because this really does speak to 
the future of medicare, to the method of service delivery, Mr. 
Speaker. It speaks to a system that was born here, born of this 
province that guarantees access to all people the highest level 
and highest quality of health care that we can, that we can 
support. 
 
Now Mr. Fyke has made some recommendations with respect 
to how he sees changes that may improve the delivery of health 
care throughout this province. Now, Mr. Speaker, one can agree 
with some of Mr. Fyke’s recommendations or one can disagree. 
I think it will be a matter of some debate in this province 

because of the size of the issue. This is not a trivial issue. It’s 
not a trivial matter. This is the basic fundamental future of 
health care in the 21st century in this province. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we have been, as a province, 
leaders in terms of health care delivery in Canada. And I think 
we can continue to be that, because we have a feeling and we 
have an understanding for the delivery of our medicare system, 
although we know it needs some changes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I was disappointed 
initially to hear members of the opposition indicate that they 
didn’t want to be part of a structure that could allow for us to 
hear the people of Saskatchewan; whether they be northern, 
whether they be southern, urban or rural, whether they be 
employed by the health care system or merely individuals and 
family members who have been supplied that kind of service by 
our health care and by our medicare system. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the intent of this committee 
goes beyond that though. It’s important. We would intend to 
use this as a vehicle to hear the people of Saskatchewan and 
their response to the Fyke Commission. And I think that’s 
important. 
 
But I think it’s fair to say that the establishment of this 
committee is important as well because there has been a 
national commission struck that is spearheaded and lead by the 
former premier of this province which commission will make 
some recommendations, as I understand it, to the federal 
government. And I think that this is a process, this committee, 
this all-party committee, is a process that can hear and that can 
listen and question the recommendations that will come out of 
that national commission at some point in time. 
 
But I think more importantly for the immediate future, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s the intention of this administration to establish the 
committee so that we can hear what the people of Saskatchewan 
have to say about the Fyke report that deals with Saskatchewan 
health care and medicare here in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many issues that deal with our health. 
This legislature has been . . . 
 
(14:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
thank you very much members of the Assembly to allow me 
this opportunity to introduce to you and through you to, Mr. 
Speaker, to all members of the Assembly the grade 11 students 
from Smeaton School in my constituency. 
 
They are sitting in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Collins, and by chaperone, 
Mrs. Dunn. I’m going to be meeting with them for a little MLA 



1252 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2001 

 

visit at 3:30. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all members of the Assembly and 
you, I would like everyone here to welcome the students, grade 
11 students from Smeaton School in Smeaton. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Membership of Standing Committee on Health Care 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want 
to welcome the students to the legislature and I hope they enjoy 
the proceedings this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker indicated there are other issues aside from Fyke 
that this committee would have the ability to deal with. There 
are other issues that will happen from time to time that would 
allow for some discussion and would allow for some input from 
people, members of the general public. 
 
We just had a circumstance — a very unfortunate circumstance 
in North Battleford recently here — that deals with health care 
and water quality. And I can see that as being perhaps a vehicle 
to act on that particular issue, to respond to and gather 
information. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the member indicates that it 
might be something for the Committee of the Environment. 
And it may — I wouldn’t debate that. But I think with health 
care as the largest issue that’s facing this province at this point 
in time, it’s appropriate that we have a Committee on Health 
Care. 
 
Now members of the opposition are on record as supporting 
enhanced work of committees through this legislature. As a 
matter of fact, speaking of committees, they’re part of the Rules 
Committee which is now reviewing the establishment of 
different working relationships between the Legislative 
Assembly and committees and enhancing the role that 
committees take in terms of regulations and deliberation in 
terms of legislation. And I think that’s totally appropriate. 
 
Certainly members on this side of the House support that, which 
is why I think it’s very much appropriate to have this 
commission and this committee that we are proposing . . . 
committee we propose . . . we’re proposing today, the 
membership to it. And I want to say that I think it’s more than 
appropriate that we have a legislative committee whose 
mandate is to deal specifically with this issue. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that I understand why members 
opposite would be reluctant. And I am certainly hopeful that 
they’re going to support my motion today — the motion by 
myself, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
And I’m certainly hopeful that they will support the proposed 
membership list which includes the established, long-time 
historically established membership, as the Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly has indicated the appropriate membership 
would be in. That’s what I’m recommending here today. 
 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, given the direction that this legislature 
is taking — that of an enhanced role of committees — that 
members opposite would support us in this initiative today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m somewhat not understanding — and I don’t 
want to get into the debate on Fyke because I think that’s a 
debate for another day. This is merely a motion to propose 
membership to this committee on health that we’ve established, 
that this legislature has established. Because I think it’s really 
important that we do as we said we would do and what 
stakeholders, what SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations) and the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical 
Association) and other groups are asking: that they be allowed 
to comment to a legislative body with respect to their comments 
and how they believe Fyke and his commission and his report 
would impact health care and the future of this province. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, the debate on Fyke and on the Fyke 
report is for another day. I would only say that I’m hopeful that 
the official opposition will put partisan politics to the side on 
this issue and deal with what is a substantive recommendation 
in terms of changes to health care in this province, and hear 
what people of Saskatchewan have to say about this report. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I see the role of this 
committee as reporting back to this legislature what they hear. 
And I also see the role of this committee as being a committee 
that a report would be drafted by someone appointed by the 
Clerk of the Legislative Assembly — an independent person — 
so that we could review in some detail what was said by the 
stakeholders and individuals. And I think that these are all 
things that can happen as a result of the committee’s work. And 
we certainly want to work in a positive way with members of 
the opposition as it relates to this committee. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, I think the debate in terms of 
the commission, the report that Mr. Fyke has put before the 
Legislative Assembly, we’ve had some six and a half hours of 
hearings. Mr. Fyke was . . . attended to the legislature and spent 
some six and a half hours answering questions a couple of 
weeks ago. 
 
I think this now gives us an opportunity to hear from the people 
of Saskatchewan in terms of that report. And so I’m certainly 
hopeful that my motion today will be supported by members of 
the opposition. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest: 
 

That the Standing Committee on Health Care consist of 
four government members, three official opposition 
members, and one coalition member; and further that the 
members Judy Junor, Jim Melenchuk, Buckley Belanger, 
Andrew Thomson, Warren McCall, Rod Gantefoer, Brenda 
Bakken, and Bill Boyd be appointed to the Standing 
Committee on Health Care and that the membership be 
transferable pursuant to rule 94(4). 

 
I so move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it 
certainly is a privilege for me to rise today to second the motion 



May 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1253 

 

by the Hon. Government House Leader with regard to 
establishing the membership of the Standing Committee on 
Health Care. 
 
We recognize that this is a new committee that has just been 
established recently — within the past week — by this 
Legislative Assembly and that the standing committee will deal 
with health care issues. Certainly this motion today basically 
establishes the membership based on the usual proportion 
designated for standing committees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly when we look at health care as an issue 
before the province of Saskatchewan, it is recognized that 
health care has been the number one issue of concern for the 
public of Saskatchewan for some time. This issue has 
dominated all other issues to the extent that issues such as 
agriculture, municipal affairs, issues such as legislation with 
regard to whistle-blower — I mean all of these things are minor 
issues when compared to the big issue of health care. 
 
So we now have a standing committee. We are now establishing 
the membership of that committee so that committee, that 
all-party standing committee can do its work. And the purpose 
of that work is to listen to people, to have people come before 
this committee to talk about the issues of concern for them. 
 
We have petitions that have been presented by the members 
opposite daily for the past several weeks talking about a health 
care centre concern with the community of Wadena, concerns 
about health care in Kamsack, concerned about emergency 
response and emergency services in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly some of the concerns that 
have been talked about in the Fyke report, and concerns that the 
public of Saskatchewan need to bring forward to this 
committee. 
 
So certainly, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the opportunity 
for this committee to hear responses to the Fyke report, to 
actually know what the stakeholders are thinking, what the 
providers of health care are thinking, and what the communities 
are thinking in terms of how we can improve our health care 
system, I’d say we should be putting aside partisan politics and 
having that committee do its work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly with the motion today, we establish the 
membership based on the usual proportions for standing 
committees. And I believe that that committee should get on 
with the work of looking at health care concerns for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would strongly be supporting the motion by the Hon. 
Government House Leader with regard to creating the 
membership of the Standing Committee on Health. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last week in this Assembly we supported the motion to establish 
a Standing Committee on Health. We felt that it was being done 
at the wrong time, for the wrong reasons, and it should have 

been done, Mr. Speaker, after the report came back from the 
Special Committee on Rules and Procedures. 
 
Nevertheless the government moved forward with this and we 
supported it, Mr. Speaker, I think actually much to their 
surprise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government House Leader and the Minister of 
Education talk that this motion should be viewed in a 
non-partisan manner — non-partisan manner. And yet, Mr. 
Speaker, they name all of the committee members not through 
consultation, Mr. Speaker, but just simply by doing it 
themselves without dealing with the official opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, on who should be a part of this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, take a look at the very motion. Take a look at the 
very motion, Mr. Speaker, that determines the makeup of this 
committee. Not the individual names, but it names four 
members of the government, which is a normal method of 
naming people. It names three from the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, which is again a normal way of doing things. But, Mr. 
Speaker, in this House it also names that one of the members 
has to be a member of the coalition Liberals. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the first time since this province was 
formed in 1905 that there has been coalition Liberals in the 
House. So after the next election — or even before that, Mr. 
Speaker, if members change their seats — we may very well be 
in a position where there are no coalition Liberals, Mr. Speaker, 
so how do you form the Standing Committee on Education? 
 
One of the members named on that committee — not an 
individual but a function of the House, Mr. Speaker — does not 
exist. There may very well not be any coalition Liberals in 
future Assemblies, Mr. Speaker. That invalidates that motion, 
Mr. Speaker. How do you form the committee without coming 
back to this Assembly and changing the motion? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is being done simply for partisan reasons. It’s 
not non-partisan at all. It’s 110 per cent partisan, Mr. Speaker, 
and that very motion shows the partisanship of it. Otherwise the 
government would have said four or five government members, 
three non-government or opposition members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since they’re naming parties in the House — the coalition 
Liberals — in the motion, Mr. Speaker, why was no 
consideration given to the independent members of this 
Assembly? They weren’t even considered, Mr. Speaker. They 
are as much a member of this Assembly as any other member, 
Mr. Speaker, but yet they’re totally disregarded in this motion. 
 
They could have said, Mr. Speaker, in the motion, a Liberal, 
which again in a lot of cases in this province there are not 
Liberals elected to this Assembly, but in this particular day and 
age there is three. They could have said in the motion, a Liberal, 
and that would have included the independent members, Mr. 
Speaker. But no, no. Because of partisan reasons it had to be a 
coalition Liberal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tradition of this House is that at the formation 
of a committee, it’s done in consultation with both sides of the 



1254 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2001 

 

House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this particular case the establishment of the criteria for this 
committee was a phone call from the Government House 
Leader informing myself as the Opposition House Leader, here 
is what it’s going to be: four government, one coalition Liberal, 
three members of the official opposition. End of story. Not what 
do you think, Mr. Speaker; simply this is what it’s going to be. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the normal way of this House, 
that’s not their tradition, and that most certainly is not a 
non-partisan way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been the habit of this NDP government over 
time, over the last 10 years, to simply use its power to force its 
will on the members of the legislature. And again, when it 
comes to the establishment of committees and naming of 
individuals to those committees, that is not the tradition of this 
House. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what they are establishing here today is a 
new precedent: that government will appoint all the members to 
any committee, Mr. Speaker; that they don’t need to consult 
with the opposition; they don’t need to consult with any of the 
members of the House. They can simply go ahead and appoint 
whomever they wish, Mr. Speaker, to any of the standing 
committees of this legislature. 
 
That’s not the way it has been done in the past. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my understanding and belief that this is the very 
first time that this practice has been used in this Assembly. 
 
The Government House Leader talked about some of the other 
issues that could be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Health, and he used the example of the North Battleford water 
situation. Well, Mr. Speaker, water is an environmental issue. 
Certainly can impact on health, but water is the jurisdiction of 
the Environment in this province. 
 
We have a Standing Committee on the Environment, Mr. 
Speaker. The last time it sat was about 1993 because it didn’t 
support the government, Mr. Speaker, and has not been heard of 
since. 
 
I predict, Mr. Speaker, that the Standing Committee on Health, 
after it deals with the Fyke report, will never again be heard 
from, that there will be no references by this government to that 
committee just as there has been no references to the 
Environment Committee, the Education Committee, the 
Constitution Committee, the Municipal Committee, and a whole 
number of others. 
 
Once in 10 years that I’ve been here, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has referred one item — one item only — to the 
Agriculture Committee. Mr. Speaker, no, this government 
simply uses these standing committees for its own partisan 
political purposes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had Mr. Fyke in this Assembly. The minister 
says that we need to debate the Fyke report another day. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, he’s being consistent because the day we had Mr. 
Fyke here, he shut the committee down because we needed to 
debate it another day, Mr. Speaker, when he had told us 

previously that we could ask as many questions as we wanted 
and take as long as we wanted to get our answers. Mr. Speaker, 
again he’s being consistent when he says it’ll happen another 
day. Well, Mr. Speaker, the department on Education may sit 
another day but it likely won’t be this century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a very sad day in this Assembly when this 
government carries out its undemocratic actions. Undemocratic, 
Mr. Speaker, because it does not allow the opposition to freely 
choose which of its members it wants to hold on a committee, 
Mr. Speaker. This is simply, Mr. Speaker, the implementation 
of the heavy hand of the majority to stifle, to stifle the 
opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s a disappointment, Mr. Speaker, when the members of 
the New Democratic Party can’t even live up to their own 
democratic name, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this government is 
simply a disappointment to everyone in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 9 — The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to talk 
today about the points brought up by the amendments contained 
in Bill No. 9. I’d like to go through and talk about some of the 
points being raised here that I think are of some importance to 
the people of Saskatchewan in regards to the SaskPower 
Corporation. 
 
Of course lately, SaskPower has been in the news due to the 
rising rate hikes. So it is our duty as opposition MLAs to make 
sure that the government realize their position and that Bill No. 
9 does not result in further increases which the people of 
Saskatchewan already finding it difficult to afford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at clause 5, we see the amendment 
that will relieve SaskPower of the requirements to publish its 
charges, rates, and conditions where the service in question may 
be provided by an independent third party. And this explanation 
of clause 5 goes on to say that increased competition will 
appear with the implementation of the open access transmission 
tariff in July 2001. 
 
Certainly, most people in Saskatchewan would agree that 
SaskPower needs to remain competitive with any independent 
third parties that may come into the province to supply power to 
its residents. However, we must remain assured that SaskPower 
does not use this clause to withdraw publishing of any charges, 
rates, and conditions that in the area where SaskPower has 



May 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1255 

 

exclusive power supply. It is only fair that the people of 
Saskatchewan know what the charges are for the utilities and 
especially with that in the light of the rising and continually 
high utility rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan realize again that any 
company, whether they are Crown corporation or an 
independent third party private company, needs to clearly 
advertise and make customers aware of just what rates will be 
charged to them. Let’s make certain though that at the end of 
the day it is the customer that is best served from any 
competition that’ll be coming into the province, as well as the 
rates charged to power customers are kept in line within 
reasonable limits. 
 
There are many examples by which SaskPower seems to enjoy 
charging excessive rates. Re-servicing sites that had service at 
one time, especially in the rural areas where farmers may no 
longer use a particular yard and have had services cut there, and 
now at this point in time, they wish to re-establish a working 
facility for their farm. They’re somewhat shocked to learn that 
the reconnection charge is quite costly. They feel that this is 
unfair and I would have to agree with that. Assessment is 
extremely high considering that all that happens in most cases is 
a re-installation of the meter and basically hit the switch. 
 
Most farmers and people in all areas of Saskatchewan where 
power is reconnected are burdened with this high cost. I don’t 
believe that they should be. And I would like to have the 
minister and his officials at SaskPower come up with something 
a little bit better than we feel is quite a gouge into the pockets of 
Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In clause 6, we look at the explanation here providing 
SaskPower with express authority to wheel or transmit power 
across the province on behalf of third parties. 
 
I also see from the explanation provided by SaskPower that 
SaskPower has express authority to stipulate interconnection 
standards by which independent power producers in the 
province may interconnect with SaskPower infrastructure. 
 
This express provision will enable SaskPower to protect the 
integrity of its grid system and safeguard the safe and reliable 
supply of its power to other SaskPower customers. As well, this 
will enable SaskPower to join a regional transmission group or 
appropriate electrical association. And of course membership in 
that would assist in access and supply of emergency power 
needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly these points in clause 6 are needed to 
ensure that third party power supplying companies have access 
to the power grid. SaskPower does not have express authority in 
this matter. As well, as the authority to stipulate interconnection 
standards, does raise some concerns that SaskPower yields all 
the authority in what third party companies must do in order to 
come into this province. 
 
I would not want to see SaskPower exercise so much authority 
as to frustrate the attempts of private power businesses in 
Saskatchewan. However, all of Saskatchewan should be again 
given all the opportunities of having a competitive power 
system in which our rates are kept at a respectable level. 

I believe that we have to look closely at SaskPower willingness 
to assist these companies should any of them be coming to 
Saskatchewan, and that would most likely serve the residents of 
Saskatchewan over the long term. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, when you look at clause 9, we read that this 
amendment serves two purposes. The first is to clarify the 
language which is used to specify consent for the construction 
of power lines under a parcel. The language is now clear there 
may be on or under land that SaskPower needs to access. 
Secondly, the language allows SaskPower to obtain a 
non-registered easement in the situation where it is necessary to 
remedy an emergency or hazardous condition. 
 
It must be completely clear that when we look at the terms, over 
or under land, that SaskPower is requiring to have access to 
virtually the land underground and the land over top. And as 
well we must bear in mind that all the improvements, buildings, 
and fences along the way that must be carefully safeguarded to 
prevent damage to residents’ property. 
 
Of course all the hard feelings and trouble that something like 
this could create would look like SaskPower, with the 
unregistered easement portion of this clause, has given 
themselves the power to act when necessary in cases of 
emergency conditions. 
 
I would like to add that again here we must be careful that 
SaskPower does not do any undue damage while getting to an 
emergency, any more than would be necessary to clear up the 
emergency problem. 
 
So again . . . so we must again have the property rights of 
people here protected. The ability of SaskPower to do this is 
something we must carefully watch to ensure that no more 
power that has been granted SaskPower has been used or 
abused. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also in clause 10, I see that it clarifies 
SaskPower’s ability to enter onto lands adjoining rights-of-way 
for the purposes of construction as well as operation, 
maintenance, repair, and replacement of any line. 
 
It also indicates that this is compatible to authority given to 
other utilities, including Manitoba Hydro. So it’s compatible, I 
would suppose, to other provinces. It will enable SaskPower to 
trim trees on lands, adjoining rights-of-way, in order to prevent 
safety hazards from developing, as well as unnecessary power 
interruptions. 
 
Basically the concern here is that the obstructions of any kind 
should not hinder in any way the right of SaskPower to remove 
such obstruction such as trees and other obstruction that may 
fall onto power lines and power poles. I guess we have to agree 
that these things will have to be done. It is hoped that 
SaskPower officials will discuss with the property owners 
exactly what they are doing so that the work with the property 
owners is to their satisfaction, Mr. Speaker. Again, we must 
ensure that SaskPower does only what is necessary to make the 
repairs. 
 
I believe that in the event of any repair or operations on the 
power lines or other electrical facilities, the site should be left 



1256 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2001 

 

clean and neat to the property owner’s satisfaction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clause 11 indicates that it will give SaskPower the 
explicit right to consent to not only supply but also the 
transportation or sale of electrical energy by third party or to 
category of third parties. This will allow SaskPower to consent, 
for example, to a customer establishing its own system in 
isolated areas where no other customers are likely to require 
service. And to give an example, a good example would be I 
guess of isolated northern mine situations. 
 
Here we have amendment that again is pursuant to the possible 
third-party supplier of power in the province. Again, it gives 
SaskPower explicit rights to consent to supply but we are 
adding also transportation, movement, and sale. We must be 
very cautious that SaskPower has the power to control most of 
the aspects of the power supplied, whether it be through 
themselves or through these third parties who may or may not 
be coming to the province. 
 
Also again with that, under clause there at 11, I see SaskPower 
has the right to consent or not consent to a customer in the 
northern areas of the province where they wish to establish their 
own power system. They still must go through a Sask . . . or 
even though there could be an example in the future of a third 
party supplying power for less and the cost that SaskPower 
would charge to put the service in, SaskPower would have to 
consent to that. 
 
(15:00) 
 
So I find that it maybe cause some difficulty down the road to 
third-party power suppliers. We would have to make certain 
that this kind of conflicting situation does not occur and that 
people in northern situations have access to all kinds of power, 
whether it be through SaskPower or through somebody else. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, about clause 12. The amendment makes it 
clear that the corporation can issue securities which may not be 
in the currency of the country in which SaskPower is issuing 
those securities. 
 
SaskPower seems intent on continuing their foreign investments 
as made clear by this amendment that they can issue these 
securities which may not be in the currency of the country in 
which SaskPower is issuing those same securities. 
 
It is clear that SaskPower will continue to invest abroad, 
although we cannot on this side of the House figure out why 
they would continue to invest abroad with a track record of such 
fiascos as Channel Lake. 
 
You all remember Channel Lake and what a good investment 
that turned out for the people of Saskatchewan. Indeed it wasn’t 
anything but a money loser. And we on this side of the House 
will carefully watch the investments of SaskPower in the future, 
to ensure that they’re in the interest of the taxpayer of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to talk about clause 13 and 14, briefly goes on to 
show the financial rules and boundaries of the finances of 
SaskPower. And these are basically explained as housekeeping 
amendments intended to make SaskPower legislation consistent 

with other Crown corporations and approximately reflect 
provisions of The Financial Administration Act, we are told. 
 
Again the track record of Crown investments in the past, be 
they Channel Lake or if we look across at Sask Water which 
I’m the critic, I can see many times where money was invested 
such as with SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) where millions of dollars were lost and 
are still being lost with Sask Valley Potato Corp. 
 
These broad financial powers that are awarded to the Crown 
corporations must be watched very carefully, because this 
government has shown that over the past few years their 
investments have not panned out. 
 
The result has been millions of dollars in losses to the taxpayers 
while at the same time they’re looking at substantial rate hikes 
to many of the utilities, including SaskPower and SaskEnergy. 
 
And whether the government thinks so or not, the people of 
Saskatchewan need a break. They cannot afford to allow these 
rates to go up while at the same time SaskPower is free to make 
investments abroad which in the long run may or may not be in 
the best interest of the taxpayer at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again we look at the taxpayer and also who is paying the 
bill. It is the taxpayer who is overburdened with far too many 
expenses, such as the small-business tax, high PST, (provincial 
sales tax), and the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Government knows full well how high their taxes are for the 
people of Saskatchewan and how poorly they have acted in 
regards to the business climate they have presented to this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also talking about the next clause, clause 15, 
indicates that subject to the passage of future regulations, 
SaskPower will be authorized expressly to collect arrears of 
accounts and accordingly this satisfies the Supreme Court of 
Canada’s direction where the court recently ruled the utility 
required express positive authority to collect arrears. 
 
Again SaskPower seems to be broadening its complete rules 
and regulations over the power . . . over the people that it 
charges for its services. We would like to think that SaskPower 
is acting in the benefits of its customers and it gives them every 
chance to pay their arrears when it is such a case, and also that 
compassion is shown as many of the people of Saskatchewan 
are not making a lot of money as the members opposite tend to 
say they do. 
 
I would not like to see SaskPower cutting people’s power off, 
especially during the cold winter months without some form of 
communication, without trying anything before that; that being 
the last, last to come before you cut somebody’s power in the 
middle of January. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at clause 16 that indicates that 
SaskPower be given the ability to register an easement where a 
power line must be moved in order to correct an emergency or a 
hazardous condition. Certainly most of us would agree that 
SaskPower needs the ability to move a power line when there is 
an emergency or when a hazardous condition does exist. And 



May 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1257 

 

again I must stress that the property owner’s right to careful 
repair and clean-up process, to ensure that all the interest of 
landowners and repairs are looked after. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also wanted to address clause 17. In it they will 
enable SaskPower to order the removal of such obstructions and 
ensure that other customers are not paying for power supply of 
individual subscribers using these obstructive devices. Basically 
the corporation is saying here that currently there is no remedy 
for customers who build obstructions over meters and that this 
of course will give them that ability. 
 
Certainly we have to be mindful of customers who are trying to 
double-dip I guess or who have extra usage which the 
customers are trying to hide from SaskPower. Certainly I don’t 
believe this is the case in all matters but again SaskPower I 
guess will need the ability to read its meters and that is common 
sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However, again . . . and the removal of these obstructions could 
be done with the customer’s interests at heart, in the spirit of 
co-operation with the customer. Perhaps the obstruction is there 
for a reason other than hide the meter. It may be there to protect 
the meter in certain instances from external sources such as 
wind or harsh weather conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I’ve lightly touched on today on some of the 
clauses and provisions included in Bill No. 9, the Act to amend 
The Power Corporation Act . . . amendment to The Land Titles 
Act, 2000, most of these notes I have spoken upon are simply to 
try to advise the minister and the corporation to always keep the 
best interests of the taxpayers at heart and to keep the rates 
affordable and to allow, if needed, the proper co-operation with 
any third-party power providers which may or may not come 
into Saskatchewan and enter into our economy here in the 
province. 
 
We have to make certain that SaskPower realizes that the 
customers come first. Their rights of property should be taken 
into account when SaskPower exercises any of its powers to 
handle its electrical grid system during normal maintenance, 
installation, or repair and emergency repairs of its systems. 
 
With that then, Mr. Speaker, I still have more questions on it, as 
with I believe other members of mine, so I will adjourn debate 
on this Bill for now. I will make a motion to adjourn, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
Bill No. 15 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 15 — The 
Credit Union Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to join in the debate on Bill No. 15 today, The Credit 
Union Amendment Act. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, this Assembly did deal with a piece 
of legislation about three years ago, a major overhaul of The 

Credit Union Act. And that piece of legislation at that time in 
1998, Mr. Speaker, dealt with a number of issues that actually 
gave credit unions the opportunity to modernize their system, 
and improve and focus the services that they were providing 
and making them more accessible to their customers, as well as 
communication amongst themselves, so that they could provide 
a more modern, up-to-date banking system in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I understand, Bill No. 15 before this Assembly 
today is a Bill that continues to build on the previous legislation 
that was passed in 1998 and came into force in 1999. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about credit unions we’re talking 
about lending institutions that were built by individuals across 
this province — men and women who felt they needed an 
avenue of banking and banking business and services in small 
communities, and services which they felt they weren’t 
receiving from the larger lending institutions that were currently 
in the province or that were in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And therefore they put their heads together years ago and began 
the credit union movement, basically a co-operative movement 
of forming a lending institution. And as such, Mr. Speaker, 
these credit unions through the years have grown from small, 
one-room facilities to very large lending institutions in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And the credit unions have certainly 
met the needs of men and women and boys and girls across the 
province for a number of years. 
 
And as we saw back in 1998, Mr. Speaker, credit unions have 
amalgamated to a point where they felt it was beneficial that 
they begin to look into the future, and how they were delivering 
services in order to keep up with the needs of their customers 
and the requests coming from their customers in regards to 
access to technical information and the services that come with 
it in regards to finances and the financial needs of their 
customers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe the legislation in 1998 certainly did 
open the door for the credit unions across this province to 
provide an enhanced level of financing and banking to the 
people of this province and certainly to their members who 
have worked so diligently to provide avenues of lending and 
banking in many . . . especially, Mr. Speaker, many small 
communities as we see them today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past number of years and certainly the 
last . . . I would say that within the last five years, there are a 
number of communities in this province that have seen lending 
institutions actually discontinue their services. Some of the 
larger banking institutions have pulled out of small 
communities in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, most of the members of this Assembly know 
what one business leaving a small community does to that 
community. The fact that it may be four or five jobs, which in a 
larger centre like Regina may not mean a lot, but to a small 
community in many parts of Saskatchewan, that is a fairly large 
labour force that actually is pulled and removed from that 
community. 
 
And what we have seen, Mr. Speaker, is we have seen the credit 



1258 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2001 

 

unions of this province have actually, in many cases where they 
were in those communities, have become larger and have 
become the major lender and providing lending services to 
those communities. And in other communities where the service 
was totally removed as a result of the large lending institutions 
pulling out, credit unions have provided a branch or have 
moved in to take up the slack. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly appropriate that credit 
unions be given the tools that are necessary for them to continue 
to evolve and provide a class act, if you will, in meeting the 
financial needs and the lending needs and the banking needs of 
the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe there are many reasons why lending 
institutions have pulled out of our smaller communities. And 
some of them . . . as we see in the area of agriculture, some of 
the struggles that we see in the agricultural field today, farms 
are becoming larger because we’ve had a push for the last 
number of years to larger farming operations because of the 
margins being so narrow. And so the feeling was if you became 
larger, you might survive longer in the agricultural field. And I 
think that’s true as well in the lending institutions. 
 
Banks themselves have looked at some of the communities 
they’ve been in, and then just felt that these communities were 
not large enough, and the base of membership that they had in 
these communities wasn’t substantial enough for them to justify 
their presence in that community and have pulled out. 
 
But what we have found, Mr. Speaker, as a result of their 
pulling out, we’ve found that credit unions however have taken 
the other view and they have . . . while they have amalgamated 
and, Mr. Speaker, throughout this province we’ve probably 
have many smaller credit unions have formed, have 
amalgamated to form larger lending units, they have at the same 
time, Mr. Speaker, continued to have a visible presence in many 
of these small communities which is . . . and what they’re 
saying through that, Mr. Speaker, is they’re telling these small 
communities and the small membership of those communities, 
you’re just as important to us as the larger community that 
we’re involved in and certainly the larger area we’re covering 
as a result of the amalgamations and the formation of the larger 
credit union offices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about credit unions, credit unions 
certainly provide a level of lending that communities and 
membership are looking for. They provide a means whereby 
people across this province have an access to financial 
opportunities, and in many cases, Mr. Speaker, they are the, if 
you will, the level of revitalization for many of our smaller 
communities. 
 
And it’s appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that we have this legislation 
before this committee, before this legislation right now, a piece 
of legislation to that . . . that will, after we’ve taken the time to 
review the legislation and to go through it, will give the credit 
unions even a greater opportunity to continue to provide the 
services that they desire to provide across rural Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it would certainly be appropriate for us, Mr. 

Speaker, it would be appropriate if this government would 
maybe follow the example of credit unions when we talk about 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We have the government forming a new committee, or actually 
a new department — I believe it’s called Rural Revitalization 
— basically saying that all of sudden the rural community in 
this province still has an important role to play, and therefore, 
since we’ve been so far out of touch, we’d better find another 
means whereby we can address the needs of rural 
Saskatchewan. And so therefore they’ve come up with a 
ministry called Rural Revitalization. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that maybe the 
government could learn a little bit about rural revitalization by 
looking at the credit union system across this province and the 
way credit unions have met and continue to meet the needs of 
rural residents. 
 
And I begin to wonder if the member from Regina Elphinstone 
even understands what rural Saskatchewan is all about, living in 
the very centre of a major centre, Mr. Speaker. And maybe it 
wouldn’t hurt if the member from Regina Elphinstone would 
take a minute and go outside of the city of Regina and find out 
that there is actually a community that lives in this province that 
is not totally tied to the centre of Regina. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, that there are people outside of the city of Regina that 
are just as much a part of this province as members and as the 
residents of Regina. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s appropriate that we certainly 
take a look at credit unions. We take a look at how they provide 
services, and as well, Mr. Speaker, take the time to look at the 
needs of credit unions, realizing that as we move into the year 
2000 and beyond, that some of the means of providing services 
have changed dramatically. Therefore it’s important that 
legislation be brought forward as well to address the areas that 
need to be changed to enhance the role of credit unions to 
provide the services that they endeavour to provide and want to 
provide as they continue to look at how they can meet the needs 
of the customer base that they serve. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I’m pleased here this 
afternoon to stand and address some of the issues that have been 
raised in regards to The Credit Union Act. And I know many of 
my colleagues would like to raise some questions as well and 
would like to bring forward some ideas and make some 
comments in regards to Bill No. 15. 
 
I know that some of my colleagues have different opinions than 
I have. That’s one thing about our caucus. We have a caucus 
that’s certainly diverse in its opinions on many pieces of 
legislation and on co-operatives and the co-operative movement 
and Credit Union Central, but in general, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
very supportive of the rural economy and we feel it’s important 
that we take the time to address this piece of legislation to see 
that it is indeed, Mr. Speaker, is going to meet the needs of the 
credit unions that are currently providing a valuable source of 
financing. And not just financing, Mr. Speaker, but the fact that 
as a result of the number of credit unions across the province of 
Saskatchewan and in rural communities, we have jobs that are 
provided to people. And in many cases it may be a second 
income to a family that’s struggling to survive in our rural 



May 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1259 

 

economy. 
 
And so in that regard, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important 
that we give the credit unions across our province the tools that 
are needed to allow them to continue to provide the support to 
their communities that they endeavour to do. 
 
We do have some questions however. We have some questions 
about some of the functions, some of the changes that this 
legislation is bringing forward. Changes such as the functions 
that are currently conducted by the board of directors of a credit 
union appear to be shifting now from their control into a 
conduct review committee. We want to make certain, Mr. 
Speaker, that this doesn’t take away from what the board of 
directors were doing before, that indeed the rights and 
responsibilities of credit unions and their membership will 
continue to be enforced; and that the membership can feel very 
positively about their credit union and about the level of service 
that it is providing to each and every one of them. 
 
We also want to take a close look at, and ask, who will be 
sitting on these committees and how will the committee 
operate? Will the committee continue to be responsible to its 
membership and to the people that continue to support credit 
unions across the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that while the Bill in itself has a lot 
of good points and certainly is designed to enhance the role of 
credit unions, Mr. Speaker, there are a few questions that need 
to be raised about some of the changes that are going to be . . . 
will be brought forward as a result of this legislation before us. 
And it’s imperative that my colleagues and I do take the time to 
review the piece of legislation and be certain that every . . . the 
intent of the legislation meets the need of the credit unions as 
they continue to provide service to our communities. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I now move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 6 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 6 — The Planning 
and Development Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
a privilege to enter into the debate on Bill No. 6, The Planning 
and Development Act. Mr. Speaker, when I looked at the Bill, 
it’s very brief. It doesn’t have a lot of substance in it. I can’t go 
on like the member from Arm River when he went through each 
clause and talked about each clause, which I’m sure is really 
disappointing for the members opposite. 
 
But there are some issues in this Bill that I do want to touch on. 
And I think probably the biggest issue, when it comes to 
anything put forward by municipal . . . the Department of 
Municipal Affairs, is the concern that is raised by so many 
people from around the province after the episode we went 
through last year, Mr. Speaker. The episode, Mr. Speaker, last 
year of the Joe Garcea report and how the government 

responded to it. 
 
And they really talked about amalgamation and forced 
amalgamation, and certainly that really brought to the 
awareness of a lot of municipalities of, you know, the concern 
of what government can do just through legislation. 
 
And so anytime that I have been talking to any of the 
municipalities for the last year, since last session, they’ve 
always been saying, well, what’s coming forward as far as 
Municipal Government, what’s coming forward? And when we 
see a Bill coming forward from Municipal Government, I tell 
you people, especially in rural Saskatchewan, and the 
constituency I represent, whether it’s the communities of Indian 
Head or Montmartre or Francis are concerned with the whole 
— Odessa — the whole amalgamation. So when they hear Bills 
coming forward from Municipal Government, they want to 
have a look at it and they want to see how it’s going to affect 
them. 
 
Because they had a . . . they felt like they had a near-death 
experience last year when they had to deal with the former 
minister of Municipal Affairs who is no longer in that position. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I do want to get into the concern that was 
raised, some of the concerns that were raised with this Bill. And 
although it is fairly brief, it touches on the Municipal Board and 
the whole area of subdivision appeals and that area, which, Mr. 
Speaker, really seems quite straightforward. But I guess until 
you talk to a number of the different municipalities that have 
been through this with appeals, one is not sure how this Bill will 
affect them. 
 
Before in the past, Mr. Speaker, if a subdivision was to be 
appealed, they had to go through a couple of hoops or a couple 
of steps before the Municipal Board could make its ruling. And 
it seemed like very seldom would the Municipal Board ever . . . 
would rarely agree to the appeal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this Bill does and talks about is that instead 
of going through a couple of hoops, there’s really only one area 
that the appeal has to suit. You know, before it was whether it 
relaxed the provisions of existing zoning bylaws or it had a 
negative impact on neighbouring properties. Right now, Mr. 
Speaker, the Bill looks like it’s going to say that only one of 
these areas need to be addressed, need to be affected for the 
board to make a decision on it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s only just that, as I said, when the 
firestorm of amalgamation hit last year, the municipalities . . . 
their interest is heightened any time a Bill comes forward 
regarding them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked to a few of them; talked to some of 
them. They still have more information that we feel we need to 
get back before we can make a proper decision on this Bill, 
even though it is only a half page long, a couple of clauses, Mr. 
Speaker. But until we hear from the many different 
municipalities on how it’s going to impact on them, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d move that we would adjourn debate until we 
receive more information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1260 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2001 

 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 16 — The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2001 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 
short time that I’ve served in this House as a member for 
Cypress Hills, it’s fallen to me very infrequently to have to 
speak on a subject that I know little about. However, that is the 
hazards of this job. I might as well get the confessions out up 
front. But you know, with the possible exception of rocket 
science, I know less about the film industry than just about any 
other subject. 
 
I do know enough about the subject though, Mr. Speaker, to say 
that there are some very encouraging things happening in the 
film industry — not internationally, not nationally, but right 
here in Saskatchewan. And I think that the Bill that was a 
precursor to the amendment that we’re talking about today was 
part of that particular growth and the stimulus for the film 
sector in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the previous member spoke about the shortness of 
the Bill and the couple of brief paragraphs that we wanted to 
study. This particular Bill is even more brief. This Bill, this 
amendment, changes one item in the entire Bill. It changes the 
date 2001 to the date 2003. Now I’m going to spend 10 minutes 
talking about this Bill based on that one change and I hope 
you’ll bear with me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This particular Bill, as I mentioned, the precursor to it was The 
Film Employment Tax Credit Act, and is now known as The 
Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
And the existing provision of the Act says, and I beg your 
indulgence as I read this: 
 

4(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, an 
eligible corporation may apply to the minister to have the 
residency requirements imposed by this Act waived by the 
minister with respect to a person to allow that person to 
qualify as an eligible employee or an eligible individual for 
the purpose of allowing the eligible corporation to claim as 
eligible salaries the salary or wages paid to that employee 
or the remuneration paid to that . . . (employee). 

 
Mr. Speaker, that sentence would fail my grade 9 grammar 
class. Lots of verbiage there, lots of words. Doesn’t say a whole 
lot, except to say that in the situation where we don’t have 
people in Saskatchewan that can do the job, we can bring 
people in from other jurisdictions to do the job, and companies 
here can claim their pay as an eligible tax deduction. 
 
Now the explanation for this says that section 4 of The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Act allows applicants to apply for the 
waiver of residency requirements when utilizing skilled 
individuals from outside the province due to the lack of 
available trained individuals residing here in the province. And 
this provision was included in the Act for the specific purpose 

of assisting the accelerated development of Saskatchewan’s 
base of qualified crew and other professionals. 
 
Now this provision in the Act has a sunset clause of December 
31, 2001, which is the subject of this amendment. It’s to be 
removed and replaced with a sunset clause dated December 31, 
2003. 
 
Now apparently the industry has requested an extension to the 
sunset clause, articulating the extreme importance of section 4 
which I read earlier, of The Film Employment Tax Credit Act, 
to the continued training of Saskatchewan’s film crew and 
related professionals as required by the rapid growth of the film 
and video sector in this province. 
 
As well, the delay of full film employment tax credit 
implementation and resolution of administrative issues have 
contributed to the underutilization of this provision. 
 
I think we could do well, Mr. Speaker, by implementing a plain 
language Act in this province. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Basically, Mr. Speaker, what we have here is an admission that 
the tax credit was successful, maybe even beyond the 
expectations of the department and the people who promoted 
the tax credit. But they weren’t in a position to fulfill the 
demands created by that tax credit, so we’re going to have to 
look at bringing other people in to benefit the industry in this 
province, allow the tax credit to be used by extra provincial 
people. 
 
But there is something in this explanation that does trouble me 
somewhat, Mr. Speaker. It says here, the delay of full film 
employment tax credit implementation, and resolution of 
administrative issues have contributed to the underutilization of 
this provision. 
 
In plain language, Mr. Speaker, this I believe is saying that 
there’s been too much red tape. Too much regulation. It’s been 
a boondoggle. It’s worked very well in one respect, but it has 
actually created more complications than anybody anticipated. 
And in order to get all those complications resolved, we have to 
get an extension on the sunset clause pushed ahead to 
December 31, 2003. 
 
So on one hand, we have benefits to this particular provisions; 
on the other hand, we have negative consequences that is 
actually preventing the full benefit of this particular Act being 
seen in the film industry in this province. 
 
Taking the minister’s own words, and just looking at the press 
release issued by Culture, Youth and Recreation on April 10, 
the fact that there has been some positive developments as a 
result of the tax credit is evidenced by the statistics in this press 
release. And if I may, I would just like to quote the minister 
here. She said the change that we’re talking about in this 
particular Act: 
 

. . . will continue to speed up the process of training our 
talented film and video professionals” . . . “Saskatchewan’s 
film and video industry has proven to be an economic and 



May 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1261 

 

cultural benefit to the province and will continue to grow 
with our support.” 

 
To substantiate this particular statement the minister provided 
the following statistical information. And I won’t go into great 
detail, but the press release says: 
 

In 1998, after the introduction of The Film Employment 
Tax Credit Act, film and video production increased to $58 
million and in (the year) 2000 production and activity 
reached over $60 million. 

 
And somewhere in the research material I perused before 
speaking to this Bill, I understand there are projections of the 
film industry actually contributing upwards of $100 million to 
our economy. 
 
That’s all very encouraging, and quite exciting I would think. 
Not just for the film industry, not just for the provincial 
government and the department that has moved to sponsor this 
type of legislation and activity, but it should be of interest and 
support to anybody who has promoted the idea of tax incentives 
to stimulate the economy. 
 
Now individuals on our side of the House who have spoken to 
this Bill, have repeatedly pointed out that tax incentives have 
been the cornerstone of much of our political agenda. And we 
believe that the good work the tax incentives have created for 
the film and video industry could be replicated in many other 
industries in this province. And you’re not talking about a huge 
incentive; you’re not talking about significant or dramatic 
unsustainable tax incentives. In this case you’re talking about 
reasonably, moderately instituted incentives. 
 
And we think that if that was done in other sectors of the 
economy, especially in terms of the small-business sector, that 
we would see equal growth, equivalent to what the film and 
video industry saw, in the other sectors where that type of 
strategy was implemented and effected. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we would think that the government 
would learn from this particular example. It’s been an example 
of their own creation, and we applaud that. What we don’t 
understand is why they wouldn’t take the very good lessons 
they’ve learned from the impact that tax incentives have had on 
this particular industry and extrapolate it to the rest of the 
industry, to the rest of the economy, to the small businesses, to 
the entrepreneurs who are struggling to get their businesses up 
and running in a competitive manner and in a way that will 
make them even more successful than they already are. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that having brought this to the attention 
of the House, the minister should be prepared to vote with the 
opposition when we talk about strategic tax incentives in the 
future. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we have in fact a serious situation 
here. In discussing this particular piece of legislation, it alludes 
to the fact that we need more time to get more people involved. 
And it’s occurred to me, Mr. Speaker, that part of the problem 
may be that we don’t have the people in this province in as 
great numbers to become involved in the industry. 
 

You know, one of the most frightening things statistically that 
has been brought to light in the last little while is the mass 
exodus of young people from this province. I’ve said in 
speeches previously how dramatic the loss of population has 
been in my own constituency. And we know for a fact that the 
province as a whole has experienced a large numbers of people 
leaving. 
 
Some of those numbers have been offset of course by, you 
know, increased population through birth and some people 
moving to the province. But the reality is we have not grown as 
a province in population as other jurisdictions have. 
 
And the most important segment of our population that is being 
lost is the 18- to 24-year age category. That particular category 
is the one in which we’re going to see the most enthusiasm for 
occupations in the film and video industry. And that particular 
area is suffering from a lack of individuals coming into the 
industry for training. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just recently a survey said that up to 40 per 
cent — up to 40 per cent of the 18- to 24-year-olds surveyed 
said they were planning to leave the province within five years. 
Now I think that in itself is a tragedy. I think that it does no 
good for the future of this province. And it certainly doesn’t do 
any good for the future of any industry that is specifically 
looking to that age group for recruitment potential and 
opportunity. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as you can see these numbers of people 
planning to leave the province, you can understand why the film 
and video industry has had the difficulty implementing and 
achieving the results they wanted with this particular tax credit. 
So while the news is good on one hand, there is a downside on 
the other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I was referring to the loss of people in that 
specific age group, one of my colleagues asked me to confirm 
again the number of people that we’ve lost in the southwest. 
And I don’t want to harp on this, but I think that when you see 
the vastness of this number, you can understand the tragedy that 
has been brought to bear on this province because of the loss of 
people. 
 
In the area of Swift Current to the south and the west, we’ve 
lost 15,000 people since 1972 — that’s a population equivalent 
to the entire city of Swift Current. Let me bring this down to a 
number we can understand and appreciate a little more 
specifically. 
 
A week or 10 days ago the grade 12 class from the community 
of Eastend was visiting this legislature. There were 16 grade 12 
students. In my opportunity to visit with them later I was trying 
to make the point of how important the contribution of young 
people can be and will be to the economy and the social 
economy of this province in the future. And I said to them how 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would just remind the member about the 
issue of relevancy. You should try to bring the date relevant to 
the one-word change that is in this second reading, the word 
2001 to 2003. 
 



1262 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2001 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you. I intend to get to the point you’ve 
just brought to my attention. But I believe there is relevance 
here. Because the purpose of extending this particular sunset 
clause is because the industry was not able to achieve the 
mentoring and the training of young people that they hoped to 
achieve with this particular Bill. They ran out of individuals, 
frankly, to train for the purposes of the film and video industry. 
 
The group of high school students that I was speaking about, 
Mr. Speaker, there were 16 in total — eight of them indicated 
they were leaving the province upon graduation, five were 
planning to stay, one was returning to her home in Germany 
where she came from as an exchange student, and two —and 
two — weren’t sure what they were going to do. 
 
That particular example, Mr. Speaker, indicates to me very 
clearly that we are losing young people in too great a number. 
And the effect on commerce and industry of all kinds, not just 
the film and video industry, is adversely affected, and in a very 
serious way. 
 
Many of my colleagues have referred to the business climate 
that a general reduction in taxation would create. And while 
they have expounded on that in a very full and proper way, I 
don’t want to belabour that particular point. But it does, it does 
beg repeating, Mr. Speaker, that the entire economy of this 
province, not just this specific economy addressed by this 
particular Bill, but all of the economy in this province would be 
benefited by general tax relief. There is a crying need for that in 
this particular jurisdiction in this province and until we see it, 
Bills like this only amount to tinkering around a very serious 
problem — they don’t get to the root of the problem. 
 
The loss of qualified Saskatchewan residents for training is 
another very important issue, and I think that we’ve addressed 
that in fair detail already. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in summary here, very little is changing as a result 
of this amendment. The government is just simply extending 
the sunset clause that allows a film or production company to 
claim wages paid to a non-Saskatchewan resident when 
calculating their particular tax credit. And that date has now 
been moved to December 31, 2003. 
 
And the waiver of residency provision is for non-Saskatchewan 
personnel required. And it only needs to be used, or only can be 
used rather, when no qualified Saskatchewan resident is 
available. Mr. Speaker, I think that that speaks very specifically 
and clearly to the issue I tried to enunciate a little earlier. 
 
The film and production industry has requested that this 
particular sunset clause come into effect. And the extension I’m 
assuming will be granted; the government will use its majority 
to make sure that happens. But it’s important that this 
opportunity not be squandered, Mr. Speaker, with the 
bureaucratic administrative boondoggles and delays, but that 
they get to the meat of the matter and do what the Act was 
intended to do. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move adjournment of this 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Rural Revitalization Office 

Vote 43 
 
Subvote (RR01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. With me today is Harvey 
Brooks who is the deputy minister for the office of Rural 
Revitalization. And immediately behind me is Dion McGrath 
who is acting director of policy and planning. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome, 
Madam Minister, and I want to welcome your officials here 
today. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like to start off today, because your 
department is new and we haven’t had the opportunity to go 
into this area before, possibly if you could just outline the 
mandate of Rural Revitalization for us. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The mandate of the office is to work 
with rural citizens, provincial government departments and 
agencies, and Crown corporations to focus programs and 
services on assisting rural residents build on the economic 
opportunities available in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The office provides for initiatives that contribute to rural 
economic development. It works to alleviate obstacles to rural 
opportunity. It assesses overall government policy decisions for 
the impact upon the rural economy. It advocates and 
communicates rural achievements. And its other job is to 
consult with people in rural Saskatchewan about various 
economic opportunities and challenges. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I find in what you were just saying resembles a lot of 
the things that we used to see in a department called Rural 
Development, and I’m sure you’re well aware of that. 
 
I’ll just read out some of their objectives and goals when they 
had Rural Development. They talk about community-based 
economic development, environmental sustainability, local 
autonomy, quality client services, development of staff 
resources . . . and I think that’s kind of in a way what you’re 
saying. 
 
Community-based economic development they talked about 
here, a whole area on that. And environmental sustainability, 
they talk about that. And it goes on and on, but it sounds quite 
similar to what you’re talking about, Madam Minister. 
 
I found it interesting, Madam Minister, and I don’t know if 
you’ve seen one of these copies — they used to have a monthly 
copy out of Rural Development on issues that were going on — 
but they talk at the back of this pamphlet, they talk of 90 years 
of change. 
 



May 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1263 

 

And I’d just like to go through some of the things that actually 
have helped rural Saskatchewan in the past decade before your 
government was elected. And we could even go back further 
but I think the ones that are more . . . that are fresher in people’s 
minds are something like, one of the programs was rural 
gasification, which everyone in rural Saskatchewan appreciated. 
It was a tremendous lift to people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The organization of the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, the 
Water Corporation has helped in a number of areas out there. 
 
Another area they talk about is rural underground distribution 
program, which I thought was just an excellent program, the 
RUD (rural underground distribution) program, and I believe 
was cancelled by your government, Madam Minister, when you 
came in. 
 
They talk about also the rural service network out there, rural 
development corporations, the RDCs, which I think have added 
to help in rural Saskatchewan. In 1989 they talk about SCN; 
Saskatchewan Communications Network was implemented. 
1990, community bonds program, another thing that helped 
rural Saskatchewan. 1991, they talk about GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) and they talk about NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account). 
 
And I don’t really know if we have to go too far into that, 
Madam Minister, to remember what happened to rural 
Saskatchewan when GRIP was cancelled. I think that was one 
of the biggest blows that farmers have had in the past number of 
years, probably in the last 30, 40 years. Really the effects are 
still being felt out there. 
 
NISA was a program that was set up between the federal and 
provincial governments back in that era, and NISA is still there 
to help farmers. 
 
I guess where I’m going with this, Madam Minister, is rural 
development at that time initiated many of these programs that 
really they’re a legacy left there that, if you ask anybody in 
rural Saskatchewan about any of these programs, I think they 
would have an opinion on and think they would remember all of 
these programs. 
 
In the last 10 years, Madam Minister, I don’t think we’ve seen 
anything like this. In fact I think we’ve seen cuts. 
 
Now after 10 years we get a department called Rural 
Revitalization. I’m wondering, Madam Minister, what the 
legacy of your government will be for the last 10 years, and 
what do you plan on doing now with rural revitalizations to 
change the lack of leadership in rural Saskatchewan in the last 
10 years? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I want to thank the member for a 
recitation of various events that took place under Grant 
Devine’s government. We know where he ended up. 
 
But what I can tell the member opposite is that if you look at 
what’s happened in rural Saskatchewan in the last decade, there 
has been some significant increases. And I could . . . I might 
just recite some of those increases. 
 

When we look at specialty crop production in this province, 
we’ve seen a significant increase. In fact we’ve seen . . . it’s 
been up 23 per cent since 1999. If we want to look at specialty 
crop processing, we’ve seen an increase in employment in this 
area. In fact what we can say now is that the annual payroll for 
this sector is now estimated at $21 million. We have 128 special 
crop processors in Saskatchewan and we have a workforce of 
over 1,000 people. 
 
In the hog industry, we’ve seen significant increases in hog 
production in Saskatchewan. And in fact since 1997, we’re well 
on our way to an output of one million hogs. We’ve seen a 
significant increase and we expect that we will bring the 
industry to over three million hogs by the end of this particular 
year. 
 
We’ve seen an expansion in capital projects. In fact over $400 
million has been invested in this industry. We’ve seen 760 
direct on-site jobs. And we’ve seen another 2,300 indirect jobs. 
 
In the cattle industry we see that our entire cattle herd has 
grown by over 15 per cent since 1992, and it’s now at 2.7 
million animals. 
 
In the game farm industry in just four years, our bison herd has 
increased from 7,500 head to over 24,000 head. 
 
The elk farming industry has 500 producers with 28,000 head. 
And that’s up significantly since Grant Devine era when there 
were about 400 head. 
 
As well, deer on Saskatchewan farms has grown, an increase of 
13 per cent in the last year. 
 
In terms of the greenhouse industry, we’ve seen significant 
sales and we now have over $11.2 million in sales in the 
greenhouse industry. 
 
In fruits and vegetables, there’s been a 100 per cent increase in 
the Saskatoon berry acreage since 1994. And in fact, since 1999 
we’ve seen a 23 per cent increase in the potato production. 
 
Let’s go to farm equipment manufacturing, where in 1991 when 
we came to office we had about $250 million in this industry in 
manufacturing sales; today over $584 million. Employment in 
this sector has doubled since 1991. So that’s been significant. 
 
As I said, food processing has dramatically increased. 
 
We have seen the opening of a nutriceutical plant which has 
certainly improved opportunities in our province. 
 
We’ve seen the Hazenmore-Mankota community feedlot, where 
the community invested over a million dollars to head up a 
10,000-head feedlot operation in their area. 
 
FarmGro Organic Foods has built a flour mill and processing 
plant to process organic grains and specialty crops. 
 
And I could go on and on, Mr. Chair, but there have been many 
exciting stories in rural Saskatchewan. And I think that we need 
to start talking about those exciting stories where we’ve seen 
some significant change obviously in rural Saskatchewan. But 



1264 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2001 

 

we’ve also seen some significant opportunities that has meant 
jobs and has meant a diversification of our rural economy. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. And I’d 
be remiss if I didn’t mention some of the remarks made by Mr. 
Goodale yesterday and I’m sure the minister is aware of them. 
 
And a lot of the things you just talked about are really 
diversification in rural Saskatchewan. I think farmers have 
taken the initiative out there through tough times and tried to 
diversify as fast as they can and as efficiently as they can. 
 
If you heard Mr. Goodale’s remarks yesterday, I thought they 
were somewhat amazing and astounding coming from a federal 
minister that supposedly is from the province of Saskatchewan 
when he says it’s time for Saskatchewan farmers to diversify. I 
don’t know where that minister and that Member of Parliament 
has been for the last 20, 30 years, but he certainly should know 
better than to make a statement like that. But I guess that shows 
why we have very little representation on the Liberal side in the 
federal government from Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, you had talked about a number of things that 
have gone on in rural Saskatchewan, but I’d like to just read for 
you a few headlines in the paper over the last number of years, 
and I’m coming back to Rural Revitalization and your new 
department. 
 
But some of the headlines, this one is in 1996. It says: “No 
grand design for rural development government admits.” And 
then it goes on to say a 1994 internal memo from Economic 
Development minister, Dwain Lingenfelter, says his 
government has no grand strategy for economic development in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Another one says: “NDP not endearing itself to rural areas.” I 
believe this was also in 1996. It was done by Dale Eisler, 
Madam Minister, and one of his quotes in here says: 
 

The loss of hospitals became a major factor in the NDP’s 
declining support in several rural constituencies. 

 
And, Madam Minister, why I’m talking about things like this is 
that I feel that when we lost all our hospitals out there, the 53 
hospitals, it was another nail in the coffin of rural Saskatchewan 
and it certainly speeded up the demise of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Another headline, Madam Minister, goes on to say: “SARM 
slams tax burden shift.” And I think we’ve talked many times in 
this House on the education tax that farmers are picking up out 
there. And again this year we see with the new assessment, even 
being asked to pick up a bigger portion of the education tax 
with the shift under the new assessment program. 
 
Another program that was cut: “Rural road program cancelled” 
and we’re talking, Madam Minister, about the futures program. 
And I was a reeve at the time when the futures program was in. 
To me it was one of the best programs we ever had and when 
that was taken away, it was just another insult to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, we talk . . . this one goes back to the school 
tax part: “School taxes funding cuts angers SARM president”, 

and he’s talking about Sinclair Harrison. And that’s been a bone 
of contention with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) for a number of years now, Madam Minister. 
 
Go back to April 12, 1996, Murray Mandryk, “Government 
spending demise of rural Saskatchewan.” I’m just going to give 
you some quotes right out of this but it says also: 
 

Suspicions were further heightened when Municipal 
Government leader, Carol Teichrob, (and I quote, Madam 
Minister) suggested next year’s $20 million cut to 
municipal government funding might be handled by 
changing the way money is distributed. Change has become 
the ’90s euphemism for rural Saskatchewan getting less. 

 
Well, Madam Minister, we wait 10 years and this is just a trend 
of what’s gone on out there. And forgive me if I’m suspicious, 
but now you come out with a new department called Rural 
Revitalization. After 10 years of downloading on rural 
Saskatchewan, after 10 years of putting rural Saskatchewan . . . 
treating them like second-class citizens, what is your 
department going to do after 10 years with that kind of a record 
to revitalize rural Saskatchewan and turn around the trend that 
your government seems intent on doing to rural Saskatchewan? 
What are you going to do under your new department for rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I find the member’s comments 
extremely interesting from this point of view. All we have to do 
is look at the demographics — not only in this province but in 
countries across the world — where we have seen an increasing 
urbanization of various provinces and countries. And it’s taken 
place for a number of reasons. And this province has been 
undergoing a transformation in terms of urbanization for the last 
60 years. 
 
One of the things that has speeded up that transformation, in my 
view, is the context that we found ourselves in in the 1990s. 
Let’s think about this country in the early 1990s. This was a 
country that had just entered in . . . recently entered into a new 
trade arrangement with the United States and with Mexico. 
There were dramatic changes taking place on a global basis 
when it came to international trade. 
 
Saskatchewan people are traders. We are exporters of what we 
produce. We are the largest trading province in this country. We 
are dependent upon exports. And the world had changed. That’s 
point number one. 
 
Point number two, when we came to government in 1991, we 
basically were . . . we were a fiscal basket case. We were left 
with a legacy — and I think this would have happened to any 
government, had it been the Liberals that were elected in 1991 
or the Reform Party or any government in 1991 — we couldn’t 
borrow any money. 
 
(16:00) 
 
So you had a choice: either you turn this province over to the 
federal government and let them administer it from Ottawa or 
you started to deal with the fiscal realities that we were faced 
with. And we were faced with the reality that we couldn’t 
borrow any money. 



May 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1265 

 

We had over $15 billion in debt. We were spending well 
beyond our means and we had to make some decisions. And 
there were some very difficult decisions that had to be made. 
And I think . . . I mean the members can chirp from their seats, 
but as I recall it, everybody in this province paid the price for 
the spending that occurred in the 1980s. Whether you were 
urban people, rural people or northern people, I don’t think 
there was a person in this province that did not feel the effect of 
the things that the government had to do to get our fiscal house 
in order. 
 
And I’m pleased, Mr. Chair, that we were the first province in 
the country to balance our budget. I’m pleased, Mr. Chair, that 
we also began to pay off some of that long-term debt because 
we were spending, I think, close to 900 million on interest on 
the public debt. As part of that, government restructured itself. 
There were various changes and so on. 
 
We now have our fiscal house in order because of the hard work 
of Saskatchewan people. We now have a new leader, a new 
Premier in the province, and he has made a decision that he 
wants to turn his attention to the many opportunities available 
in rural Saskatchewan and that’s why this ministry was created. 
That’s why we have a mandate to work with rural communities 
and rural citizens to focus government and government’s 
thinking on the various opportunities that are available to 
people in rural Saskatchewan when it comes to economic 
development. 
 
As you know we have set up a committee called the Action 
Committee on the Rural Economy. It’s a committee that’s 
comprised of 45 very diverse citizens, representing various 
businesses, various farm and rural organizations. I think that the 
Action Committee on the Rural Economy demonstrates our 
government’s commitment to improving the quality of life for 
rural residents, as well as its willingness to listen to rural 
stakeholders about what can be done to promote economic 
activity outside of the major centres. 
 
The development of a rural economic strategy I think is a 
consequence of all of the efforts that have occurred from those 
that are involved in ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural 
Economy). ACRE is going to submit its interim report to the 
province in the fall and they’re working on developing an 
economic development strategy. 
 
There has been substantive public consultation with rural 
stakeholders which has occurred through the ACRE process. 
And we expect that ACRE will submit its final report to us in 
the spring of 2002, and then once they submit their final report 
there’ll be many, many opportunities. 
 
As well we have been working with Economic and 
Co-operative Development to develop a blueprint for the new 
provincial economic strategy, and there certainly is a rural 
component to that strategy. And we expect that the Minister for 
Economic Development will release the strategy very soon. 
 
So we place a high priority under the leader . . . or leadership of 
our Premier on economic development in rural Saskatchewan, 
and we’re looking forward to hearing from ACRE. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, I think the intentions of ACRE are probably very 
honourable and the people sitting on those committees are very 
concerned about rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I guess my concern, Madam Minister, that every time we turn 
around with your government it seems that we’re going to have 
round-table discussions, we’re going to study something. 
 
I think the Fyke report is just another example of what we’re 
talking about here. Mr. Fyke was sent out to check the needs of 
Saskatchewan when it comes to health care, and now what do 
we see is we have a legislative committee being set up to study 
it once again. I think it’s one way for your government, Madam 
Minister, to pass the buck and not have to accept the 
responsibility to try and repair what’s happened in health care, 
considering it was your health care reform that put us in the 
shape we’re in, especially in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, another comment and I find this one very 
interesting because it’s a past, a past NDP MLA — and I’m 
quoting — says: 
 

NDP ignoring rural Saskatchewan. 
 

I’m sure you know already who I’m quoting from, it’s Dr. 
Draper. But he says a former . . . it said . . . The quote goes on 
to say: 
 

A former NDP MLA says his party has had a carefully 
planned strategy since 1992 to ignore the needs of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In a letter to the editor in today’s Regina Leader-Post, Dr. 
Lewis Draper, MLA for Assiniboine-Gravelbourg from ’91 
to ’95, said the Romanow NDP government has virtually no 
concern for ridings outside of Regina, Saskatoon, Moose 
Jaw, and Prince Albert. So rural Saskatchewan is in a 
double-bind, Draper said in his letter. The NDP doesn’t need 
our votes so they will continue to ignore us. 
 

Why I quote that, Madam Minister, is because I honestly 
believe that’s the impression that many people in rural 
Saskatchewan, if not pretty near all people in rural 
Saskatchewan, have right now, is that they’ve been totally 
neglected and totally left out of what’s going on in this 
province. And yet you yourself, Madam Minister, listed all the 
accomplishments that have happened in rural Saskatchewan, 
although they’ve happened with far less people than there used 
to be. 
 
I guess, Madam Minister, today we’re trying to get a feel what 
your new department is actually going to do to help us out in 
rural Saskatchewan. And I say us is because I am from rural 
Saskatchewan along with the high majority of my colleagues on 
this side. And our concerns are for the whole province of 
Saskatchewan; but, Madam Minister, I believe what is good for 
rural Saskatchewan is good for urban Saskatchewan is good for 
all of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think one of the problems we have today, Madam Minister, we 
forgot that trend that’s going on in this . . . or we’ve set the 
trend that’s going on in this province. We’ve catered to urban 
Saskatchewan and they certainly haven’t won by this, because 



1266 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2001 

 

when rural Saskatchewan hurts I believe all of Saskatchewan 
hurts. 
 
And not all of it is the NDP government’s fault; don’t get me 
wrong. We know that grain prices have dropped out of anyone’s 
control. I feel we’ve been neglected by the federal government 
drastically. Mr. Goodale — I commented on him before — I 
honestly believe if I was Mr. Goodale I’d be scared to go out to 
rural Saskatchewan right now after some of the comments he’s 
made lately and some of the lack of representation that he’s 
taken to Ottawa, supposedly, when he’s the only cabinet 
minister from this province. 
 
Madam Minister, you know we go back and I’d just like to . . . 
the trend . . . I guess what I’m trying to say today is that there’s 
been a trend for the last 10 years in rural Saskatchewan. And 
we’ve talked about hospitals. We’ve lost hospitals. 
 
But there’s more than that, Madam Minister. I give you an 
example in my own constituency when we get to education. 
Two years ago I lost the MacNutt School and I know, it’s due to 
the drop in population. Yesterday there was an announcement 
there’s another school in my constituency closing, Bredenbury 
School. And I know it’s due to the drop in population. 
 
Highways are in pretty bad shape out in my constituency and I 
think every member on this side can list you a number of 
highways — and you being the Highways minister, Madam 
Minister, I’m sure you’re aware of this — that are in very poor 
shape out there. 
 
There’s little things that have happened under your government, 
Madam Minister. Regional parks, the funding for regional 
parks, something that brought a little more tourism into each of 
our areas out there — most of us have regional parks — that 
funding was just about disappeared. 
 
Municipal funding, we’ve talked about this on many occasions, 
Madam Minister. It hurts rural Saskatchewan; it’s a drain on 
rural Saskatchewan. And municipalities out there, small towns, 
large towns for that matter, villages, and RMs (rural 
municipality) have nowhere to pass the buck but to rural people. 
 
All of a sudden we see what’s happening out there. It looks so 
much better to the people out there to live in the cities or the 
larger centres because number one your taxes don’t seem to be 
much higher in the cities. And you have access to the malls. 
And you have access to better health care. 
 
And I for one can tell you, Madam Minister, that that’s right. If 
we have a problem, as an MLA in Regina, I found it amazing to 
go down to South Albert, to the medi-clinics down here. If I go 
from . . . In my area we have to go to Yorkton now, to the 
Yorkton hospital; but we have to go to the doctor’s office, 
which is normal procedure rather than use emergency, which is 
the way it should be. But on many occasions, Madam Minister, 
we might wait three hours to get to see a doctor. 
 
We sit in a waiting room which is quite often full. I’ve had 
occasions to go a couple of times in the five years I’ve been 
elected to the . . . one of the medi-clinics on South Albert and 
was totally amazed actually. In fact, I could grow accustomed to 
this and quite spoiled by it. I wasn’t in there, I’ll bet, 15 

minutes, Madam Minister, and I had a prescription. The doctor 
had checked me over, had a prescription, and I was out of that 
office. 
 
And I guess what I’m saying is that service is tremendous. It’s 
the way I feel it should be. But when I go home and see the 
time it takes the people from my constituency to go through the 
system, it’s like a two-class system. And I know it doesn’t 
always work like that in the city. There’s many waiting lists in 
here, and they have their problems in here too. 
 
But I’m trying to show you, Madam Minister, why if a person, a 
couple say, retiring, had their choice of where are we going to 
live? Out in rural Saskatchewan where we’ve lived all our life 
or would, maybe, should we be better off to move into the city 
of Regina, or Saskatoon, or P.A. (Prince Albert), or Moose Jaw. 
Yorkton even, for an example, the larger centres, but especially 
the big centres in here. 
 
I think a number of the things we’re doing, Madam Minister, 
are maybe chasing people out of rural Saskatchewan or on the 
other hand enticing them into the big cities. And I guess that’s 
where I feel as government representatives, provincial MLAs 
on either side of the House, I think we don’t need to speed that 
process up. I think if anything we have to try and slow it down. 
 
I don’t mean we can get involved in the economy and interfere 
with what’s happening out there through you know, the normal 
population drains that are happening; but I think we have to try 
and put a slowdown to things that don’t have to happen out 
there. And I think a number of the things that we have done in 
the past have speeded it up. 
 
Madam Minister, can you maybe tell us today, do you have 
ideas in your mind that your department hasn’t gone into yet, 
that you may want to look at, or you will be looking at, of 
slowing this trend down of people moving into the cities, out of 
rural Saskatchewan, further adding to the problems that we 
have in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I want to thank the member for 
acknowledging that not all of this is the fault of the provincial 
government. I appreciate that and I think it, I think it’s very 
useful when we come to these kinds of discussions that we 
acknowledge that there are some events that are simply beyond 
our control. 
 
And when you look at the grains industry in our province, in 
fact it hasn’t declined. The level of consumption of grains has 
continued to grow and the real problem that we face is the 
European Community subsidies, as well as the US (United 
States) subsidies. And yet when you think about Europe and 
you think about the US, I mean they are the ones that wanted to 
enter into these trade agreements, yet they have large enough 
treasuries to subsidize European and US farmers. 
 
I guess the question is really this, and what’s interesting in 
terms of what the member speaks of, I had an opportunity to 
attend a WESTAC, which is the Western Transportation 
Advisory Council meeting in Victoria. And we had an 
opportunity to listen to the federal minister for Transportation, 
Mr. Collenette, talk about his vision of transportation in this 
country. And when I listened carefully to what he had to say, he 



May 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1267 

 

talked about metropolitan Toronto and he talked about 
Vancouver and the need to move urban people. 
 
And when I was sitting there listening to him, I thought this guy 
has no idea about the West. He has no idea about what we do. 
He talked about the new economy and he talked about the old 
economy. And it felt as though the federal government was into 
the new economy, the knowledge economy. 
 
And when you think about our economy and our province, we 
are traders and we’re traders of bulk commodities. We send out 
forestry, potash, uranium, oil and gas, coal, and grain. And it 
goes out by two modes; it either goes by truck or it goes by 
train. 
 
And when I was sitting there thinking about this, I thought, well 
I almost feel like maybe how some rural citizens feel. They 
think about Regina, they think about Saskatoon and say they 
have no idea about what we do. So when the member talks 
about rural alienation, I agree with him. But when you think 
about western alienation, there are many, many times as a 
provincial politician that you’re sitting, dealing with colleagues 
from across the country and you think these people have no idea 
about what we have to contend with. 
 
Now in terms of what do we do in rural Saskatchewan, the 
member talks about losing schools in his constituency. I’ve 
been a member of the legislature for 14 years and I think I have 
lost four schools in my constituency and it’s an urban 
constituency. And why have I lost those schools? Because the 
population has shifted out of my constituency to other parts of 
an urban centre, and schools are being built in those areas. So I 
understand what it’s like to go through a school closure. 
 
But school boards have to deal with certain realities. And the 
reality is that you need a certain amount of students in order to 
have a school, in order to have a proper education for students. 
And it seems to be the reality. And we can say it shouldn’t 
happen; on the other hand, you need to look at what is a good 
education and you need to look at what can you afford. 
 
(16:15) 
 
In terms of what do I think we need to do, I think that we need 
to spend more time with our REDAs, our rural economic 
development authorities. And we have many in the province. 
They have some tremendous ideas. But they’re not funded as 
well as they could be. 
 
So I think that in terms of rural opportunities, the REDAs are a 
natural for us to really work with and support. And some of the 
REDAs are more developed than others. Some of the REDAs 
have more support from their municipalities, and why they’re 
urban and rural, than others. And some of them are more 
sophisticated than others. And I think that we need to spend 
more time with the economic development authorities. 
 
As well I think that we need to look at investment instruments 
for rural economic development. One of the problems that we 
have with rural opportunity is that rural people have . . . not 
only rural people but rural businesses, whether they’re urban or 
rural businesses, have difficulty accessing capital because 
they’re smaller projects. Some of the big venture capital funds 

and so on are more interested in larger projects. And we need to 
figure out how we could design investment vehicles for rural 
development. So that’s something that we’re going to take a 
crack at. 
 
The other thing that’s become clear to me is that we have some 
regulatory impediments to rural development. And that’s why 
our office . . . to try and act as a way to get through some of the 
bureaucratic nightmares that people refer to. 
 
The other thing that I think we have to do is build 
organizational capacity. There are lots of people who have good 
ideas but they don’t know what to do or how to do it. And so 
it’s building community capacity or organizational capacity. 
 
And there’s a very good group of people . . . and I’m thinking 
of Linda Pipke, who is involved in community development, 
community economic development. And I think that her group 
has done a tremendous job along the No. 11 Highway between 
Saskatoon and Regina in terms of capacity building from an 
organizational point of view. 
 
I think the other thing, and this is where it gets tricky, because I 
know that the job of the opposition is to critique the government 
and be critical of the government where necessary, but we have 
an attitude problem in the province. And I’m certainly not going 
to put that at the doorsteps of the Saskatchewan Party, but we 
need to have a more positive attitude when it comes to 
ourselves and promoting ourselves. 
 
We are an innovative people in this province. We’re a 
co-operative people. We’re always thinking about new ideas, 
new thoughts. But when people think about Saskatchewan, I’m 
not necessarily sure they have positive attitudes about 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact when the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce released 
its paper last week it talked about the need to have a more 
positive attitude. And I’m not sure how we do that. Because I 
know your job is to be critical. On the other hand, sometimes 
that could be impediments to economic development. 
 
Training and education initiatives in rural Saskatchewan and, 
you know, we have a problem with shortages of certain kind of 
people. I’m thinking of nursing in particular. You talk about 
hospitals closing. Well if we can’t get trained personnel to 
operate facilities 24 hours a day, it’s closed by default, as a 
matter of fact. 
 
And the Minister for Post-Secondary Education has . . . we’re 
going to have a virtual campus. And I think this is really going 
to be positive for rural Saskatchewan because I think if we can 
train people in places where they live, that they’re more likely 
to stay there. So I think that’s another opportunity for us. 
 
And finally, CommunityNet is really important for rural 
Saskatchewan. And it’s become so interesting because there are 
knowledge industries outside of the larger centres, operating in 
Outlook and other places in Saskatchewan that need access to 
the high-speed Internet where they can create jobs. And I think 
that the high-speed Internet will be important. 
 
And just to have the physical infrastructure that those of us in 



1268 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2001 

 

urban Saskatchewan take for granted like high-speed Internet, 
cell phones, gas, electricity, water, all of those things, I think 
that we need to also focus on our physical infrastructure 
because that also is key to economic development in our 
province. 
 
So just to recap, I think we need to focus in on how do we get 
the investment vehicles in place for rural development? How do 
we remove regulatory impediments? How do we have 
organizational capacity building? 
 
We need positive attitudes. We need training and education 
initiatives. We need to make sure that rural people have access 
to information and knowledge. And we need to ensure that we 
identify those key sectors in rural Saskatchewan for 
development. And we need to really work with our economic 
development authorities. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Some of what 
you said I agree with, which is probably strange, Madam 
Minister, right off the bat. 
 
But you talked about attitude of the people in Saskatchewan. 
And you know that it’s surprising that I have constituents that 
actually have businesses in Alberta but maybe farm in 
Saskatchewan or for whatever reason are tied to both sides. And 
that’s the first thing that you will hear from those people every 
time you talk to them, is that the attitude in Alberta — and I 
know you’re going to say well we’re always bragging up 
Alberta, but that’s not where I’m going — but they say the 
difference right now is that the attitude in Alberta is that we can 
do anything we want and we can be successful. It doesn’t 
always work out like that but that’s their attitude. 
 
And I agree in Saskatchewan, part of our problem is — I think 
whether it’s rural or urban or wherever it is — is our attitude 
that we’re scared to try because what if we fail. So what if we 
fail? Get up and try again. And I think that’s . . . I don’t know 
how it’s done, there’s no easy button to push it out, but I think 
that’s one of the areas I agree with you, that we have to change 
that attitude if we’re going to go ahead. 
 
One of the things, Madam Minister, that I’ve talked about with 
a private member’s Bill, is The Farm Land Security Act. I think 
that’s one of the hindrances. You talked about removing red 
tape. And I believe honestly that’s an area where it’s a win-win 
for us; we’re not in the ’60s or the ’50s anymore, we’re in the 
2000-2001. 
 
I think it’s a win-win because we can bring money in from 
outside. We could retire the people that have wanted to retire 
for the past 5, 10 years, who we hope would stay here and 
retire. So we bring new blood into the province. We bring new 
ideas. We bring new money and we keep that money with the 
people that have actually earned it, and create a competitive 
market for that land. 
 
And I think it’s things like that, Madam Minister, that we have 
to change. And we can’t do it five years down the road, we’ve 
got to try and do things like that quickly. 
 
You talked about processing earlier on and I agree with that. I 
think we have to get to the point where we get to process our 

products right from start to finish. I think we both agree on that. 
I think how we get there we maybe differ on. 
 
I think if Mr. Goodale wants to help us, there’s an area he could 
help us. Federally they have far more dollars than we do in the 
province. They could come in here with dollars and help set up 
ethanol plants, processing plants for all kind of things, if they 
genuinely wanted to help. But once again it seems they get to 
the border of the other side of Manitoba and seem to forget we 
exist out here. 
 
Madam Minister, my colleague from Watrous has had a couple 
of calls on exactly if your department could help these certain 
people. And they were talking about businesses wanting to be 
set up for processing pulse crops, for processing specific feed 
for horses, probably race horses I think she figures they’re 
talking about. If these people contacted your department, could 
you help them, help them find ways to set their business up? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I could go on here for the whole afternoon and on into 
the night, and I’m sure my colleagues would love to go further. 
But due to time constraints and I believe we have to move on to 
the next department, I want to thank your officials and I’m sure 
we’ll have a number of times to return to this. So, thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I would move that we report progress 
and ask for leave to sit again. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 

Subvote (SS01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Social Services to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated 
beside me is Bonnie Durnford, the deputy minister. And seated 
to her right is Shelley Hoover, the acting assistant deputy 
minister. Seated behind Ms. Durnford is Dorothea Warren, the 
associate executive director of family and youth. 
 
Seated behind me is Richard Hazel, the executive director of 
family and youth. And seated behind Ms. Warren is Darcy 
Smycniuk, the acting executive director, financial management. 
 
Seated behind the bar are Phil Walsh, the executive director of 
income support; Larry Moffatt, the executive director of 
community living; and Deborah Bryck, the director of child day 
care. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and to your 
officials, welcome this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to begin with a few questions related to 
some inquiries that have been made through my office in 
regards to funding for special needs and some of the special 



May 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1269 

 

services that are available in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the requests that was brought to my attention was in 
regards to funding for . . . and I believe what they are is actually 
something like a private heavy care home but it was actually 
providing services for disabled or handicapped individuals, 
adult individuals. 
 
And what I’ve been told, Mr. Minister, is that — and it’s been 
brought to my attention — is the amount of funding that is 
available for these services, the amount of funding that people 
receive per client I guess — I think that’s the term you would 
use — that they’re providing a service for. 
 
And I’m led to believe, Mr. Minister, that the level of funding is 
. . . most people are finding to be somewhat inadequate or it’s 
very difficult for them to provide the 24-hour care and provide 
the services and needs based on the funding that’s available. 
 
So I guess the first question I would have, Mr. Minister, is what 
level of funding would a person receive per client in providing 
that 24-hour heavy care assistance to a handicapped or disabled 
person? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I can undertake to provide 
the member with details following our discussion today, Mr. 
Chair. But we have . . . And I think what the member is getting 
at is the level-of-care payment that we would provide to 
families to . . . or not to families, but that we would provide to 
individuals enabling their families to provide them with care in 
their own home. 
 
We will have individuals who will make application to us who 
are disabled, and as any other adult can make application to us 
for assistance. We provide what is called a level-of-care 
payment. The level-of-care payment is dependent upon their 
level of functioning as determined by a physician. 
 
And then on that basis, we will provide a level-of-care payment 
to that individual, which can then be utilized by the family to 
support that person in their own home with their family, and 
where the family is providing the care. 
 
If that person is cared for by a personal care home that is 
outside the family, then those rates will be somewhat increased. 
The same levels of care are in effect, again depending on a 
physician’s assessment. But the levels of . . . the level-of-care 
payment will be increased recognizing the additional cost that 
approved, licensed, personal care homes, staffed 24-hours a 
day, having to meet certain requirements, will have over and 
above a family home. 
 
But I will certainly undertake to provide the details of that to 
them . . . to the member. The level-of-care payment for 
someone that is assessed at a level 1 would be $453 a month. 
The level-of-care payment, level 2, is $588 per month, and level 
3 is $773 a month. And this is for family homes, which are 
non-approved homes. And I might point out that that is a 5 per 
cent increase this year over the previous year. 
 
With respect to level 4, we do not provide level-of-care 

payments to family homes, or to non-approved homes, or for 
individuals to be cared for in their own homes. Level 4 requires, 
by definition, a physician attendance or registered nursing 
attendant at some point during the day. And therefore we take 
the position that that level of care should be provided in a 
licensed nursing home facility or in an appropriate facility that 
can do that. And I hope that answers the member’s question. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, from what you’ve 
basically given me, you’ve indicated that there are levels of care 
to family members provided by a family. 
 
The question that I’m actually looking at is levels of care for 
people that, and as I understood it, people that have some 
special needs and somewhat — what I’m trying to figure the 
right politically correct term, but let’s . . . it’s not coming to me 
right now — but who would have some disabilities and need 
care but aren’t receiving that from a family home, are receiving 
it from a personal care home. 
 
And what I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, is what the level of 
funding that personal care home would receive per client. And 
at the same time if that client, if you will, was in a, was in a care 
home — a licensed care home or a publicly funded care home 
— what level of funding would they receive in a publicly 
funded care home versus a private personal care home? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — We will provide payments to 
individuals who are in licensed personal care homes and who 
receive levels of care from levels 1 through 3. And that 
payment is then forwarded on to the operators of the personal 
care home by the trustee or guardian or whatever it might be. 
 
But in that case, the level 1 payment is $558 per month. The 
level 2 payment is $709 per month. The level 3 payment is $905 
per month. But those are licensed personal care homes. Those 
are not necessarily public institutions. 
 
The only public institutions I can think of are those that provide 
level 4 care, in which case the Department of Health becomes 
involved. And again, level 4 requires some, as I understand it 
. . . and I can certainly provide the member with the details of 
the policies with respect to attendance of physicians and nurses 
at some point during the day. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, what you’re 
saying then is, I would take it, level 1 at 558 . . . would that be 
someone who has some ability to actually contribute something 
towards their care? And level 2 and level 3 is getting to the 
point where an individual basically is totally dependent on care 
and therefore it’s recognized in the 905? And is that the total 
sum that’s available to a personal care home for the caregiver 
per person? 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I guess in all the years of involvement, do 
you find that that fee or that amount of funds are adequate 
enough to address all the needs of caring for that person; food, 
clothing, shelter, and some of the special needs that come with 
care for that individual? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — First of all, the member asked 
about the definitions of various levels. Level 1 means 
essentially independent but may need some guidance or 



1270 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2001 

 

supervision in the activities of daily living. And staff time for 
care averages about 20 minutes a day. 
 
Level 2, supervision and assistance may be needed with 
personal hygiene and grooming. A person is safely ambulant 
with or without mechanical aids or independent at wheelchair 
level. Usually continent, able to feed self. Some supervision and 
direction may be needed regarding behavioural problems. And 
staff time for care averages 45 minutes a day. 
 
Level 3, all degrees of supervision and assistance may be 
needed in the activities of daily living. Basic nursing care is 
usually required. Supervision and direction may be given for 
emotional problems which do not endanger life or property. 
And care at this level is usually carried out under the 
supervision of a registered nurse or registered psychiatric nurse 
as directed by the attending physician. And staff time for care 
averages two hours per day. 
 
And then in addition to that, there are level 4 facilities which 
provide for level 4 patients where all patient care is carried out 
under the continuing medical supervision, and all nursing care 
is carried out under professional supervision, and emergency 
and consultative medical services and highly skilled technical 
nursing services must be readily available when required. And 
staff time for care averages more than two hours a day. 
 
As to the payments which can be made, in addition to the 
level-of-care payment which would go to a resident of a 
personal care home or a family home, there is, in addition to the 
level-of-care payment, there is an $85 per month personal living 
allowance. 
 
(16:45) 
 
And in the case of the personal care home there is also a $25 a 
month activity allowance. So that if the personal care home 
needs to or wants to take some of its residents out for a social 
outing and there are costs, whether it’s for a bowling activity, or 
a movie, whatever the case might be, then there’s some money 
provided for the residents of those personal care homes to 
enable them to do that. 
 
But that is not an activity allowance that would be provided in 
the case of a family home, where we take the position that the 
family would be including the person who is the recipient of the 
allowance as part of their normal family activities. 
 
And in both cases allowances can be made for special needs, 
whether it’s diet or transportation. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Chair, and, Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, 
so what you’re . . . as I understand it then over and above the 
905, there’d be 85 plus 25? And also, Mr. Minister, what 
provisions are made if there’s special medications that are 
required by a client? Are they . . . would that be a value that’s 
covered over and above this amount as well? 
 
And another question that was raised, in the case of, say, a 
personal care home that’s in a smaller rural community where 
access to a dollar is not — or doctor, pardon me — is not 
immediate in that community and you have to transport that . . . 
I shouldn’t use the word transport, but basically you have to 

drive to see a physician. I understand there is some funding 
available or mileage allowance available. 
 
I’m wondering what that allowance is, Mr. Minister, and if 
indeed you’ve had requests for a higher level of mileage in 
order to access physician services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — With respect to coverage for 
prescription drugs and the like, all our clients would be enrolled 
under a supplementary health coverage so that we would make 
provision for that. 
 
With respect to transportation allowances we provide, I guess, 
what might be construed as the bare minimum of 13 cents a 
kilometre which recognizes gasoline cost but really doesn’t 
recognize any depreciation or ongoing maintenance that might 
be required as is in the case of some other allowances I can 
think of. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair and Mr. Minister, I think that’s exactly 
correct. And that was certainly the point that was raised with 
me, the fact that the 13 cents is like the bare minimum. And of 
course right now with the current pricing on fuel, it may 
actually be a negative. They may be falling behind. 
 
And I guess the question, Mr. Minister, is what discussion has 
your department been having in regards to the possibility that 
there may be some additional costs that may need to be looked 
at? Do you look at some of those changes? 
 
And in regards to the wear and tear on a vehicle, if you were not 
caring for that person and didn’t have to make that extra trip, 
then that’s a savings on the part of the individual that’s 
providing the service. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m just wondering what ongoing policy your 
department has in regards to changes that take place that you 
have no control over, but recognizing the fact that that becomes 
an extra burden for the caregiver. And how do you work . . . or 
look ahead and plan on dealing with those added costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — One, without, Mr. Chair, without 
getting into details of the policy and embellishments that can be 
made if someone from a personal care home has to travel with 
the individual. If there are more than two individuals going into 
town to visit a doctor, or the fact that the allowance gets paid in 
each case, and so that there’s some potential for savings, but 
obviously not for a single person. 
 
I accept the member’s comments. We do consult with 
constituent groups, stakeholder groups, about the services we 
provide . . . the adequacy of the services we provide and the 
rates that we deal with. We did provide for a 5 per cent 
across-the-board increase in the level of care rates over the 
previous year which is not insignificant. But we hear the 
member and we hear the comments from stakeholder groups 
about the transportation allowance. And all I can say at this 
point in time is that we appreciate the comment. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, another question I 
probably should’ve asked the last time because it deals along 
the same lines. 
 



May 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1271 

 

But if a personal caregiver is taking a patient to see a physician 
— and in some cases in rural Saskatchewan now it may be an 
hour or so drive to your physician — and the question was not 
only the mileage but, Mr. Minister, are there allowances made 
for a meal if you’re away for that time period and what 
allowance would be made if there is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, we do not provide a 
separate transportation allowance in addition to the 
level-of-care payment. We see that as something that we 
assume would be provided by the personal care home, not only 
for those of our clients that are cared for in personal care 
homes, but that they would provide for other residents of their 
personal care homes as well. 
 
We would not provide a separate allowance for their employees 
who takes someone somewhere for an appointment. We see that 
as part of the services they provide for their . . . or as part of 
their personal care home services. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Having said that, I 
realize the difficulty that your department faces when you start 
looking at allowances for certain care services, and providing 
for individuals. 
 
And I’m not here, Mr. Minister, I think you’ve seen that in the 
past, just to argue for a lump sum, a large sum more of money, 
but certainly I believe we all feel that people should be 
remunerated in a fair fashion. And that if they’re providing 
cares to individuals it shouldn’t actually be a care . . . level of 
care that’s coming out of their pockets because if that care 
wasn’t there, it would certainly be coming out from another 
care home, maybe a publicly funded care home or caregiver 
type of format which may even be a lot more costly because 
you then begin looking at union fees and working with unions 
and what have you. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, how many personal care homes of this nature 
or agencies would we have in the province that your department 
deals with, where we deal with individuals who have special 
needs and roughly, how many individuals would we be talking 
about giving care to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, rather than try to put 
together that number today, we will undertake to provide the 
member with that information as soon as we can. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 
 
 


