















































Hansard: April 06, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 423 
 April 6, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, good morning. And I’d like to 
mention that this morning I’m rising on behalf of residents in 
the communities of Tompkins and Gull Lake in regard to their 
concerns about the possible implications of the Saskatchewan 
EMS (emergency medical services) development project. 
Recommendations forthcoming from that particular report are 
of grave concern to the people of these two communities in 
particular. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in this EMS report 
and to affirm its intent to work to improve 
community-based ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition from citizens of the Central Plains 
Health District asking for the government to protect children 
from tobacco use. 
 
And the petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
legislation to protect children from tobacco use. 
 
And as duty bound your petitioner will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signators on this petition are from Middle 
Lake; from Humboldt; Leroy; St. Benedict; Bruno, 
Saskatchewan; and Fulda; and there are numerous other towns 
within the Central Plains Health District that have submitted 
their signature to this petition. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
to present today on the EMS review: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Rose 
Valley and Wadena, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the high energy costs. The petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from the city of Melfort, and the communities of Star City, 
Gronlid, and Naicam. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
proposed weight restrictions on Highway 43 and the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the economic harm its plan to close Highway 43 
to heavy traffic will do to south-central Saskatchewan and 
instead devote necessary funds to upgrade Highway 43 in 
order to preserve jobs and economic development in the 
area. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the community 
of Vanguard and include the name of one RM (rural 
municipality) from an affected municipality and a councillor. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens who are concerned about 
EMS service in Saskatchewan and the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the petition is signed by citizens of Radville in the 
Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of concerned citizens who are petitioning to 
maintain community-based ambulance service. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 



424 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2001 

 

The petitioners come from the communities of Wynyard, 
Punnichy, Leslie, and Semans. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again on behalf of concerned citizens from southern 
Saskatchewan pertaining to the cuts at the Assiniboia Pioneer 
Lodge and the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that, at the very least, 
current levels of services and care are maintained at 
Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by numerous people 
from Assiniboia, Lafleche, Mossbank, and Coronach. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people in Swift Current and area concerned about their regional 
hospital. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in Swift Current, 
Stewart Valley, Saskatoon, Shaunavon, Gull Lake, and Prelate. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 

To provide necessary funding to upgrade Highway No. 43; 
 
The consolidation and centralization of ambulance services; 
 
A request for Swift Current for a new hospital; and 
 
The level of services and care at Pioneer Lodge in 
Assiniboia. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 19 ask the government the 
following question: 

To the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation: for each 
of the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and Prince 
Albert, and for each of the provincial electoral 
constituencies outside of these four cities: (a) which 
organizations received funding from the Associated Entities 
Fund under the cultural facilities grant program in the 
1999-2000 fiscal year; (b) how much money did each of 
these organizations receive in the 1999-2000 fiscal year; 
and (c) what are the projects these organizations received 
funding for? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have an identical question referring to the year 
2000 and 2001. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 19 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management: regarding support for the 
Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association and its subsidiary 
clubs, what does the government plan to do to assist the 
Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association so that it can 
strengthen tourism in Saskatchewan by building a safe-trail 
system throughout the province and maintaining same. 

 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday 
next move first reading of a Bill, The Direct Sellers 
Amendment Act, 2001. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of the Assembly, I would like 
to introduce one of my constituents. 
 
Seated in the Speaker’s gallery is His Worship Mayor Tim 
Perry from the great city of Estevan. Mayor Perry is one of 
many people involved in municipal government deeply 
concerned about the lack of revenue sharing. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming him. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 
through you to members of the House, not individually but as a 
group, seated in your west gallery. 
 
These people represent all areas of rural and urban 
Saskatchewan. They are front-line workers who provide 
important services to the people of Saskatchewan. It’s very nice 
to have them present in the House today, to take time on one of 
their days off to be in the House to observe proceedings. 
 
So I would please encourage all members of the House to 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of privilege to introduce some very important 
constituents from the riding of Rosetown-Biggar that I 
represent. 



April 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 425 

 

I would like to introduce the mayor of Rosetown, Alma Dubé, 
and also the administrator, Gary Crowder, and another assistant 
at Rosetown, Starla Slater. If you would please stand so that the 
hon. members would know who you are. Alma Dubé first and 
Gary Crowder and Starla Slater. 
 
And also the mayor of Biggar is here. Blair Cleaveley. And, 
Blair, if you would please stand and be acknowledged. 
 
I’ve had the privilege of working with these people both at the 
federal level and the provincial level, the communities of 
Rosetown and Biggar, for a number of years. They’re excellent 
people, they do a wonderful job on behalf of the people they 
serve. 
 
And I would appreciate it if you would join me in giving them a 
warm welcome to the Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
have a special guest to introduce to you and to all members of 
the House, Miss Quinn Quach was born in Vietnam and spent 
the next eight years of her life in Norway. And now she’s at the 
U of R (University of Regina) taking economics and business 
administration. She’s in her third year. And right now she’s in a 
mentorship for women program with me and I’m very delighted 
to have her with me all day today. 
 
Quinn Quach, please stand. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Economic Indicators 
 
Mr. McCall: — I’m excited about the things I have to say, Mr. 
Speaker. Later today members will stand and be counted in the 
vote on the Minister of Finance’s excellent budget. 
 
Any guesses as to how I will cast my first budget vote, Mr. 
Speaker? Well let me save you the suspense. I will be voting for 
the budget because of its vision, because of its prudence, and 
because of its support for health, education, highways, 
information technology, the arts, and the environment. In short, 
it’s a budget for the people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — I will be supporting this budget because it and 
previous ones have had the desired effect of keeping our 
economy growing and moving forward no matter what the 
weather, and even during these tough times for agriculture. 
 
For instance, as you know we’re a trading province, Mr. 
Speaker, and in 2000 our international exports increased by 
25.8 per cent to $12.5 billion. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but at 
home while some were crying wolf, our economy retail sales 
increased by 6.5 per cent this January over last January. Plenty 
of progress. 
 
One more example, Mr. Speaker. Today’s Leader-Post reports 

that April land sales of oil and gas generated $6.7 million, an 18 
per cent increase over last April. Housing starts are up in 
Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, I know . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tartan Day 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 
to rise on Tartan Day to offer our best wishes to the people of 
Scottish descent in our province. It is a day to celebrate the 
many contributions the Scots have made to our country and to 
our province. 
 
It was my pleasure to introduce and have Tartan Day officially 
recognized and have the legislature pass legislation to recognize 
the contributions of the Scottish settlers to our province. 
 
To celebrate the day, Mr. Speaker, the . . . (inaudible) . . . of the 
Scottish settlers, the Sons of Scotland Benevolent Association, 
will be performing and piping and Highland dancing in the 
second floor rotunda on April 6 — that is today, this afternoon 
at 1 p.m. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the legislature to join 
with me in congratulating the Scottish descendants to our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I would just like to add to my welcome to all 
the guests in the legislature, but I would ask all guests that they 
not participate in any way directly in the proceedings. You’re 
very welcome, however, to remain and observe for the entire 
day. 
 

Canora Lounge Opening 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news 
for rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The Rise N’Shine Cafe 
and Snypers Lounge — that’s snypers with a “y” — opened for 
business on March 17 of this year. These new establishments, 
located in Canora, with bring many new opportunities both in 
recreation and job creation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The owner of the combination cafe and lounge establishment, 
Mr. Nolan Kuruliak, hopes to start both a billiard and dart 
league for the people of the Canora and area. There are also 
hopes of receiving a new big-screen television so that 
pay-per-view events, the Stanley Cup playoffs, and the mighty 
Grey Cup can be enjoyed on a new level. 
 
Kuruliak’s establishment will employ 15 people, Mr. Speaker, 
including full- and part-time staff. This new business will give 
the people of Canora a new place to kick up their heels and 
relax after a hard day’s work. I would like to congratulate Mr. 
Kuruliak, the Rise N’Shine Cafe, and the Snypers Lounge on 
yet another Saskatchewan success story. 
 



426 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, this commitment and this investment right here in 
Saskatchewan — it is this kind of a commitment that will help 
our rural areas to build. I’m sure the people of Canora will 
appreciate this new establishment, Mr. Speaker. And I would 
like to congratulate them; I’d like all members of this House to 
congratulate them. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Melfort Hosts Western Canadian 
Bantam Hockey Tournament 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
members, I would like to tell you about an exciting event that’ll 
be happening in my constituency this weekend. Participants, 
along with their coaches, support staff, and families, will be 
coming from BC (British Columbia), Alberta, Saskatchewan, 
Manitoba, and the territories to our great city, Melfort, to take 
part in this year’s Western Canadian Bantam Hockey 
Tournament. 
 
This event will involve approximately 200 volunteers working 
together to make it a success. I have every confidence that it 
will be a success because Saskatchewan people are known for 
their ability to do just that. 
 
Events such as these provide a wonderful avenue for the team 
members to compete and improve their skills. The participants 
and supporters also have the opportunity to meet and enjoy the 
company of fellow Western Canadians. 
 
I would ask the Assembly to join with me in congratulating 
Melfort on being awarded this opportunity to host the Western 
Canadian Bantam Hockey Tournament this weekend and wish 
everyone involved every success for this event. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tourism Information Kiosk System 
 
Mr. Harper: — More good news, Mr. Speaker. Global Kiosk 
Systems established itself in the fall 1994 to develop and 
produce an interactive tourism information kiosk system at the 
request of local businesses. The kiosk was designed to provide 
tourist information on provincial events and attractions, allow 
credit card transactions on on-line purchases, play video 
promotions and advertisements, provide direct telephone access 
for ticket purchases, reservations and additional information. 
 
Since then, Mr. Speaker, Global Kiosk Systems has developed 
an interactive ordering network for the local McDonald’s 
Restaurants, menu kiosks for some Saskatchewan liquor board 
store outlets, in addition to a number of different interactive 
kiosk products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government laid out an economic road map 
when it came to office. One based on innovation, technology, 
and the entrepreneurial spirit. I would like to tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that Global Kiosk Systems is living proof that that 
strategy is working. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

North East Terminal 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, farmers 
are innovative and independent people. They would prefer not 
to be reliant on government to supplement their farming 
operation. 
 
Nearly a decade ago a group of farmers from the Wadena area 
invested their money in the North East Terminal in the hope of 
gaining more control over marketing of their grains. This 
successful privately owned agri-business has expanded to the 
adjoining communities of Kelvington and Rose Valley. 
 
NET was an innovative idea and continues to show progress 
with strong profits and new ideas. For the year ending July 31, 
2000 this agri-business realized $480,000 in net profits. It was 
the first grain company to distribute a return of capital to its 
shareholders. NET facilities handled over 180,000 tonne of 
grain during the 1999-2000 crop year and did approximately $9 
million in crop inputs with each segment showing a profit. 
 
Over the past year they focused on improving system processes 
and control and are proud to say that they shipped 78,000 
tonnes of oats last year without a single car diverted because of 
quality. Over 16,000 tonnes of malt barley was shipped without 
a car rejection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this company is working for its shareholders and 
customers very effectively and providing superior service. 
 
It gives me great pleasure on behalf of the constituents of 
Kelvington-Wadena to congratulate the members and the board 
of this agri-business on the success of its operation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tartan Day 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Scotland’s 
national poet, Robbie Burns once wrote, and I quote: 
 

My love and Native land farewell, 
For I maun cross the main, my dear — for I maun cross the 
main. 

 
And in 1992 in this legislature we passed a private member’s 
Bill that provided a day of official appreciation for the clans of 
Scotland — the descendants of those who left their native land 
and came to Canada. 
 
Many members in this Assembly voted for that Bill, you and I 
included, Mr. Speaker, because the contribution of the Scots to 
our national and our provincial life is substantial and 
exceptional. 
 
Our first prime minister was MacDonald; our first premier was 
Scott. In the political realm this legislature has been and still is 
well represented by the sons and daughters of Scotland. We 
have had any many of M-c and M-a-c Donalds, McInnises, 
McIntryes and so on. 
 



April 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

 

And in this day and age, Mr. Speaker, we are now graced by 
MacKinnons and McCalls and sons of an Angus — Addley that 
is — and on this day only, a McBoyd, the sponsor of the Tartan 
Day Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the percentage of our citizens with Scottish 
ancestry may be small, but over the brief life in our nation and 
our province, their influence for the good has been anything but 
small. 
 
So in the words again of Robbie Burns on this day and all days: 
 

May we be blessed with health and peace and sweet 
content. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

World Ice & Snow Sailing Association 
World Championship 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to talk today 
about a world championship sporting event that took place in 
the Arm River constituency this past March. The World Ice & 
Snow Sailing Association held this event on Blackstrap Lake 
and included 53 competitors from 10 different countries. 
 
The event kicked off on March 6 with the opening ceremonies 
during which I was honoured to address the competitors and all 
others who attended. Organizer Barney Kenney said that the 
week went very well, with warm temperatures and good winds 
adding a special edge to the competitions. 
 
The high speeds these athletes reached, the brightly coloured 
sails, was quite a remarkable sight. 
 
I am pleased to see that Saskatchewan is drawing events like 
this at the world championship level. I believe that 
Saskatchewan can continue to attract local and international 
sporting events in the future. We have the places and the people 
to host these events. 
 
Mr. Kenney wanted me to mention all the good people who 
staff Cedar Lodge which hosted the competitors and their 
families. He went on to say the Cedar Lodge staff went above 
and beyond the call of duty, and further that the meals were so 
good that no one wanted to go home. 
 
All in all both competitors and spectators alike enjoyed the 
successful event. And it’s hoped that we can host this event 
again in the near future. 
 
Hats off to the numerous volunteer organizers who helped make 
the event a success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Job Creation Statistics 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
today is for the Premier. Yesterday we learned that the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) has the worst record for population 

loss in the country and today, Mr. Speaker, we see why. 
 
It’s because the NDP also has the worst job creation record in 
the country. There are now over 11,000 fewer jobs in 
Saskatchewan than there were a year ago. That’s the NDP 
record and it’s a disaster — 8,400 people left the province last 
year; 11,000 jobs lost in the last year. That is the net result of 
NDP economic policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this happening? Why is the NDP driving 
jobs and people out of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Well there he goes again, the sultan of gloom, helping 
to build our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that member to keep in mind that last 
March was a record month for employment with over 500,000 
people working in this province, Mr. Speaker. March of 2001 
recorded the second-highest level ever recorded in the month of 
March for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were off from last year, it’s . . . compared with 
last month. 
 
But I want to say to that member that he knows full well there 
has been year, over year, over year of economic growth in this 
province beginning in 1992 right through to the year 2001. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is as a result of tax initiatives. It’s as a result 
of confidence in this economy. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a result of the confidence the business community has in our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, this government is rowing a 
boat with a big leak in it and they don’t even know they’re 
sinking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this was happening elsewhere, perhaps the NDP 
would have an excuse. But it’s not. The NDP has by far the 
worst job creation record in the entire country — by far, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Meanwhile other provinces are creating new jobs. Manitoba 
created over 5,000 jobs in the last year. Alberta created nearly 
28,000 jobs in the last year. And what did the NDP do in 
Saskatchewan? They drove 11,000 jobs out of the province and 
8,400 people left Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP so useless when it comes to 
creating jobs? Why is it that today they have the worst job 
creation record in the entire country? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday when the 
member of the . . . Leader of the Opposition was asking me 
questions, I was actually visiting with the North Saskatoon 
Business Association and the Saskatoon Chamber of 
Commerce. 



428 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2001 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I see in the paper here, not long ago, a little 
headline which says that the coalition mood is upbeat. Well I 
want to report to the House this morning that the mood among 
the north Saskatoon business community is upbeat. The mood 
among the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce is upbeat. The 
only place that we don’t have an upbeat attitude is right here in 
this House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now it’s explained to me this morning why the mood over there 
isn’t upbeat. Because yesterday, yesterday the Leader of the 
Opposition exposed his party’s plan for the economy of 
Saskatchewan. Here it is, Mr. Speaker, right from The 
Leader-Post. Now listen up: 
 

If the Saskatchewan Party wins the next election, 
Hermanson said the population outflow would be stemmed 
in a year or two and the province would then grow, if the 
weather and the national economy co-operated. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Leader of the 
Opposition will start again. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I would say to the Premier 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would say to the Premier that the country has enjoyed good 
economic times. The rest of Canada is growing. Saskatchewan 
has had reasonably good weather and a good economy . . . 
should have had a good economy, but it hasn’t under your 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the failure of the economy under your leadership 
also affects vital services like health and education. These 
important services will be unsustainable in the long run without 
a growing tax base. The NDP is not growing our tax base. The 
NDP is shrinking our tax base. Last year it was shrunk by losing 
11,000 jobs in the province and 8,400 people leaving the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What we are seeing is a government that’s growing, while the 
province is shrinking. That, Mr. Speaker, is a recipe for disaster, 
and the Premier doesn’t even know it. 
 
(10:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan needs more jobs and more people. 
Why is the NDP driving people and jobs out of the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as the Leader of the 
Opposition should well know, who claims to be sensitive to 
issues in rural Saskatchewan, he should well know that in the 
last short period of time, we have lost in the agricultural sector 

over 13,000 jobs — in the agriculture sector. 
 
And this government is working hard — hard — to revitalize 
rural Saskatchewan and strengthen our agricultural sector. 
Outside of agriculture, Mr. Speaker, this province has 2,500 
more people working this March than last March. 
 
Now I want to tell the Leader of the Opposition the policies of 
this government, the economic planning of this government and 
the budget of this government, are not fair-weather, are not 
fair-weather plans. Mr. Speaker, we’re not balancing . . . we’re 
not going to cancel a balanced budget due to rain. I’ll tell you 
that, Mr. Speaker. And we’re not going to pin our hopes on 
letting the sunshine in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve laid before this House a solid budget plan, a solid 
economic plan, and across the province, the mood is upbeat 
about this plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the other day the Premier of 
Saskatchewan stood in this House and said that his government 
sets goals and then meets those goals. That sounds good, Mr. 
Speaker, except it is not true. 
 
Last election, the NDP set a goal of 30,000 new jobs. Now the 
Finance minister admits that there’s no way they’re going to 
meet that goal. Last week’s budget set a goal of 3,800 new jobs 
this year. Mr. Speaker, it’s now clear that that goal will not be 
met. 
 
The tragic fact is the NDP is not creating jobs. The NDP is 
losing jobs right here in Saskatchewan. They’re killing jobs, 
Mr. Speaker. They are driving people and jobs out of this 
province — 11,000 jobs lost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP breaking its word? Why is the 
NDP killing so many jobs in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, a Leader of the Opposition 
so out of touch with what’s going on in this province. Mr. 
Speaker, for goodness sakes the Royal Bank of Canada 
headquartered in Toronto knows more about what’s going in 
Saskatchewan than the Leader of the Opposition. They say — 
they’re bullish on the Saskatchewan economy — they’re 
predicting 3 per cent growth in the Saskatchewan economy this 
year. 
 
The chief economist, Mr. Speaker, of Scotiabank, Mary Webb, 
what did she say? This is a quote, Premier Lorne Calvert’s 
budget is “prudent” she says. 

 
Derek Burleton, a senior economist with the TD (Toronto 
Dominion) Bank says: 
 

Definitely a good grade on this one . . . 
 
And closer to home, Mr. Speaker, closer to home. Here is the 
editorial opinion from the Saskatchewan . . . Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix, quote: 



April 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

 

Sooner or later the Saskatchewan Party has to figure out 
that its one-trick pony act, tax cuts as a solution to 
everything that ails the province, is going to wear thin. 
 

They talk about jobs, Mr. Speaker, they talk about jobs. Listen 
to this . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
unfortunate but when governments have been around too long 
they become blind to reality, they become blind to the facts, 
and, Mr. Speaker, this government is the best example I’ve seen 
in a long time of a government that doesn’t know what’s going 
on right around it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we learned today from 
Statistics Canada that Saskatchewan has the worst population 
loss in a decade. A huge loss. Mr. Speaker, the NDP got out the 
old blame thrower. They blamed the Saskatchewan Party. How 
pathetic, Mr. Speaker. After 10 years in office, they will not 
take responsibility for their own record. 
 
Today we have the worst population loss in the country. Today 
we have the worst loss of jobs in the country. That’s the NDP 
record today. They have no one to blame, Mr. Speaker, no one 
at all except themselves and they don’t realize it. You know 
what the problem is, this government better stop blaming others 
and start fixing the problem that they created. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Ten years in government, Mr. Speaker, 
ten years of growth. Ten years in government, ten years in 
government, eight balanced budgets . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That group couldn’t do it the whole time 
they were in government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 10 years in government, we’re described as the 
star of the ’90s, the largest growth in per capita GDP (gross 
domestic product) anywhere in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s 10 years in government. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, is a foundation on which we are building for the 
future. 
 
And we are not going to succumb to the doom and gloom of 
that small group of men and women that sit in opposition in this 
House. We are with the people of this province who look 
forward with optimism to the future of the great province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Municipalities 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is again for the minister of Municipal Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today is the day. Today is the day the minister has 
to decide whether to vote for the NDP’s plan to grow the size of 
government instead of increasing municipal revenue-sharing 
grants. Mr. Speaker, the NDP and Liberals want to grow the 
size of government, and the Sask Party wants to hold the line on 
property taxes and grow Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, we believe that 10,000 
capable government employees we have today can get the job 
done for the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
municipalities across this province want to know, will the 
minister vote today . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Order. I think it’s 
important that we hear the question. Order. Order. Order. 
Member will continue. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 
important they hear the question too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, municipalities across this province want to know: 
will the minister vote today to grow the size of government, 
ignore municipalities, and drive property taxes up yet again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I just 
can’t understand why the members opposite continue to attack 
civil servants that will be working to create great communities, 
to help young people, to work in the health care sectors, to work 
on highways, to create economic activities in all our small 
communities throughout the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — They continue to attack those people, 
those workers that are going to protect folks from forest fires, 
that are going to work in the education and health care fields. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand why they continue to attack 
even when editorialists and people around the province 
recognize their very shallow, non-existent plans for what they 
would do to help grow Saskatchewan. They are attacking the 
small workers, the small communities throughout this province. 
They’re not doing anything for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would once again respectfully 
request the people in the galleries not to participate in the 
debates in any manner whatsoever. I know people would 
appreciate your applause but our custom is to refrain from 
doing that. Thank you very much in advance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister, a Liberal, has a short memory. His plan in 1999 



430 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2001 

 

election was less government workers, not more, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the minister sent out his letter to 
municipalities yesterday, our support for our plan actually 
increased. We’re receiving more letters of support than we were 
before. Mr. Speaker, here’s one from the town of Wawota, and I 
quote: 
 

We were in total support of the Sask Party’s proposal that 
the provincial government cancel its plans to expand the 
civil service and instead (and instead, Mr. Speaker) use the 
money saved to hold the line on property taxes. 

 
Here’s another, Mr. Speaker, from the RM of Cupar: 
 

When local governments have been forced to reorganize 
and priorize service delivery, we find it difficult to accept 
there are no other alternatives for the province than to hire 
additional employees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister take off his blinders and support 
the Saskatchewan Party’s plan to increase revenue-sharing 
grants and hold the line on property taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
question from the former Tory, the former Liberal, now the 
Sask Party and perhaps supporter of the Alliance, coming at me 
in that respect, I just want to respond. I continue to be 
concerned that the opposition does not provide all the 
information to municipalities when they ask them to support 
their motion to amend the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I too have letters. I have copies of letters that were sent to the 
member opposite. 
 

We will not comment on the needs of rural municipalities, 
nor will we presume to speak to staffing levels in the 
provincial public service since we, in turn, would find it 
unacceptable for the provincial government to instruct 
urban governments on staffing levels in municipal 
operations. 

 
Well people . . . I have more. I have more. 
 

We recommend that the Assembly be aware of the fact that 
many municipalities were unaware of the wording for the 
proposed amendment and they want the opportunity to 
discuss their support of this amendment as it is presented. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would ask the minister to table his three letters because we 
tabled our 120. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s scare tactics aren’t 
working. 
 
Since the minister sent out his letter saying he couldn’t possibly 

fix the roads or he couldn’t possibly put out forest fires without 
570 new government employees, the Sask Party has received 
even more letters in support of our position. Here’s one from 
the town of Lashburn, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Municipalities have maintained services while keeping our 
costs low. The province should do the same. It is not 
possible for the government to maintain services without 
expanding the size of service. 
 

Here’s another one from the RM of Flett’s Springs: 
 

The council supports the motion urging the province to 
cancel its plans to expand the civil service and instead use 
the money to provide . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Would the member put the question please. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister demonstrate 
he’s listening? Will he vote to increase municipal 
revenue-sharing grants by $30 million today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be happy to 
table these letters for the members opposite, but I want to read 
another one first of all, from the town of Raymore. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. We should also be 
able to hear the response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to quote 
from this letter before I table these three: 
 

We do not support . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — We have more, Mr. Speaker. Do they want 
more? 
 

We do not support the portion of your motion to eliminate 
570 positions in communities across Saskatchewan. 
 

I’ll table these, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to read you a news release from people that are 
hard-working people in this province: 
 

About 570 full-time equivalent positions were added to the 
public service although the precise number of actual new 
jobs, the spinoffs from these people working in our small 
communities, paying taxes, buying goods and services . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, those people do not want this province, our 
communities, which I respect very much, they do not want them 
to prosper. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
more than 120 letters from municipalities across this province 
— every one of them support an increase in municipal 



April 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

 

revenue-sharing grants to hold the line on property taxes. The 
vast majority state full support for the Saskatchewan Party 
amendment, and a few municipalities are proposing the money 
for revenue sharing be taken from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party believes the 10,000 
capable government employees we now have, have the ability 
to do the job. We think it’s more responsible to work with the 
resources we already have than to grow government. 
 
(10:45) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP doesn’t like our plan, will the 
minister tell municipalities what his plan is for increasing 
municipal revenue-sharing grants this year? Or is the NDP 
simply going to ignore municipalities and drive up property 
taxes once again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I created a stir when I said I 
would table letters. The letter I’m quoting from here, Mr. 
Speaker, is from the president of SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association). He represents the small towns and 
communities. 
 
And now, what I would ask the member opposite to do is table, 
table the letter and the information that they sent to the mayors 
and municipalities. I’d like to see that tabled and see if they 
were upfront with the folks in the information they presented to 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, highways and social services, our biggest budget 
ever for highways to fix our highways, our education, the 
reduction in business taxes — all these are good news for 
people in those communities and municipalities that will be 
working, will be contributing to the success and growth of those 
communities and this great province of ours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board 
 
Mr. Weekes: — My question is for the Minister of Labour, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) is still saying today 
that spending $7,000 on a farewell party for the former 
chairman is a good idea. CEO (chief executive officer), Peter 
Federko, says it’s appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, businesses who fund the WCB and many injured 
workers have been treated with contempt by the WCB in the 
past. Now the minister knows what it feels like because the 
WCB is treating him in the same way. They are refusing to be 
accountable to the businesses who fund them. They are refusing 
to be accountable to the workers. And they are refusing to be 
accountable to the minister who appoints their board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the minister: who is in charge of the WCB 
and who is accountable to the public for their actions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
stand in this legislature today and to say that the issue of Mr. 
Stan Cameron’s noon hour luncheon that would have caused the 
closure of Workers’ Compensation Board and caused the 
cessation of service to injured workers, that farewell luncheon 
will not happen. 
 
I’m saying unequivocally that the board and the minister are in 
total agreement on that issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the public wants some answers. 
The WCB chairman leaves and is paid a $150,000 severance 
package. The WCB plans a $7,000 retirement party for him, 
which is now cancelled because they say the timing isn’t right. 
Four top management officials are fired without cause and the 
WCB refuses to release how much severance they receive. 
 
Since at least February the minister has had in his possession 
the Dorsey report which examines the operations and policies of 
the WCB but hasn’t made it public. It’s absolutely appalling 
that the WCB and the minister are treating the stakeholders of 
the Workers’ Compensation Board in this manner. They want to 
know, they deserve to know what is going on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the WCB won’t explain their actions, then the 
minister should. To the minister: will he explain to the 
stakeholders and the public the less than accountable actions of 
the WCB? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m astounded at two things. 
One the new-found concern that members opposite have for 
fiscal responsibility. That I find astounding. But coming from 
the member that says unions are job killers, I find any question 
about labour and working people to be repulsive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Stan Cameron served as chairman of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board for nearly eight years. Stan Cameron 
moved the board forward in a great many ways and deserves 
our respect, deserves a suitable retirement function, and it is my 
hope that he will get it. What I have shared is that the noon hour 
shutdown of compensation boards stopping service to injured 
workers was inappropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this issue I think is closed at this point. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 212 — The Balanced Budget Act, 2001 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would move first reading of Bill No. 212, The Balanced Budget 
Act, 200l. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 



432 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2001 

 

read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Water Corporation 
Amendment Act, 200l 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 12, The Water Corporation Amendment Act, 2001 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Class Actions Act/ 
Loi sur les recours collectifs 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 13, 
the Class Actions Act be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of a very 
accountable and forward government, Mr. Speaker, we are 
pleased to table the answers to written questions no. 11 through 
52 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 11 through to 52 are hereby tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday when members opposite waved the white flag and we 
curtailed the debate, I was talking about a management style, a 
management style which I referred to as the inverted Coke 
bottle syndrome which I am very familiar with. And that’s the 
type of style that this government is using. 
 
And when I say I’m very familiar with this style of 
management, Mr. Speaker, in my past career we operated 
within that style of an inverted Coke bottle. But the reason is, 
and there’s one fundamental difference, is in the military you 
operate with a large group of people at the higher end of the 
spectrum, a lot of middle management, but in time of crisis you 
have to immediately be able to expand to upwards of a million 
people in time of crisis. 
 
So now what I look at, this government is operating with a large 
group of people at the top as in the inverted Coke bottle; a large 
in the middle; very, very small number of workers . . . room to 

expand but nobody to expand with. We could not expand to a 
million people in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An example of this is what I used yesterday, right from the 
NDP’s own press release: 54 new positions in Social Services 
— 9 for management supervisory, 25 administrative, but only 
20 workers. Now that fits right into this plan very, very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my concern . . . my concern, when we talk about 
the 570 civil servants that we’re looking at hiring or the NDP is 
looking at hiring, I wonder where they actually fit into this 
inverted Coke bottle. I know members opposite get up and say 
that we are the ones that want to cut these positions. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, how can we cut them, we’re not 
government. Also they don’t exist, so how can we be purporting 
to cut them. But, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the minister . . . 
the Minister of Municipal Affairs’ release, he says 83 forest fire 
jobs . . . forest fighting jobs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have to ask where these fit into the 
structure. Do they know something that we don’t know? Are 
there more forest fires going to come this year than last? Where 
in fact do they fit into the structure? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have a little concern with this, other than the 
$50 million. We look at what’s given by members opposite as 
they’re hiring. Well the total that I see on this is 304 positions, 
Mr. Speaker. Doesn’t take a rocket scientist to figure out that 
leaves 266 that are not identified. We know where one is, so 
that basically means 265 more hacks and flacks to be hired. 
And those are the words of the Liberal members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to just touch base . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would just ask the 
Assembly just to settle down a little bit. Just lower the level a 
little bit, please. I would like to hear the words of the member 
who’s got the floor. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as others have mentioned, I would like to applaud the budget 
where it deserves some applause and that’s in highways, the 
money going into highways. Everybody in rural Saskatchewan 
and in the urban centres knows that we need money in 
highways and roads. 
 
My concern, Mr. Speaker, is where this money will go. As I just 
explained this inverted Coke bottle style of management, how 
much is actually going to get to the roads. And that’s a concern. 
We have a real concern and I have very much of an interest as 
to where the rubber meets the road, that’s where we want the 
money to go. 
 
Interesting, Mr. Speaker, and I’m going to quote from the 
Regina Leader-Post, on Saturday, March 31: 
 

The increased funding in the highways sector is great. But 
if we don’t put increased funding into our rural road 
network, the system is not going to work. 
 
With the centralization of railroads, with the centralization 
of schools, hospitals, we need a good road system. 



April 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 433 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do hope that we get that money to the roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn my comments now to health for a 
couple of minutes. It’s interesting for me to see that we’re 
throwing a lot more money into health which, if it hits the front 
line workers, I really applaud that. But again, I have a fear it’s 
going to be bottled up in this bureaucracy. 
 
(11:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve raised it in the House in question period and 
in petitions, but I have very much of a concern for people in the 
Assiniboia area with the Pioneer Lodge. It’s downsizing; beds 
have closed. 
 
We have a government that refuses to listen to the people of the 
province. We had some 275 people out, mostly seniors, to listen 
to the concerns. I listened to the concerns and nothing is being 
done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of my concerns is, now we’ve put more 
money into the health system, I’m wondering if it’s going to 
help places such as Assiniboia. And, Mr. Speaker, I would 
gather that it is not. And the reason is when we were at the 
meeting in Assiniboia, one concerned citizen stood up and said 
to the CEO (chief executive officer), if we raise the money to 
put the renovations into the Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia, would 
you keep it open? And the answer was no. 
 
So even the money that’s going into Health now I’m not so 
certain is going to help a lot of us people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about EMS an awful lot, but I just 
want to read a letter that was sent to the Minister of Health. And 
there’s just a part of it here I would like to read, and it concerns 
EMS system. A lot of our rural people, and probably urban 
people too, are volunteers as first responders. And this lady has 
wrote, and I quote: 
 

There must be thousands of people in Saskatchewan who 
volunteer their time for training and calls to be First 
Responders. They probably do it for their friends and 
neighbors instead of the government but they are aiding our 
health care system. Never once have I heard a word of 
praise from the government for their dedication. ‘Shame on 
you.’ 
 
Please consider very carefully, talk to ambulance service 
and health districts and think about people who need the 
service before you make changes. Remember someday it 
may be you laying in a ditch, a meeting room or anywhere 
in Saskatchewan waiting for an ambulance. Make sure you 
can live with any changes that are made. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a sentiment that is felt throughout rural 
Saskatchewan with reference to the ambulance system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also now like to comment for the next couple 
of minutes on rural revitalization. It’s very, very interesting to 
me. A big plan for rural revitalization — $800,000 and an office 
in Regina. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that fits in with the Premier’s plan. And the 

reason I say that is the Premier has campaigned, had 
campaigned on his reconnection with rural Saskatchewan by 
getting a bus, loading the cabinet up, and going into rural 
Saskatchewan to get in touch with the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from Hansard on March 29 
where the Premier says: 
 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Wood River has (some 
concerns) some question about my bus. Well I’ll tell you 
this, Mr. Speaker, my bus started rolling — my bus started 
rolling — in Elphinstone, and then it rolled through 
Riversdale . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is the first time I’ve ever heard that 
Elphinstone and Riversdale are considered rural areas . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I could go on an awful lot more with 
the rural revitalization and issues that are very much of a 
concern to rural Saskatchewan, but I wish to save some time so 
I’m going to close my remarks out with a statement from The 
StarPhoenix of March 31, and it says: 
 

Rather than connecting to the future, Cline’s budget 
succeeded in compounding the confusion. Given the 
resources at his disposal it looks as if Cline opted to create 
a war chest for an election the NDP will have to fight in the 
near future, rather than thinking about what’s best for the 
province’s future. 
 

Mr. Speaker, to me it’s very obvious that this government has 
set a very, very low standard for itself and still fails to achieve 
it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Bakken: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker, 
with leave to introduce guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to have the mayor of Weyburn with us in the 
gallery, in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Don Schlosser. He’s a 
long-time businessman in Weyburn and a great promoter of 
Weyburn. And he’s very concerned about property taxes in his 
city as are many other mayors and reeves in this province. 
 
And so I’d like the rest of the members of the legislature to help 
me welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — With leave to recognize guests, Mr. 



434 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2001 

 

Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I appreciate 
the leave. I want to also join with the member from Weyburn in 
welcoming Mayor Schlosser to the Assembly this afternoon . . . 
or this morning. I’ve had the opportunity over the years to meet 
with His Worship, both as the Minister of Municipal Affairs 
and now Agriculture, because the community of Weyburn has 
been very aggressive and forward looking in terms of what we 
can do in that part of Saskatchewan to enhance and grow the 
agricultural industry. 
 
So I want to extend my welcome to the Assembly today and 
continued good work as we grow the agricultural industry in 
your part of the province, sir. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thanks again, Mr. Speaker, and I join with 
the hon. member in recognizing and welcoming the guests in 
the gallery today. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, before I get into my remarks related 
specifically to the budget debate, let me take just a moment to 
extend my personal congratulations to you, sir, upon assuming 
the important office of Speaker of the House. 
 
You know the tremendous respect that I hold for the office. And 
let me simply say that I am extremely confident that 
recognizing your proud and lengthy contribution to our system 
of parliamentary democracy and commitment to principle, that 
you will serve us well not only in the proceedings of the House 
here, but as representative of the full Legislative Assembly in a 
whole range of duties. And I congratulate you on achieving this 
important position, voted democratically by a majority vote of 
the members of the House. 
 
I’d also like to extend my congratulations to the Deputy 
Speaker and the Deputy Chair of Committees. And I would 
simply say I stand confident that we will be served well by the 
presiding officers of the House. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I will want to use my brief amount of time 
to spend most of my remarks focused on the budget and its 
focus on the use of resources of taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
related to Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. 
 
But before I do that, I just simply cannot ignore the remarks of 
the hon. member for Wood River who just preceded me. And I 

must admit that I take great issue with two of the points, and I 
think they are key points in this budget as I listen to his debate. 
 
We share, Mr. Speaker, a significantly different views on what 
this budget does relative to both income tax as well as the 
employment of people in the public service of Saskatchewan. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, it was with a bit of alarm that I 
listened to the hon. member for Wood River. And recognizing 
that in this budget we are continuing an agenda, Mr. Speaker, 
which involves the largest tax reduction in the history of 
Saskatchewan. That the beginning of this year, we saw the 
elimination of the flat tax, the deficit surtax, and the 
high-income surtax. And then I listen to the hon. member for 
Wood River say he was disappointed that income tax was going 
down. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think he shares the view of the 
people of Saskatchewan. He certainly does not share the view 
of the Government of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan are of the view in our tax agenda we’re heading 
in the right direction. And I and the members of the government 
stand firmly with the people of Saskatchewan and opposed to 
the position of the member for Wood River. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I heard as well the hon. 
member say that the implications of this budget which involve 
the increase of 571 positions of public service employees is 
something to which he is strongly opposed. And in fact we will 
vote later this morning on an amendment, Mr. Speaker, an 
amendment moved by the member of the opposition. So it’s not 
only the hon. member for Wood River opposing that 
implication to this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just put on the record what those positions 
are. Because the hon. members opposite would like to paint that 
as these being some kind of nameless, faceless administrative 
kinds of positions, Mr. Speaker. And let me outline what these 
speakers . . . what these position are, Mr. Speaker, that is in this 
budget. And I’ll invite the hon. members to just pay careful 
attention and then to comment which specifically of these they 
do not approve of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this budget we have 88 positions 
to account for workload pressures in forest firefighting. We 
have 86 positions to increase highways construction and repair. 
We have 71 positions to account for workload pressures in 
corrections for secure prisoner transport. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s 60 positions to respond to the Child 
Advocate’s report on Social Services. I hear the hon. member, 
the hon. critic for Social Services. I ask, does she not support 
the addition of 60 workers as recommended by the Children’s 
Advocate? Stand in your place and say you’re opposed to that, 
if you are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, there are 26 positions to 
recognize the IT (information technology) services and labour 
market research services that were previously outsourced in 



April 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

 

Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training that we’re 
bringing into permanent employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 15 positions to recognize the Aboriginal 
employment initiatives in the Public Service Commission. Are 
you opposed to that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, 16 positions to increase tax auditors and tax 
collectors to make sure that we’re doing a proper job of 
collecting the taxes that are owed. Seventeen positions for new 
adoptive initiatives in agriculture to help farmers take advantage 
of opportunities and convert marginal land to forage. Seventeen 
positions for Energy and Mines to expand oil, gas, and mining 
industry and to address environmental concerns. Are you 
opposed to those? 
 
Eighteen positions for Education to enhance learning 
opportunities. Fifteen positions for Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management and Health for quality of water 
compliance. Ten positions for an immigration initiative to 
encourage qualified immigrants to locate in Saskatchewan. Ten 
and a half positions, Mr. Speaker, in Labour to address the 
occupational health and safety concerns and labour relations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 30 positions to automate and improve service in 
the corporations branch, prosecutions service, and the public 
trustee. Eight positions for the Royal Saskatchewan Museum 
for development of the life services gallery. Seventeen positions 
for the new Culture, Youth and Recreation department. Eight 
positions for the new Rural Revitalization department. And 58 
other positions to new programs and program expansions. 
 
Which of those, Mr. Speaker, do the hon. members stand 
opposed to? We are proud of the work of the public service 
employees of Saskatchewan, on this side. And we are confident 
that this will increase the quality of service to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and the public service employees will do that 
well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — So, Mr. Speaker, there they are. There they 
are. Those are the positions that are in this budget. A budget, 
Mr. Speaker, which I am proudly standing in my place to say I 
support because it gives Saskatchewan . . . the people, 
Saskatchewan people the tools to connect, participate, to 
communicate, and to compete. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at what’s in this budget, we find 
ourselves having to admit, Mr. Speaker, that it captures the true 
Saskatchewan spirit, which is all about opportunity. And this is 
a budget, Mr. Speaker, which invests in education and 
technology, the foundation of our plan to connect Saskatchewan 
to the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve said it many times, in the world of 
post-secondary education we are in the future business. It is our 
job to use the resources provided by the people of 
Saskatchewan to connect the people to their future in our 
province. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I would just like to 
remind the hon. members that the Minister of Post-Secondary 

Education has the floor. Most hon. members have had a chance 
to participate in the budget debate. And I’d ask that we allow 
the Minister of Post-Secondary Education to be heard by us all, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, it is no surprise to me that the hon. 
members opposite are a tad troubled by what they’re hearing 
when they get a statement of the fact, Mr. Speaker. But we 
won’t go there. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, post-secondary education is a priority for 
this government. And this is a good news budget for the people 
of Saskatchewan. And included in that, the post-secondary 
sector which receives an increase, Mr. Speaker, of $17.5 million 
overall, included in that a 3.5 per cent increase, $9.8 million for 
our public institutions. 
 
In addition to the operating grants that go to our institutions, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s investment in capital. And I would point 
out to the House, Mr. Speaker, that the capital investment in the 
last three years has been $108 million invested in capital in the 
province of Saskatchewan, the large, large bulk of that to our 
universities. And included in that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is some 
accelerated payments in the capital just at the tail end of the last 
fiscal year. 
 
(11:15) 
 
This as well, Mr. Speaker, a budget which supports income . . . 
learners who need income support. It will be a surprise to some, 
I suspect, Mr. Speaker, to note that when you combined the 
commitments in this budget to student loans, to Saskatchewan 
bursaries, to the provincial training allowance and skills 
training, that there is $74 million, Mr. Speaker, in this budget in 
income support to learners. 
 
There is also in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, a new program, a 
half a million dollars, to be matched by our post-secondary 
institutions, for a merit-based scholarship to ensure that the best 
and the brightest of Saskatchewan’s high school graduates will 
make their studies here in our province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I point out to the hon. members, and I know it’s 
strongly supported by the hon. members opposite, because if I 
recall the resolutions of their . . . of the SP’s (Saskatchewan 
Party) last annual convention, they took a strong position in 
support of the post-secondary graduate tax credit. And I’m glad 
to see that they share the pride that we have here, being the first 
in Canada to take that initiative. Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue 
that. 
 
And I just simply report that in February we mailed out some 
10,000 graduate tax certificates to graduates in Saskatchewan, 
which, Mr. Speaker, will provide to them a $350 reduction in 
their Saskatchewan income tax, payable when they establish 
themselves here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I will also advise the House, Mr. Speaker, that we have . . . in 
addition to the fact that we have the best student loan program 
in all of Canada right now, we’re working to make that better. 
And I anticipate, in the not too distant future, Mr. Speaker, to be 
able to make some announcements regarding the . . . improving 



436 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2001 

 

the best program in the area of interest relief and debt reduction. 
 
It’s also maybe of interest to note, Mr. Speaker, that of some 
$62 million lent in the last year to Saskatchewan students, loans 
that are here in Saskatchewan, $29 million of that was forgiven. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that is a strong statement of the 
support for low-income students here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I said earlier that we’re in the future 
business and we are. And part of that is technology, and that 
was certainly emphasized in the budget. And it is also a part of 
the important investment in this budget in post-secondary. 
 
We will be announcing in a more formal way, later on in the 
session, Mr. Speaker, “campus Saskatchewan”, the virtual 
campus for our province. There is in this budget, an additional 
investment of . . . an additional $2.5 million, bringing the total 
investment to the use of technology for on-line education and 
related services. Mr. Speaker, a tripling over the budget of last 
year, and in fact, an increase by tenfold over two years ago. 
 
So clearly, Mr. Speaker, this is a department in the government 
that is investing in technology, specifically in the delivery of 
post-secondary training, bringing the campus to the student, Mr. 
Speaker. But when I say that, not only through our rural and 
northern regional colleges but in fact, I think increasingly, 
we’re going to find that on the campuses themselves, that we 
will have a mix of on-campus and on-line delivery. 
 
I followed very carefully, Mr. Speaker, I attended the national 
committee . . . the national council of ministers of education of 
Canada, just earlier, which is my pleasure and my honour to 
Chair, and we are looking very closely at the recent report of 
the National Advisory Committee on On-line Learning. And 
Saskatchewan will be positioning ourselves to take advantage 
of investments not only in this province but other provinces and 
nationally in the interest of post-secondary students in the years 
ahead. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re also adding in this budget one and a 
half million dollars going to our universities and SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) to 
expand the training capacity for informational technology and 
professionals. Some 250 new computer science training 
opportunities coming on stream there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in rural and northern Saskatchewan remain 
committed to the regional colleges as an important vehicle to 
bring the campus to the student and the use of SCN 
(Saskatchewan Communications Network). And both of those, 
Mr. Speaker, the rural and northern regional colleges and SCN 
receive increases in the budget here to assist in that regard. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re targeting training in a number of ways 
to deal with the advancement of our economy. Let me simply 
say, because I know my time is short, that increased 
investments and forestry training — 250 training positions last 
year funded, Mr. Speaker, increased to 290 this year — most of 
those being northern and Aboriginal workers who are involved 
there. 25,000 training employment opportunities across the 
province in a whole host of ways; regional colleges playing a 
very important role as we use the JobStart, Future Skills, and 

other programs to connect workers to employment building 
their futures and the future of our province. 
 
Now when we look at the future, Mr. Speaker, in this province 
we cannot look at it with optimism without concentrating on the 
important role that our Aboriginal peoples play. As the nation 
will experience a decline in this decade, the availability of 
skilled employees in our labour market, Saskatchewan has one 
natural competitive advantage and it’s our Aboriginal peoples, 
Mr. Speaker. And we must support and enhance that. 
 
We have $7 million to our unique and uniquely successful 
Aboriginal institutions in this budget. Mr. Speaker, we’ll have 
more to say about this later in the session as well, but we’ll be 
seeing emphasis on northern nursing training expanded and 
introduced to meet Saskatchewan’s important needs in the year 
2002 and we’ll be announcing some positioning to get ready for 
that later in the session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, we have the expansion of Aboriginal 
training in the Apprenticeship Commission, Mr. Speaker, and 
summer jobs, Mr. Speaker. Doubling of the tax credit for 
students will mean that students making over $11,000 will pay 
absolutely no income tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All of those in the budget, Mr. Speaker. I would love to 
continue. This list is long, but I do want to respect the 
agreements that have been made between members of the 
House to enable speeches to be made today. And so having said 
that, Mr. Speaker, let me simply say that I stand proud of the 
record of this government, I stand proud of this budget. I stand 
proud of the plans of post-secondary sector, and I will be voting 
against the amendment and strongly in favour of the motion to 
adopt the budget of the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to be able to take part in the 
debate on the budget this year. 
 
There are many similarities I feel with last year’s budget, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I think we saw last year where the Minister of 
Finance tried to portray to the people of Saskatchewan that 
they’d actually lowered taxes, and in essence and in the final 
outcome, they’d actually raised taxes. 
 
What we see this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is really not much 
difference except this year they forgot to lower the taxes first 
before they decided to raise the taxes. And by that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, what I’m talking about is property taxes. And how are 
they going to raise those property taxes? They’re going to raise 
those property taxes by not increasing revenue sharing for the 
municipalities of this province. 
 
The municipalities of this province have been downloaded on 
— whether it’s cities, towns, villages, or RMs — have been 
downloaded on by that NDP government for 10 years now, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Ten years this has gone on. And what many 
municipalities are saying to us now is we took the pain, now it’s 
time to see the gain. 
 



April 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 437 

 

And did they see it in this budget? No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they did not see it. They saw no relief after 10 years of cuts to 
municipalities, absolutely no relief, and have no alternative but 
to raise property taxes or cut services. 
 
Now I find that funny, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because what is the 
government of the day doing at the same time? They’re asking 
local municipalities to be put in that spot — either raise 
property taxes or to cut services which would probably mean 
cutting employees. This government is saying they want to go 
out and hire 570 more employees. 
 
You know what that is, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It’s don’t do as I 
do, do as I say. Pay absolutely no attention to what we’re doing; 
this is what you’re going to have to do. This has gone on far too 
long, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to quote from some of the letters 
that we’ve received to the amendment we put into the budget. 
And I quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this letter comes from 
the office of the mayor, city of North Battleford. And I quote, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

Dear Mr. Bjornerud: 
 
To do with the amendment to the 2001 provincial budget, 
the city of North Battleford supports your amendment and 
is hopeful that the Government of Saskatchewan will 
accept your proposal. 
 
I wish to identify that municipal governments requested 
$20 million in additional funding, revenue-sharing grants 
this year, with an infusion of funds in the future years. 
 

They’re already talking next year they need more. That’s from 
North Battleford, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Sticking with the cities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, city of Estevan, 
Tim Perry, mayor: 
 

Dear Mr. Bjornerud (and I’m quoting again): 
 
The City of Estevan completely supports the amendment 
(completely supports the amendment) recommended by the 
Saskatchewan Party to the 2001 Provincial Budget calling 
on the Provincial Government to provide an additional $30 
million in municipal revenue sharing grants this year. 
 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Grants are vital and we support 
. . . (the) request for . . . (more money this year). 

 
That was the city of Estevan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
City of Yorkton. The Deputy Premier I think would be very 
interested in what they have to say: 
 

Dear Mr. Bjornerud (and I’m quoting, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker): 
 
I want to thank you on behalf of the taxpayers of the City 
of Yorkton for making an effort to seek new funds for our 
Municipalities. 
 

I would point out that we have been seeking $20 million in 
additional funds through SUMA but I am sure if you were 
able to obtain $30 million we would be most happy to put 
those funds to work in our province. 
 
I, like several of my fellow City Mayors, was very 
disappointed to learn that we were not even recognized in 
last week’s budget. (Not even recognized, the mayor is 
saying.) I believe it is the communities of this province 
which offer the “Quality of Life” which the Minister spoke 
. . . (of). I also believe the Ministers comment . . . that’s 
progress” does not fit when it comes to Cities, Towns and 
Villages. 
 
I say this because the Provincial Government is giving back 
some money, but then because of our lack of municipal 
funding, this forces the municipality to take those savings 
back at the local level. This is counter productive in my 
opinion. 

 
I’m still quoting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the mayor of 
Yorkton: 
 

We have seen our funding levels in Yorkton slide from a 
high in 1989 of $1.358 million to a low of $560 thousand in 
1999. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s about a third of it was in 1989. He 
goes on to say: 
 

I have enclosed a spreadsheet showing our funding from 
the province from 1984 to 2000. 

 
And I don’t have time to read through it all, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but these numbers show that the downloading — and 
the Deputy Premier will be very interested in this because it 
comes from the city of Yorkton — that that government, that 
minister, has been part of the downloading on the city of 
Yorkton since 1991 till the year 2001 today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to go on now and talk to . . . talk 
about other situations we have here. I’d like to maybe move 
over though and talk about towns in the province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And as the minister of Municipal Government talked 
today about his three letters, here’s what we have, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, from the towns, and I’ll start on that pile. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I quote the town of Luseland. I know the 
members opposite are just glued to hear what I have to say over 
here. They want to hear it. Listen to this, members: 
 

Dear Bob: (I’m quoting) 
 
The Council in the Town of Luseland are also disappointed 
in the lack of funding for Municipal Government in the 
2001 Budget as presented by the current administration. 
The increases in energy costs (and we hear this a lot in 
these letters) alone constitute a need for increased Revenue 
Sharing. We, as a Council are trying to survive . . . 
 

And I repeat that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because this is 
important: 
 



438 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2001 

 

We, as a Council are trying to survive in a rural setting by 
encouraging families to stay and use the public facilities in 
this community. 
 
We are doing our part and have taken the brunt of the 
balancing of the provincial budget. It is time the Provincial 
Government shared some of the extra revenues they have 
received with small Urban Municipalities. 
 

The letters continue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The town of 
Balcarres, minister of Municipal Government would be 
interested in that. 
 
Town of Eston, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’ll quote: 
 

The Town of Eston supports your request for additional 
funding to be provided in revenue sharing grants. 
 
The amounts we received in 2000 was $43,277 or about 3.8 
per cent of our revenues. 
 

In 1989, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they received over $120,000 — 
11.5 per cent of their revenue. They’ve been cut down to about 
a third. 
 

We made up for the reduction in grant by a combination of 
delaying some projects and increasing the local mill rate. 
 
In 2001 we are faced with a major increase in natural gas 
costs, particularly in our arena and swimming pool. These 
costs will have to be shared by increased user fees, with a 
potential loss in participation, and an increased mill rate. 

 
And as I was saying before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s exactly 
what we’re talking about — increased taxes. 
 
(11:30) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on and on and on here. All 
these letters are from the towns, and there’s many of them. I go 
on, though. It doesn’t stop there. 
 
We have the RMs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have a whole pile 
of letters from the RMs in exactly the same position — no 
choice but to raise taxes, cut services, raise taxes. Get into the 
villages, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and again we have a whole long 
list of villages that are very concerned. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think by now that you get the 
message of what we’re trying to say on this side is that 
municipalities across this province want a share in the windfall 
that this province has saw this year. We’re suggesting not 
increasing the size of government, not hiring new employees, 
living within the boundaries of the employees you have now. If 
you have to restructure somewhat, move employees from one 
department to another. That’s what municipalities have done for 
the last 10 years. 
 
They haven’t had the luxury of raising taxes unless it’s been 
absolutely necessary. They don’t run out and hire new 
employees every time they feel the urge. They have to find 
ways of restructuring to justify that. And that’s what we’re 
asking this government to do today — take a look at refunding, 

replenishing revenue sharing, working within that budget. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as this week’s gone on, I think it’s 
become very clear that the people of Saskatchewan, the 
municipalities within this province, agree with us that the 
government should live within its boundaries, not hire new 
employees — live with the 10,000 quite capable employees 
they have now. If it takes restructuring, do that. Live within 
those boundaries, but increase revenue sharing to the 
municipalities of this province. 
 
I thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I’m very pleased to rise today to speak to the coalition 
government’s budget for 2001-02. 
 
As with every provincial budget my colleague the Minister of 
Finance had to balance the legitimate requests to enhance 
program spending with paying down the debt and providing tax 
relief. And he had to balance the legitimate interests of all 
sectors — education, agriculture, health, highways 
infrastructure and more. 
 
I am pleased with the results. This is a very good budget for 
education. This is a very good budget for the people of 
Saskatchewan, and I’m very proud to be able to participate in 
the debate with regard to this budget. 
 
Last year’s budget for Education, as originally presented and 
ultimately passed by this Legislative Assembly, was good, was 
very good for education and the people of this province. Over 
the course of last year, we provided significant additional 
financial resources in response to changing circumstances. We 
provided the necessary additional funding to address the new 
teachers’ collective agreement, which was only concluded 
halfway through the fiscal year. We made that commitment, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we met that commitment in full. 
 
We also provided a further 5.6 million by way of special 
warrant for compensatory operating grants to school divisions 
adversely affected by assessment appeals mandated by the 
Court of Appeal. So we put in that additional 5.6 million 
because it was needed by those school divisions. 
 
For calendar 2000, the actual effective amount of provincial 
financial support through the foundation operating grant, not 
including the one-time compensatory payment of 5.6 million, 
increased by $29 million. That is more than twice of the annual 
increase in the past 15 years. That was a tough act to follow, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, very tough to follow. 
 
But our education partners were very clear in telling us that the 
coalition government had to invest in education. Indeed, our 
colleagues with the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, 
for example, were very specific. They wanted to see at least 32 
million added to the foundation operating grant, the grants that 
go to school boards. Mr. Speaker, we listened to our partners 
and we heard them. 
 
In this year’s budget, we provided a substantial increase over 



April 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 439 

 

and above the substantial increase last year. The grant pool for 
the calendar year 2001 is 460.1 million, an increase of 33.7 
million. This is the largest operating grant increase in the 
province of Saskatchewan in 15 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
That’s an increase of almost 8 per cent, in a year when inflation 
is projected to be less than 2 per cent. 
 
On a budget-to-budget basis, as distinct from the calendar year 
basis which school divisions look at as apples to apples, the 
increase to the grant pool for last year’s budget is 40.7, or 9.6 
per cent, bringing the total to 466.8 million this fiscal year. 
 
As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, during the most recent round of 
collective bargaining, the development of a new extended 
health benefits insurance plan was an important item for 
teachers. In accordance with that new agreement, the provincial 
government is providing all of that $9.3 million in this budget 
for this new insurance plan. 
 
This upcoming year will be the final year of the phase-in for the 
provincial payment of grants in lieu of taxes to local 
governments. In this coming year the amounts paid to school 
divisions will increase by an additional $2 million, to a total 
annual of $7 million additional dollars going to school 
divisions. 
 
Our partners also ask us to expand programs and services to 
help the most vulnerable children in our society. Mr. Speaker, 
we again listen to our partners and we have heard them. 
 
Last month, Mr. Speaker, I accepted the final report of the task 
force on the role of the school. called SchoolPLUS, A Vision for 
Children and Youth. Under the leadership of Dr. Michael 
Tymchak of the University of Regina, the task force has set a 
vision for the future of education in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am sure that all members will join me in 
thanking and acknowledging all the task force members for the 
dedication and good work they have provided to this 
challenging task. We recognize the significance of their work 
and the impact it will have on the future of education, our 
communities, the future successes of our students, and the 
improved work environment for classroom professionals and 
support staff, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Role of the School Task Force recommended an expansion 
of the pre-kindergarten program in the range of 25 to 50 per 
cent would be reasonable. Our pre-kindergarten program 
implemented in 1997 has been very successful in supporting 
at-risk children in their critical early years. Consistent with the 
recommendations of the Role of the School Task Force, we are 
substantially increasing our pre-kindergarten financial support 
and increasing the number of pre-kindergarten spaces — and 
listen to this, Mr. Deputy Speaker — by more than 80 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Saskatchewan’s award-winning 
community schools program has long been recognized as an 
effective model for meeting the complex educational needs of 
at-risk students. 
 
Since 1995 we have doubled the number of community schools. 

The task force on the role of the school recently lent its voice to 
the chorus of others in praise of this province’s community 
schools program. They said, and I quote: 
 

The community school program is one of the most helpful 
and hopeful changes to be initiated in recent times. Given 
its remarkable success and evident benefits not only for 
children but for parents and the whole community, the task 
force is of the view that the time has come for a major 
community school initiative in our province. 

 
In its final report, the task force recommended an increase of 26 
community schools over the next three years. In fact, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in this coming year we are more than doubling 
right now the number of community schools. 
 
We are enhancing this successful program by increasing the 
number of new community schools by more than 40 and 
expanding into rural communities as well as secondary schools. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — This is great news, great news for the 
children of this province and great news for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This year the Department of Education is making a major 
contribution in support of the government strategy for early 
childhood development. The purpose of the strategy is to foster 
children’s healthy growth and development by providing for a 
continuum of integrated early intervention supports and services 
to better prepare preschool children for their educational 
experience. 
 
We are taking an integrated provincial approach involving a 
number of provincial departments including Education, Health, 
and Social Services. There will be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
provincial leadership of this critical initiative which will be 
administered at the local level through school divisions and 
health districts. School divisions and health districts will work 
with communities and local community-based agencies to 
ensure our children have the support they need to be successful 
in life. 
 
The Education budget this coming year includes $1.6 million 
explicitly identified for the early childhood development 
initiative. The total amount identified for this initiative this year 
will be 10 million, rising to a total of 73 million over the next 
five years. This is Saskatchewan’s share of the federal financing 
announced last fall. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is also important that we continue to 
provide direct provincial policy and financial support to our 
northern rural and urban school divisions to support culturally 
affirming educational programs for First Nations and Metis 
students in our classrooms. 
 
This year we are providing an increase of more than 90 per cent 
in our financial support for Aboriginal education programming 
through the operating grant formula. This includes increased 
support for the Indian and Metis educational development 
program, the Aboriginal elders outreach, and financial support 
for innovative partnerships between school divisions and 



440 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2001 

 

Aboriginal communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, a little more 
than a year ago I received the final report of the special 
education review, Directions for Diversity. Our response to the 
special education review was called Strengthening Supports. 
This budget reflects a strong commitment to make that a reality 
for special needs and at-risk students. 
 
There are two important changes in our support for special 
education, together entailing a significant increase in provincial 
financial support through the operating grant program. 
 
First, there’s a 20 per cent increase in support for designated 
students with disabilities. In this upcoming new budget year, 
our total supplementary financial support for these students will 
be more than double what it was just a scant four years ago. 
 
Second, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will be combining several 
programs into a new diversity program and increasing our 
financial support in that area by over 25 per cent. 
 
These enhancements are in keeping with the recommendations 
of the special education review. We heard the committee. This 
year the recognized expenditures for all categories of special 
education increased by 32 per cent, from 82 million to 108 
million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Since 1995, when the provincial budget was balanced, our 
special education recognition has risen sharply from 48 million 
to 108 million — an increase of 127 per cent. 
 
Our education partners talked to us about the need to enhance 
the use of technology in our education system. Mr. Speaker, we 
have again listened to our education partners and we have heard 
them. Saskatchewan Education will be building on our past 
state-of-the-art learning technology initiatives, such as the 
Evergreen Curriculum, with some exciting new developments. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, CommunityNet — high-speed Internet 
connectivity for all Saskatchewan schools. For school divisions 
this means much better Internet access and lower costs. We will 
cover the 3.7 million cost of connecting all provincial schools 
over the next three years, and school divisions will immediately 
receive a benefit of $1.5 million by the provincial government 
taking on this connective cost. 
 
Connectivity through the Centenary Fund. We will be providing 
a further 2 million per year over the next three years for 
improved in-school distribution. So we’re bringing the Internet 
to the schools and we’re covering the costs of distributing. 
That’s progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — With regard to content in this budget, 
we have provided 3 million additional dollars in direct financial 
support for the development of a made-in-Saskatchewan, 
on-line learning resource to be initiated and developed by 
teachers and school divisions and of course the needed jobs to 
support that initiative, Mr. Speaker. 

(11:45) 
 
This set of initiatives will benefit all Saskatchewan students, 
and particularly those in northern and isolated schools. 
 
Our partners told us about the particular needs and challenges 
for rural education. They wanted to see specific initiatives to 
support rural education. Mr. Speaker, we again listened to our 
partners and we have heard them. 
 
We have worked with education leaders over the past year to 
see how we could build on the success of our shared services 
program which provides specialized supports to teachers and 
students in our schools. We will now be implementing those 
improvements including a 90 per cent increase in provincial 
support for shared services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And we are making changes to the 
way the grant recognizes rural transportation costs, as well as 
adding a new isolated schools factor to help address the 
challenges of providing quality education in isolated areas in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have also allocated $1 million of 
support for teacher recruitment, particularly in northern 
Saskatchewan, and recruitment of specialist teachers in rural 
school divisions. The well-being of rural Saskatchewan has 
been a particular focus of this coalition government and a 
particular focus of this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition to our support for rural schools and rural students, 
there is a great deal in this budget to support rural citizens and 
rural communities. The education property tax rebate on ag land 
will continue this year. And we recently extended the deadline 
for both 2000 and 2001 rebate years to February 15, 2002. 
 
We are investing 312 million in highways, including 25.4 
million to advance the time frame for twinning the 
Trans-Canada West from 2008 to 2004. 
 
We are increasing our investment in agriculture this budget by 
35 per cent including emergency assistance and safety net 
programs. We will continue to work with farmers and farm 
groups to persuade the federal government to provide 
additional, needed dollars to support producers until 
international negotiations can restore a level playing field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have allocated 95 million for farm income 
support, 6 million for the farm family opportunities initiative to 
help farmers adapt to the challenging . . . changing conditions in 
the agriculture sector, 5 million for a new Saskatchewan 
Conservation Cover Program, and 2 million for research and 
development through the Ag Development Fund. 
 
We are providing significant increases to help health funding 
this year. This will ensure stable health services in our 
communities during this year of transition as we work to secure 
the future of our publicly funded, publicly administered health 
care system. And here too we are addressing issues of 
recruitment and retention of health providers by providing new 
funding initiatives and for providing funding for improved 



April 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 441 

 

wages and benefits for the work environment. 
 
In addition to the series of personal tax reductions announced 
last year, Mr. Speaker, this budget provides increased tax 
credits for seniors, for post-secondary students, persons with 
disabilities, and for families with young children. We have also 
provided meaningful tax relief to small businesses. And we 
have done all these things while reducing the amount our 
government spends in interest on the accumulated debt. 
 
We have a balanced budget in every sense, Mr. Speaker. We 
have balanced revenue and expenditures. We have balanced the 
program enhancement, debt reduction, and tax relief, and we 
have balanced the legitimate needs of every sector including 
education. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, this budget is providing strong 
provincial financial commitment and support to public 
education. The 33.7 million increase to the foundation operating 
grant this calendar year is the largest operating grant increase in 
Saskatchewan in 15 years. And, Mr. Speaker, compared to the 
397.5 million paid out in operating grants in calendar year 
1999, the 460.1 million this calendar year is an increase of 
almost $63 million or 16 per cent in just two years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all children deserve to have a complete range of 
high quality educational opportunities available to them. All 
across Saskatchewan our education system and our schools 
continue to strive to provide the highest quality education to our 
students. This government is proud to provide increased 
program and financial support to meet that common goal. Mr. 
Speaker, I certainly am proud to be supporting the budget of 
this government. 
 
And just to make a little comment with regard to some of the 
feedback that I’ve received with regard to our education budget 
and initiatives in rural Saskatchewan, I had the pleasure of 
actually addressing the 6th Annual Congress of Rural Education 
in Saskatoon on April 1, Mr. Speaker. While I was delivering 
my speech — which was positively received — I noticed 
several members of the audience that wished to talk with me 
afterwards. 
 
There was a man who came up to me and talked to me about 
our current budget and what we were doing in rural 
Saskatchewan. He liked what he heard with regard to education 
tax relief on ag land. He liked the fact that we dropped the 
percentage of value from 70 to 55 per cent on ag land, and then 
he said, obviously Alberta could learn a few things from 
Saskatchewan on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And you know who that man was, 
Mr. Speaker? It was Ray Danyluk, the Progressive 
Conservative member for the Alberta riding of Lac La Biche-St. 
Paul. The Alberta Conservatives support our budget. They like 
the initiatives we’re doing in education and in rural 
Saskatchewan, and they have said so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m proud to support our budget and I will not be supporting 
the amendment put forward by the Saskatchewan Party. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
indeed a pleasure to be able to address the Legislative 
Assembly with regards to the budget that was brought down by 
the Minister of Finance just a week ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I get into the details of the budget, I’d like 
to first look at the backdrop in which we debate this budget. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan is undoubtedly a great province. Mr. 
Speaker, in size we are a large province. We nearly rival 
Alberta and British Columbia in size. Mr. Speaker, we have 
resources that are almost on par with the province of Alberta; 
perhaps even they are on par with the province of Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we have people in this 
province that are known as doers — people that build, that 
work, that construct. Mr. Speaker, we have had a base of human 
resources, talent in Saskatchewan that is second to none. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
has been the birthplace and the home of some of the most 
outstanding citizens of the world, people that have contributed 
far more than they have received from society, people of whom 
we are all very proud of as Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in the light of this backdrop, the greatest 
province I believe in the nation of Canada, we see a province 
that right now, today, is going backward, Mr. Speaker, not 
because the Saskatchewan Party says it’s going backward but 
because the facts indicate that this province is going backwards. 
 
Population-wise, we are losing people. Mr. Speaker, this is not 
the doom and gloom from the official opposition. This is the 
picture painted by Statistics Canada who go around counting 
people and do it very capably, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a province that’s losing jobs, 
immense numbers of jobs — 11,000 people fewer working than 
a year ago, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a 
province where the Minister of Education and his department 
— the member who just spoke — his department predicts that 
school enrolment over the next few years is going to drop by 
30,000 students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does that mean for the province of 
Saskatchewan? Well, Mr. Speaker, that means more jobs will 
be lost as schoolteachers do not have children in their 
classrooms to teach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is reality. These are the government’s 
numbers that I’m quoting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we live in a province where municipal 
infrastructure is falling apart. Mr. Speaker, I drive the streets of 
the city of Regina; I drive the highways of the province of 
Saskatchewan. Wherever I go I see deterioration. I see a 
province that should be proud, a province that should be 
moving forward, and I see it slipping backwards, Mr. Speaker. 



442 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see a province that used to have a proud heritage 
in health care, but health care is deteriorating. I’ve never seen 
such long waiting lists in all of my life. And what is more 
concerning is that waiting lists in Saskatchewan — I would tell 
the minister from Cumberland— the waiting lists in 
Saskatchewan are longer than in any other province in Canada. 
Mr. Speaker, that should not be the case. That is unacceptable. 
That is the result of the NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — So, Mr. Speaker, what is the NDP 
government’s game plan? What are they going to do, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are shrinking the tax base of this province. 
Has to be, when people are leaving. Has to be, when there are 
fewer jobs. The tax base in our province is shrinking. So, Mr. 
Speaker, how are they dealing with the shrinking tax base? In 
this budget brought down by the Finance minister, they are 
increasing revenues. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would think that anyone who had their 
thinking caps on and were seeing straight would recognize we 
have a problem here — a government whose revenues are 
dropping is planning on spending more money. 
 
Well how are they going to do it? They’re going to hire 570 
more public employees. Mr. Speaker, I think that shows lack of 
confidence; Mr. Speaker, I think that shows lack of confidence 
in the 10,000 they have. If we have a shrinking province and the 
10,000 public servants that we have working for us can’t handle 
it, maybe the management should look at the job they’re doing 
instead of trying to hire more public servants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say for the record and for the members 
opposite and for others who are listening: the Saskatchewan 
Party has confidence in our public service. We respect our 
public servants. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we know, we know, that the 
NDP have selected a few of their friends, put them into senior 
positions in the public service, and that has created a few 
problems. 
 
I’ve called them deadwood and skunks. Now, Mr. Speaker, they 
have taken that out of context and tried to make it look like we 
believe that that is the entire civil service. That is absolutely not 
the case. Mr. Speaker, we respect the public service. We respect 
the work they do and we have more confidence in the public 
service than the members opposite. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, who is the first person, who is the first 
person of the 570 hired? We’re not talking about cutting 570 
public service, let’s remember that. We’re talking about hiring 
570 more. The very first one is a defeated NDP MP (Member of 
Parliament), Dennis Gruending. That’s going to fill a lot of 
potholes, Mr. Speaker. That’s going to provide a lot of support 
to the Social Services department, isn’t it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is hiring more public servants 

because it doesn’t have confidence in the public service we 
have now. And then it’s doing more, it’s backing away from its 
jobs promises. Even though they’re hiring more public servants, 
the total number of jobs created in Saskatchewan — by their 
own admission — will be far less than they suspected. And in 
fact, the statistics show that they’re not even going to reach 
their more modest projections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also their plan is to increase the cost to consumers 
in Saskatchewan by raising utility rates — SaskPower, 
SaskEnergy, to name a couple. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through the action or should I say the inaction of 
this budget, we are going to see property taxes be raised 
throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
So what’s the Saskatchewan Party’s proposal? What would we 
do if we were bringing down the budget? Now I wish we had 
that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, and I believe some day soon we 
will. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party would eliminate the 
small-business tax. They could have done it, but they’re too 
busy building empires in the Crown Investment Corporation to 
eliminate the small-business tax and let small businesses 
generate far more jobs — far more jobs who would be 
taxpaying jobs — than that government could ever hope to 
create by expanding the public service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would accelerate the reduction in personal 
taxes. Mr. Speaker, we would remove the Crown Investment 
Corporation from competing in the private sector where they 
have no business. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that we could grow Saskatchewan with 
a budget that shows confidence in the people of this province. 
Thus, Mr. Speaker, we brought forward an amendment. The 
amendment would lower taxes in Saskatchewan, rather than 
growing the government of this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier didn’t understand that, the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs didn’t understand that, the 
Finance minister didn’t understand that. 
 
What the Minister of Municipal Affairs is going to do is by not 
increasing the revenue-sharing grants to the municipalities, we 
will likely lose more public servants in this province than we 
will hire because municipalities, including the city of Regina, 
will be forced to lay off hardworking servants of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’ll bet you, Mr. Speaker, that there will be more than 570 
public service positions lost because of the . . . (inaudible) . . . 
Minister of Municipal Affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I only have a few minutes and I want to touch on 
the fact of how disappointed we are on the Saskatchewan Party 
official opposition side with the response and the arguments 
made by some of the members across the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister was totally over the top when 
he kept repeating in a cataphasic way his statement that’s 
progress. Mr. Speaker, that is not progress when Saskatchewan 



April 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 443 

 

is going backwards. Why would that minister make such a 
ridiculous statement in the House? Why would he discredit 
himself by saying that Saskatchewan was making progress 
under his budget, when in fact it’s driving this province 
backwards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I was disappointed by the 
Deputy Premier’s actions. The Deputy Premier, when he 
realized he was losing the debate over the budget, when he 
realized that municipalities recognized that the Saskatchewan 
Party had the right idea and that his government had the wrong 
idea, desperately went around phoning all the municipalities he 
could in the province, twisting the arm of municipal politicians. 
And what was the result, Mr. Speaker? Well we found out in 
the House this morning what the result was of the panic that we 
saw from the Deputy Premier. He got three — three — 
municipalities to somewhat qualify their positions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they would say, they would say, Mr. Speaker, that 
the municipalities didn’t understand the proposal that we were 
making. Mr. Speaker, not only did the municipalities 
understand what we said, but they reinforced what they said. 
And after the Minister of Municipal Affairs sent his silly letter 
around to all the municipalities, they came onside with the 
official opposition more than they had before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say to you and to all the members 
opposite and to everyone who is listening, particularly — 
particularly, Mr. Speaker — the public servants in 
Saskatchewan, that there are three members in this Assembly 
whose position it is to cut the public service. There are three 
members. 
 
One member is the Minister of Municipal Affairs. His position 
was to cut 300 positions in the public service. And you know 
who another member was? The Minister of Education who just 
stood in the House. The Minister of Education ran a campaign 
throughout all of Saskatchewan to cut 300 members from the 
public service. He is the member that did it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the third member, the third member who is 
pleading amnesia is the member who crossed the floor, broke 
with the coalition, the member from North Battleford who was 
also a part of the team that called for a 300 person reduction in 
the public service. Those are the three members in this House 
who wanted to cut the public service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier is off to a bad start. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier talked about — I don’t know — buying a bus, renting a 
bus, preparing a bus. He talked about reconnecting with the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can tell by the response of the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs, we can see through the change of position by 
the Minister of Education, we can see through the over-the-top 
presentation, the cataphasic presentation by the Minister of 
Finance, and we can see by the chirping from the backbenchers 
who sing the tune that they’re told to sing, that this government 
has not yet recognized that it’s making huge, huge mistakes. 
This government has not yet recognized that this budget is part 
of the reason why our great province of Saskatchewan is going 

backwards rather than forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very proud of the amendment put forward by 
my colleague, the member for Canora-Pelly. It’s a constructive 
amendment. Mr. Speaker, it’s an amendment that would 
actually grow the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rather than creating 570 more jobs in the public 
service because they have no confidence in the public servants 
we already have, Mr. Speaker, it will see a reduction of at least 
570 public servants from municipalities. Mr. Speaker, either 
they’re going to have to raise property taxes or else they’re 
going to have to lay off people who serve. The city of Regina, 
the city of Saskatoon, the Deputy Premier’s city of Yorkton, the 
Premier’s city of Moose Jaw will all be making these very, very 
difficult decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if Saskatchewan is going to grow — and we will 
say this, and we will say this, and if they won’t listen, we’ll say 
it until we replace them — if this government will not lower 
taxes in this province, Saskatchewan will not grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they did not lower taxes in the last budget. 
They’ve raised, they expanded the PST (provincial sales tax). 
They expanded and they increased fees. Mr. Speaker, in this 
budget we are not seeing a reduction in taxes. We’re going to 
see an increase in property taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have been selling the people of Saskatchewan 
a false bill of goods but the people of Saskatchewan are not 
buying their false bill of goods. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they cannot continually get up in this House and 
blame others for their failures. Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan are looking for a government that’s prepared to 
shoulder responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they were looking towards a new Premier who 
was going to stand up and say we made some mistakes in the 
past. We made some mistakes with regards to health care. 
We’ve made some mistakes with regards to education. We’ve 
made some mistakes with regards to the way we’ve treated 
municipalities in this province. We’ve made some mistakes 
with regards to agriculture. We recognize that Saskatchewan 
can do better and we’re going to change direction. 
 
That’s what the people of Saskatchewan were looking for from 
this new Premier and his new government. But, Mr. Speaker, all 
they’ve heard is the same old line. It was the people that ran the 
province back in the ’80s that created every problem that we 
currently experience right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is irresponsible. We all know about mistakes 
that that government made. We know about mistakes the 
Blakeney government made. We know of mistakes, Mr. 
Speaker, that Tommy Douglas and his government made. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I think I was distinctly 
hearing some voices other than that from the members in the 
Assembly. I respectfully ask anybody in the Assembly to 
respect the traditions of the Assembly and that is not to 
participate in the debate in any way. 
 



444 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
I was saying, this government is not prepared to shoulder the 
responsibilities for the government they have provided in the 
1990s. We can’t change the past. I can’t undo what Tommy 
Douglas did, whether it be good or bad. Mr. Speaker, I 
remember the mistakes that Allan Blakeney made. I remember 
them very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the Devine government made 
mistakes. We can’t change that. We can’t go back to the ’80s. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan in 1999 showed 
that they know that this government has made a lot of mistakes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I call on the Premier of 
Saskatchewan and I call on his cabinet and I call on his 
backbenchers to recognize that apologizing for the mistakes of 
previous governments does not cut it with the people of 
Saskatchewan. It’s time to shoulder some responsibility. It’s 
time to come up to the plate. It’s time to get out there and 
perform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment brought 
forward by my colleague from Canora-Pelly because it will 
make Saskatchewan a better province if it’s adopted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I cannot support the budget. I cannot 
support the budget without the amendment because it’s a recipe 
for disaster. It means more people will leave Saskatchewan. It 
means that that surplus that the Minister of Finance garnered 
through a windfall through oil and gas revenues will be 
squandered with no benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I call — I know it’s the 11th hour — but I call on 
members to come to their senses, start to shoulder some 
responsibility. Let’s turn this province around. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I am pleased to have this opportunity to enter into this 
budget debate as it draws to a close. You have heard, Mr. 
Speaker, and members of this legislature have heard, ministers 
and members on this side of the House describe in detail the 
very positive aspects of this budget delivered by the Minister of 
Finance in his speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you now I will be supporting this budget. 
I will be supporting a budget that builds on the fiscal foundation 
laid through the 1990s; a budget that now connects us to a very 
optimistic, prosperous future for this province and its people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It is, Mr. Speaker, in my view, a budget 
that captures the mood which is abroad in Saskatchewan — a 

mood of optimism, a mood of looking to the future, a mood of 
hopefulness — unlike the mood portrayed by the member 
opposite and the members opposite. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I tell you this as well. I will not be 
supporting the amendment of the Saskatchewan Party in this 
legislature. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to tell you why I will 
not be supporting the members’ opposite resolution or 
amendment to the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I tell you why I’m not supporting it, Mr. Speaker, because to 
support that amendment of theirs would mean 88 fewer forest 
firefighting . . . fire people in our province. That’s what it will 
mean. It’ll mean 71 people fewer to work in corrections and 
prisoner transport. It will mean 86 fewer people to increase 
highway construction and repair in our province. It will mean 
60 fewer people to respond to the Child Advocate’s report in 
dealing with children and families at risk in our province. 
That’s what it would mean. That’s what it would mean, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I’ve listened, I’ve listened carefully to the debate across 
the province, I’ve listened to the debate across the province, and 
I find no one but this group of men and women who are not 
supporting this budget and who will support their amendment. 
In fact, it’s just the opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I read from the financial editor, the financial editor of The 
Leader-Post, Mr. Bruce Johnstone, a sentence which says, and I 
quote: 
 

Premier Calvert should be commended, not condemned, for 
investing in the province’s human capital as well as its 
infrastructure. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this is a government 
willing to invest in the province’s infrastructure and in its 
human capital for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan and 
this province’s great future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the editorial boards of our province do not share 
the view of the opposition members. I read, I read in the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix, and I am going to quote at length from 
the Saskatoon StarPhoenix editorial of April 5th, an editorial 
that is entitled the opposition’s rash promises are a trap for the 
future. 

 
That’s what the editor says. And I will read, Mr. Speaker, from 
this editorial. The journalists are saying this: 
 

Sooner than later, the Saskatchewan Party has to figure out 
that its one-trick-pony act — tax cuts as a solution to 
everything that ails the province — is going to wear thin. 

 
Now, listen to this, Mr. Speaker, this is directly to their 
amendment. The editor says: 
 

Having nattered on at length about Saskatchewan’s 
crumbling roads, the opposition now gripes about the 
government hiring more Highways workers to accomplish 
the job. Having demanded more attention be paid to rural 



April 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

 

Saskatchewan, it balks at hiring people to staff an agency 
devoted to rural revitalization. 

 
The editor goes on to say: 
 

The same dyspeptic reaction from the Opposition greets 
expansion of justice and social service programs to address 
issues such as FAS and family problems, provide 
early-childhood programs and take other measures that . . . 
(provide) long-term dividends in lower costs related to 
social ills. 

 
(12:15) 
 
Now listen to this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Apparently, the Saskatchewan Party has deluded itself that 
a lofty wave of its magic tax-cut wand is going to make all 
(the) problems disappear, leaving social harmony, 
economic growth and other good things in its wake. 
 
For the Saskatchewan Party to denigrate the public service 
on which it will have to rely . . . to accomplish its goals in 
office is just plain foolish. (And) So (continues the editor) 
is the Opposition’s oft-repeated pledge to provide tax cuts 
deeper than those set out by the NDP, even as it promises 
to do more to improve the lot of farmers in rural areas, hike 
municipal grants, pave more highways, improve health 
care, create more jobs and grow the province. 
 

And then he serves a warning, he serves a warning to the 
Leader of the Opposition. The editor says: 
 

Notions that seem so attractive when uttered from the 
safety of Opposition benches have a nasty habit of taking 
huge bites off your political rump . . . 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now it is fair to say, Mr. Speaker, it is 
fair to say that a number of municipal leaders in our province 
have indicated by correspondence to that party and this House, 
their support for that amendment. It is fair to say those letters 
have come in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want you to know and I want the people of 
Saskatchewan to know the content of this party’s 
communication with municipal leaders across the province. 
Now you’ll know that their resolution in this House says, and I 
quote from the resolution. The resolution: 
 

urges the provincial government to cancel its plans to 
expand the civil service by 570.5 positions and instead use 
the money saved to provide $30 million to municipal 
governments . . . 
 

That’s what the resolution says. 
 
Now they send a letter out to municipal leaders and what does 
the letter say in bold print, Mr. Speaker, in bold print, they say 
to the mayors and councils: 
 

With this in mind, the Saskatchewan Party has proposed an 

amendment to the 2001 provincial budget calling on the 
provincial government to provide an additional $30 million 
in municipal revenue-sharing grants this year. 

 
Period. Full stop. No mention, Mr. Speaker, no mention of 
cutting the 570 public servants who are going to be at work in 
communities, who are going to be repairing highways, who are 
going to be working with children and family at risk. No 
mention about that. They just say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. The Assembly 
will come to order. The Assembly will come to order. The 
Assembly will come to order. The Assembly will come to 
order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is pretty 
obvious from where we sit they don’t enjoy hearing the truth of 
their letters being exposed in this House, Mr. Speaker. They 
made no mention, no mention, of cutting those men and women 
who will be providing services to the people of Saskatchewan 
— no mention about that. 
 
They just say to the mayors and councils, well do you want the 
provincial government to expand revenue sharing by $30 
million? Who wouldn’t say yes, Mr. Speaker? Now that’s the 
kind of chicanery that these folks are willing to play with duly 
elected, duly elected people across our province. 
 
I’m not going to support that kind of amendment and for one 
other reason, Mr. Speaker. I’m not supporting an amendment 
from a political party, a loyal opposition and its leader, who 
says their plan, their plan for the future economy of 
Saskatchewan is based on weather permitting, weather 
permitting. 
 
Right here in The Leader-Post today it says if the Saskatchewan 
Party wins the next election: 
 

Hermanson said that the population outflow would be 
stemmed within a year or two and the province would then 
grow if the weather and the national economy co-operated. 

 
Well in my experience in this House and elsewhere, Mr. 
Speaker, my experience in the study of economics tells me that 
you don’t base an economic plan, you don’t base a budget on 
the concept of weather permitting. Weather permitting we may 
grow some jobs; if not, we won’t. Weather permitting we may 
balance the budget; weather permitting we may not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I am supporting is a budget, is a budget 
that’s all-weather, Mr. Speaker — all-weather. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now a few moments ago we heard the 
Leader of the Opposition, a few moments ago we heard the 
Leader of the Opposition criticize and condemn this budget. 
Well I don’t know whose company he’s in, but he’s certainly 
not in the company of the leading economists of Canada. 
 
Now I have here in front of me the comments made by Ms. 
Mary Webb, the senior economist of the Scotiabank. What does 
the senior economist of the Scotiabank have to say: 



446 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2001 

 

The provincial government delivered a “prudent” budget 
last Friday that offered some tax cuts along with a balanced 
budget, says Scotiabank’s economics arm. 
 
(Scotiabank’s) . . . senior economist Mary Webb . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well from their benches, the member 
from Cannington is now calling the Scotiabank a nasty 
capitalist. That’s interesting. I find that interesting. 
 
Well I’m just going to read what the economist of the 
Scotiabank has to say. I’ll carry on: 
 

“With slowing world growth, we will see lower energy 
prices this year,” said Webb in a Monday interview. 

 
Quote: 
 

Premier Lorne Calvert’s government instead maintained a 
large portion of the provincial fiscal stabilization fund 
instead of using it to fund deeper tax cuts, a move (that) 
Webb agrees with. 

 
Now here from the Toronto Dominion Bank, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Derek Burleton, a senior economist with (the) TD Bank 
who handles provincial (government) analysis, used the 
same word — prudent — to describe the budget. 

 
He says, quote: 
 

“Definitely a good grade on this one.” 
 

Definitely a good grade on this one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the validation of the Royal Bank of 
Canada who indicates that the Saskatchewan economy is going 
to grow by 3 per cent this year. We have the validation of 
individuals and groups across the province, they’re highlighted 
in the headlines. “The net plan unveiled in the budget.” 
“High-risk kids helped in the budget.” “Economic growth cuts 
debt to GDP in this budget.” “Community schools getting a 
funding hike in this budget.” “New spending on the province’s 
roads are welcomed in this budget.” 
 
Health spending, health spending, listen to this, Mr. Speaker: 
“Health spending will total over 2.2 billion in this budget”. 
Note this, Mr. Speaker: “Farm aid beefed up in this budget”. In 
this budget, Mr. Speaker, headline: “Rural areas not forgotten”. 
In this budget headline: “Budget applauded by business” — 
applauded. In this budget headline: “New youth ministry gives 
young people much-needed voice in this budget.” “Provincial 
initiative good first step, FSIN says,” in this budget. 
“Government spends $10 million of early childhood plan in this 
budget” — $10 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s that kind of validation that is coming, Mr. Speaker, from 
across the province. 
 
But a validation that I think means as much to me as any 
Scotiabank economist, is the validation that comes in this 

month’s edition of Senior Living, the voice of the senior citizen 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
The seniors are saying this budget is a reflection, and I 
underline these words: 
 

This budget is a reflection on the NDP’s long-term plan for 
Saskatchewan. Spend money on important and immediate 
concerns. Assuming no borrowing is required, keep a rainy 
day fund for emergencies. 

 
And then they too, they too have some advice for the members 
opposite. The seniors of the province say this in their editorial: 
 

If the Saskatchewan Party has any hopes (any hopes) of 
forming the next government, it would be prudent of them 
to consider the fiscal responsibility that Saskatchewan 
residents expect of their government. Because if they don’t, 
they will never form government. 

 
That’s what it says. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to take just 
this very brief opportunity which is left to me to talk about the 
progress that is in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Eight consecutive balanced budget. That’s progress. 
 
Eleven per cent more funding for health in this province. That’s 
progress. 
 
Massive increase in agricultural spending, 35 per cent. That, my 
friends, is progress. 
 
Eighty-eight new forest firefighters; 71 new people to work in 
corrections; 86 new people to work in the provincial highways 
system repairing and upgrading our highways; 60 new people to 
work with children and at-risk families; and the list goes on and 
on. That, Mr. Speaker, is progress. 
 
Ten, ten, Mr. Speaker, gigawatt hours of wind power per year 
provided by this budget. Mr. Speaker, that, I tell you, is 
progress. 
 
Thirteen departments, thirteen departments, Mr. Speaker, of our 
government working together to ensure that the Aboriginal 
people of our province have a place in the sun. Ten million 
extra in this budget for the Metis and off-reserve strategy. That 
is progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
2,200 summer jobs, personal income tax cuts of $317 million in 
this year, small-business corporate tax rate cut by 25 per cent 
and the ceiling lifted, Mr. Speaker. That is progress. 
 
$950 million committed over the next three years to upgrade the 
roads of Saskatchewan. We’re fixing the roads, Mr. Speaker, 
and that is progress, I tell you. 
 
No — underline these words — no new taxes, no fee increases 
in this budget. That’s progress. 
 



April 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 447 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, if you want to hear 
about some progress, let me just remind you of this, that the 
Minister of Finance reminded us of the day of the budget. In the 
year, fiscal year 1993-1994, the people of Saskatchewan, 
through their tax dollars were paying more on interest on the 
public debt than we paid on education. In this budget year, we 
are spending twice as much on education as we are spending on 
interest payments in the public debt. And that is progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we heard a few moments 
ago, the Minister of Education stand in his place and talk about 
what this budget is doing for education. And in my view the 
single most important step forward to connecting to the future 
for this great province, the single most important component in 
this budget is the investment we are making in education for our 
young people. That, in my view, is progress. 
 
And within that, Mr. Speaker, if I may say so, and representing 
the constituency of Riversdale, I am extremely proud and 
pleased to be able to say this, as a result of this investment in 
education, we are going to double, double the number of 
community schools in our province — 42 new community 
schools in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And that, Mr. Speaker, is progress — 
progress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a budget seeks to do one thing. It seeks to put in 
place the values and the visions of the government of the day. It 
seeks to capture the value and the vision of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This budget, which I am proud to stand and support, captures 
both the vision and the values of this government and the vision 
and the values of the people of Saskatchewan. And that is 
progress, Mr. Speaker, and I will be supporting a progressive 
budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It being 30 minutes before the ordinary 
time of adjournment, it is my duty pursuant to rule 15(3) to 
interrupt proceedings on the budget debate in order to allow the 
mover of the budget motion to close debate. 
 
The Minister of Finance now has up to 20 minutes to close 
debate after which every question necessary to dispose of the 
budget motion will be put to the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and while it’s 
now been a week since the presentation of the provincial budget 
and I’d like to thank all members for their participation in this 
debate. I’d like to thank the Premier and all my colleagues in 
the coalition government for their support throughout the 
budget process. I’d like to thank my colleagues on the Treasury 

Board and I’d like to thank the hard-working public servants, 
the men and women at Saskatchewan’s Department of Finance, 
which I’m very proud to say, Mr. Speaker, is truly the best 
Finance department in all of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
people across the province who watch these proceedings and 
who have been at home but have been sending us their words of 
encouragement over the last week. 
 
I’ve noticed in this debate that the members opposite have had 
less to say than usual — and the media’s noted that too, Mr. 
Speaker — and in fact some of them have been very anxious to 
get their remarks over with as quickly as possible. Now I 
wonder why that would be, Mr. Speaker. Well I have an idea. 
They know that the response to this budget, Mr. Speaker, has 
been overwhelmingly positive in all corners of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — They’ve been grasping at any straw they 
can to find some flimsy excuse to oppose it. But I think it’s best 
summed up by the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, which says this. 
They say: 
 

It’s only to be expected that opposition politicians would 
take potshots at every government move, claiming that 
things would be better were they in charge. However, even 
by this lax standard, the Saskatchewan Party’s reaction to 
the coalition government’s budget appears ill-considered at 
best and disingenuous at worst. 
 

Well I think disingenuous is a polite way of putting it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well that’s the opposition’s response to the budget — so much 
for them. 
 
I’m more interested, Mr. Speaker, in the people’s reaction to the 
budget. Well, Mr. Speaker, since the budget was delivered, I 
and my colleagues have been all over the province. I’ve been in 
Saskatoon and Regina, Moose Jaw and Prince Albert, Southey 
and Sedley, and tomorrow I’ll be out in rural Saskatchewan 
again, Mr. Speaker. My colleagues have been in Swift Current, 
Lloydminster, Rosetown, Nipawin, Tisdale, and Melfort. 
They’ve been in La Ronge, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Indian Head, 
Estevan, Kelvington, Melville, Yorkton, Weyburn. I could go 
on, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been all over this province. 
 
And I can report to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the House, that this 
budget has been very well received. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Saskatchewan people are pleased, Mr. 
Speaker, that their priorities are receiving attention. They’re 
pleased that this government has presented them with a 
framework of measures to move this province forward. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, this coalition government is on the move 
and that opposition is on the run, Mr. Speaker. 
 



448 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I want to say to the Leader of the 
Opposition who was just up a little while ago saying that this 
budget was a recipe for disaster, only the Leader of the 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker, would call nine credit rating upgrades 
in the last five years a disaster. Only he could do that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I want to say to the people of the province that we have a 
plan. We have a plan, Mr. Speaker. And it is not a plan like the 
plan of the Leader of the Opposition, or so-called plan, that 
says, well, it depends upon the weather he says, Mr. Speaker. 
Well that’s not good enough for the people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say to the Leader of the Opposition, that even 
Stockwell Day inspired voodoo economics will not affect the 
weather, Mr. Speaker. Even the Leader of the Opposition with 
his voodoo snake oil is not going to improve the weather, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I want to say that one of the most popular parts of this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, is our plan to fix the roads. 
 
What are people saying about that plan? Well the president of 
the Rural Municipalities Association says, the increased 
funding for highways is great. He says, it’s good for rural 
residents. Brent Warner, the president of the Road Builders 
says, we’re pretty encouraged it will translate into significant 
employment. The mayor of Val Marie, Mr. Speaker, says he’s 
ecstatic about our plan. 
 
The people are enthused about our plans for education. Gary 
Shaddock, the president of the School Trustees says, we see this 
year’s budget as an investment in our children, the future of our 
province. The monies that the province has designated will go 
directly to the classroom and will be a huge benefit for our 
students. And they gave the budget an A, the Minister of 
Education reminds me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The president of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation said, 
we’re excited. Given the fact that the community school 
mandate has been expanded, in fact doubled, there are a number 
of initiatives that will provide more equity for our students, he 
says, no matter where they live in the province, whether urban 
or rural, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Jerry Zimmer, the education director for the Saskatoon Catholic 
school system, said, it’s nice to see we’re in better times. And 
we are, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding the doom and gloom we 
hear we hear from over there. 
 
Taxes, Mr. Speaker. What has been the reaction to our tax 
measures? Kent Smith-Windsor, Saskatoon and District 
Chamber of Commerce, says, the 2 per cent reduction in the 
small-business income tax rate, the balanced budget, combined 
with the reduction in personal income taxes, is a sign of good 
things to come. And it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Canadian Federation of Independent Business says that the 
corporate tax cut is a good first step and that we’re going in the 
right direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Jim Carr, business person in Moose Jaw, says, this is 
extremely good news. He says, you’re talking about a 25 per 
cent reduction in the tax rate; that is fairly substantial. And it is, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Corey Adams, president of the Swift Current Chamber of 
Commerce, said, it’s definitely good for business. And, he says, 
it will increase the income threshold, and that’s going to be 
good, he says. 
 
CJVR radio in Melfort says, Saskatchewan’s budget is sure to 
put a smile on the faces of the province’s business community. I 
think it has, Mr. Speaker. But I must admit, it has not succeeded 
in putting a smile on the faces of the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. But even Harry Houdini and voodoo economics could 
not do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The chartered accountants say it’s significant to the businesses; 
it will make them more competitive and help to stimulate 
Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan approve of this 
budget, and so do the national commentators. The Premier just 
went through some of them — the banks, the investment 
bankers, the credit rating agencies. They say we’re doing a good 
job. 
 
What is it that the Leader of the Opposition knows, Mr. 
Speaker, that the credit rating agencies don’t know? Not very 
much. Not very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re making progress. And people locally know it, Mr. 
Speaker, and people nationally know it. 
 
I want to focus for a moment on personal tax reductions, 
because there’s been a lot of talk from the opposition that we 
have to reduce taxes, Mr. Speaker. The editorial from the 
Regina Leader-Post the day after the budget said this: 
 

In last year’s budget, Cline cut personal income tax by 
introducing a three-tiered rate to be fully implemented by 
2003. It surpassed the Saskatchewan Party’s own 
recommended tax cut. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And we’re talking, Mr. Speaker, about a 
tax cut for ordinary people, not a tax cut for the rich that is 
advocated by the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Murray Mandryk, columnist for The Leader-Post says: 
 

In fact, it’s quite evident how effective this budget really is 
by the way the Saskatchewan Party abandoned virtually 
everything that it has been bellyaching about of late to 
refocus its criticism on the fact there are no new personal 
income tax reductions. Conveniently the Saskatchewan 
Party ignored the fact that personal income taxes for an 
average $50,000 a year, two-income family will decrease 
by $481 as a result of the income tax measures announced 
in last year’s budget. 

 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, there’s a reason why the 



April 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 449 

 

Saskatchewan Party is opposed to our plan because we are 
cutting taxes for average people, Mr. Speaker. They advocate 
tax cuts for the rich, Mr. Speaker, and we’re not going there. 
 
I could go on, Mr. Speaker, at length with positive reaction to 
this budget, but in the interests of time I will encapsulate it for 
the members opposite. Business likes the budget, the financial 
community likes it, labour likes it, teachers and school trustees 
like it, road builders like it, rural and urban people like it; and 
today, Mr. Speaker, is decision day. What will the opposition 
do? Do they continue to stay trapped in their doom and gloom 
mentality or are they going to support progress, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure that the member for North 
Battleford has his seat belt safely secured before I make my 
next point. Mr. Speaker, as a result of this budget, we are fixing 
the roads. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The people of Saskatchewan support that. 
Will the opposition vote against fixing the roads? 
 
We’re investing in education. The people of Saskatchewan 
support that. Will the opposition vote against the investment in 
education? Will they vote against more money for our schools? 
Mr. Speaker, we’re taking the Information Highway to rural 
Saskatchewan. I’ve been out in rural Saskatchewan and I can 
tell you that people support it, Mr. Speaker. Will the opposition 
vote against CommunityNet and the virtual campus? 
 
We’re cutting taxes for families, seniors, students, the disabled, 
and caregivers. People support that. Will the opposition vote 
against that? We’ll see. Last year, they voted against the largest 
cut in personal income tax in the province’s history, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re lowering taxes for small business. People support that. 
Will they vote against it, Mr. Speaker, or will they support a 
more competitive small-business tax regime? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the province want to know: will the 
members opposite vote against support for children at risk; 
investment in health care; training for our young people; 
incentives for the mining and oil and gas industries; farm 
income support; increased access to group homes for the 
disabled; summer employment for students; more police 
officers; reforestation; wind power and safer drinking water; 
enhanced student aid; Aboriginal employment development, 
and hundreds of other positive budget measures? 
 
The members opposite, Mr. Speaker, have a choice. So far this 
session we on this side of the House are building for the future. 
That’s what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. We propose; they 
oppose. 
 
The opposition has been complaining. First, they complain — 
get this, Mr. Speaker — they complain we’re hoarding $500 
million in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Then they complain 
because we’re spending the money. First, they say we’re sitting 
on the money; then they say we’re spending too much money. 
Will which way is it, Mr. Speaker? We can’t save and spend at 
the same time. 

But I want to say this: that the members opposite get up and 
they say that we’re operating in a deficit because we’re 
spending some of our savings. Well imagine that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s like if George and Sonya are at home and they’ve got 
$10,000 in the bank. And Sonya says, George, let’s take $3,000 
of our $10,000 and spend it. We’ve got some savings. Let’s 
pave the driveway and let’s build a deck behind our house. 
George says, Sonya, I think that’s a pretty good idea. We’ve got 
$10,000; we’ll spend $3,000. They’ve still got $7,000. 
 
You know what the opposition calls that, Mr. Speaker? They 
call that a deficit. They call it a deficit. Well, I’ve got news for 
the members of the opposition. The difference between what 
we’re doing by spending some of our savings and what they 
would do by borrowing money and spending it is that we’re 
drawing down our savings. We’re not operating on borrowed 
money that will be paid for by the next generation as they 
would, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I want to tell the members of the 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, that when George and Sonya watch 
the Leader of the Opposition and the members opposite patter 
on about their voodoo economics inspired by Stockwell Day, 
they just look at them and shake their heads, Mr. Speaker — 
just shake their heads. And we’re all shaking our heads when 
we listen to this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we need to protect our 
children, fix the roads, and fight forest fires. We need to do 
those things. 
 
We say protect the children, as the Children’s Advocate says, 
by hiring social workers. We say, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
be hiring social workers. They say we should be firing social 
workers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then they complain about the roads. They say that we should 
fix the roads. Then they complain, Mr. Speaker, because we 
want to hire some people to fix the roads. We say let’s hire the 
people to fix the roads. They say let’s fire the people that fix the 
roads, Mr. Speaker. They want to fire the highways workers, 
Mr. Speaker. We want to fix the roads and that’s what we’re 
going to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They complain about lack of services to rural Saskatchewan. 
We want to hire some people, Mr. Speaker, to take the 
information highway to people in 366 communities across the 
province. We want every child, whether they live in Southey or 
Sedley or Humboldt or Saskatoon to have the same access to 
computers in the information highway, or whether they’re in La 
Loche, Mr. Speaker, or Weyburn or Ile-a-la-Crosse. That’s what 
we want to do. 
 
They complain we don’t do enough for rural Saskatchewan. We 
want to hire the people to do it. They want to fire the people 
who will do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They complain that we don’t do enough for education. We want 
to hire people, Mr. Speaker, that will develop the information 
highway in education, a curriculum to take to all parts of the 



450 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2001 

 

province that will provide services to special education 
students, Mr. Speaker. We want to double the funding and the 
employees for special education students — double it over what 
it was four years ago, Mr. Speaker. We want to hire people to 
do that. They want to fire people who would do that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, so much for the opposition. And that’s why 
George and Sonya, sitting there watching this budget debate, 
are wondering what the Leader of the Opposition is talking 
about and they’re just scratching their heads trying to make 
sense out of what this opposition is saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They complain about everything, Mr. Speaker. They say they 
want to fix the roads. We have a plan to fix the roads. What are 
they doing? They’re opposing it. 
 
They say they want more money for education. We’re putting 
the money into education. What are they doing, Mr. Speaker? 
They’re opposing it. They say they want us to help the children 
at risk. We’re helping the children at risk. What do they do, Mr. 
Speaker? They’re opposing it. They say they want more 
competitive taxes. We’re bringing in more competitive taxes. 
What are they doing, Mr. Speaker? They’re opposing it. 
 
Will they ever stop complaining? No, Mr. Speaker, they’ll 
never stop complaining. But what we will do, notwithstanding 
their complaints, Mr. Speaker; we will keep building. That is 
what the people of Saskatchewan expect of us. 
 
Our province is the best place in Canada to live, to work, and to 
raise a family. And our commitment, Mr. Speaker, is to make it 
even better. 
 
We will build, Mr. Speaker. We propose, Mr. Speaker: they 
oppose. We construct: they destruct. And I predict they’re going 
to self-destruct, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve laid out our plan in education, in 
transportation, and in technology. And notwithstanding the 
complaints of the opposition, we will implement our plan, Mr. 
Speaker — a plan of good news for the people of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 12:50 until 12:51. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 26 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken McMorris D’Autremont 
Bjornerud Weekes Kwiatkowski 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert  

Nays — 31 
 
Calvert Kasperski Hagel 
Lautermilch Atkinson Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Goulet Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Wartman Thomson Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Hamilton Junor 
Addley Jones Higgins 
Harper Trew Osika 
Lorjé Yates McCall 
Hillson   
 
The division bells rang from 12:54 until 12:55. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 
Calvert Kasperski Hagel 
Lautermilch Atkinson Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Goulet Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Wartman Thomson Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Hamilton Junor 
Addley Jones Higgins 
Harper Trew Osika 
Lorjé Yates McCall 
 

Nays — 27 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken McMorris D’Autremont 
Bjornerud Weekes Kwiatkowski 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert Hillson 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food Department 

Vote 1 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to wish each and every member a 
sunny and warm weekend at home with their friends and 
relatives. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:59. 
 
 
 


