















































Hansard: April 10, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 479 
 April 10, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
Humboldt constituents who are concerned about the loss of 
their community-based ambulance services. And the petition 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Cudworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today regarding the EMS (emergency medical 
services) report and the ramifications to people in our 
constituency: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Rose 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people in Swift Current and in the southwest concerned about 
the state of the hospital in Swift Current. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition’s signed by people in Swift Current, 
in Admiral, Cadillac, and Ponteix. 
 
I so present. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of some students from Balfour 
Collegiate in the city of Regina who are concerned about the 
health hazards of tobacco use. 
 

The prayer in the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to protect children and youth from 
second-hand smoke and protect them from the health 
hazards of tobacco use. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
who are concerned about maintaining local control of their 
ambulance service. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 

And the prayer is signed by citizens of Radville, Weyburn, 
Pangman, Ceylon, and Khedive. 
 
I so present. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition from students in the Regina area. And the 
prayer is as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to protect children and youth from 
second-hand smoke and protect them from the health 
hazards of tobacco use. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again on behalf of 
concerned citizens in southern Saskatchewan that are worried 
about the further cuts at the Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from 
Assiniboia and Limerick. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise to present a petition on 
behalf of students concerned about tobacco use, and they’re 
students in Regina. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



480 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2001 

 

Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to protect children and youth from 
second-hand smoke and to protect them from the health 
hazards of tobacco use. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by school students in Regina. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to present a petition 
on behalf of youth in Regina: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to protect children and youth from 
second-hand smoke and protect them from the health 
hazards of tobacco use. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present a 
petition on behalf of students against tobacco use. These 
students are from Regina. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to protect children and youth from 
second-hand smoke and protect them from the health 
hazards of tobacco use. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have the 
honour of providing a petition today, Mr. Speaker, from 
students in support of comprehensive tobacco control 
legislation. If I may read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to protect children and youth from 
second-hand smoke and protect them from the health 
hazards of tobacco use. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatories of this petition are from Regina 
and it’s my honour to table it on their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed. Pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province on the following matters: 
 

The centralization of ambulance services; 
 
The request for a new hospital in Swift Current; 
 
Level of services at Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia; and 

An energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 21 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation: why has 
the provincial government not utilized the allotted funds 
from the 2000-2001 fiscal year for the cultural facilities 
grant program? 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 21 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Health: why have large sections of The 
Psychologists Act, 1997 not yet been proclaimed? 

 
And also, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the minister of the Public Service Commission: what are 
the estimated increased staffing costs to the provincial 
government for the current fiscal year as a result of the 
recent decision to have hundreds of managers in the 
government departments become unionized workers? 

 
And also, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: has the increased staffing cost 
to the government that will come about as a result of the 
recent decision to designate hundreds of out-of-scope 
managers in government departments as in-scope 
employees been accounted for in the 2001-2002 provincial 
budget; and what will the financial effect of this decision be 
to the government? 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 21 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Government Growth Fund: (a) how much money has each 
of SGGF II, SGGF III, and SGGF IV put into Big Sky 
Pork, broken out in terms of grants, loans, loan guarantees, 
and equity investments; and (b) what percentage of Big Sky 
Pork does SGGF II, SGGF III, and SGGF IV currently 
own? 

 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice on day 21 that I shall ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the minister of SOCO: how much money has CIC put 
into Big Sky Pork, broken out in terms of grants, loans, 
loan guarantees, and equity investments; and (b) what 
percentage of Big Sky Pork does SOCO currently own? 

 
Also, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: how much money has CIC put into 
Big Sky Pork, broken out in terms of grants, loans, loan 



April 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 481 

 

guarantees, and equity investments; and (b) what 
percentage of Big Sky Pork does CIC currently own? 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health regarding the role of approved 
private homes in Saskatchewan: is the Saskatchewan 
government planning to reduce occupancy in approved 
private homes; (2) is the Saskatchewan government 
considering imposing expensive new regulations on 
approved private homes; (3) does the Saskatchewan 
government believe that approved private homes have a 
legitimate role in providing care to Saskatchewan 
residents? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
It is my pleasure to introduce through you, Mr. Speaker, to all 
members of the House a visitor — two visitors today — a 
visitor from Vancouver Island, British Columbia, Ms. Peggy 
Sluzalo, and with her, her sister, Ms. Betty Calvert. I’d ask all 
members to join in welcoming these two individuals to the 
gallery today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce to you and through you to the Legislative 
Assembly members, some very special people in your east 
gallery. I have with us today or with me today my daughter, 
Sherri Solar. Sherri is a nurse in Saskatoon and she is 
accompanied by her father, Robert Julé. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 
the Assembly 28 grade 8 students from Cudworth and Bruno 
schools. Welcome today. And they are accompanied by their 
teachers Mr. Brad Hauber from Cudworth School, as well as 
Mr. Jeff Marshak from Bruno School. 
 
And they have also accompanying them — because they’re 
such a good group we have to make sure that they have with 
them parents that they can teach lessons to — we have with us 
Mrs. Eiler, Mrs. Hoppe, and Mrs. Sand as chaperones. 
 
And I look forward to meeting with these students after 
question period today. I’d ask all members of the Assembly to 
join with me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
through you and to you a gentleman sitting in the Speaker’s 
gallery, Mr. Larry Spencer, the MP (Member of Parliament) for 
the riding of Regina-Lumsden-Lake Centre. Mr. Spencer 
represents about half of my constituency. And the constituents 
I’ve been talking to have been saying he’s been doing an 
excellent job since he’s been elected. 
 
And I want to welcome him here, and hope all the members will 
join me in welcoming him here. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to join with the member opposite in 
welcoming Larry and Larry to the legislature. As things happen 
in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, Larry was leaving as I was 
entering and . . . but I did get a chance to know him over the 
years. 
 
So welcome on behalf of the government members to both you 
gentlemen today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the members, a constituent of mine 
seated in the west gallery, Gord Gunoff, who is the business 
manager for IBEW (International Brotherhood of Electrical 
Workers) Local 2067; and with him is Pat Therrien, I 
understand his communications director. 
 
And please welcome them to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Region 7 Saskatchewan Drama Association Competition 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Saskatchewan Drama Festival for region 7 was held 
Thursday, March 29 through Saturday, March 31 at the Hudson 
Bay Composite High School, with 157 students participating in 
the event. This is the first time that this event was held . . . has 
been held in Hudson Bay. 
 
The Saskatchewan Drama Association provides 12 festivals 
across the province each year involving 4,000 students. 
 
The drama festival included nine performances. The schools 
that participated included Tisdale Middle and Secondary 
School, Porcupine Plain Composite High School, St. Mary’s 
High School in Prince Albert, Hudson Bay Composite High 
School, Birch Hills School, Melfort and Unit Comprehensive 
Collegiate, Sandin High School in Shellbrook, and Carlton 
Comprehensive High School in Prince Albert. 
 
(13:45) 
 
The event ended on Saturday with an awards banquet. And a 
very special thanks is to be given to Leanne Ukrainetz, who was 
the festival host coordinator for the event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to join 
with me in congratulating the community of Hudson Bay on a 
job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Visudyne Approved for Macular Degeneration Patients 
 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
inform the House today about more good news in our health 



482 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2001 

 

care system. More than 200 people in our province who suffer 
from macular degeneration — an eye disease that eventually 
leads to blindness — will see relief, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yesterday our government approved the coverage of a new and 
innovative way to treat this disease. With that announcement, 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan became just the third province to 
cover the cost of this treatment since it was approved by Health 
Canada last June. 
 
The treatment consists of two steps. First, the eye specialist 
gives the patient a drug called Visudyne. The specialist then 
uses a laser therapy to activate the drug. As many as six 
treatments may be needed at a cost of $2,500 each over a 
two-year period. 
 
While this treatment is not a cure, Mr. Speaker, for the disease, 
it does offer hope to those affected. It gives patients a chance to 
enjoy the visual beauty of life for a longer period of time than 
ever before possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to offering a broad 
range of treatments to ensure good health for all people in 
Saskatchewan. We are committed to doing so in an affordable, 
reasonable manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also committed to wellness because we 
know that healthy citizens equal a healthy Saskatchewan. Thank 
you. 
 

Bruno Midget T-Birds Win Gold 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Broomball has been big 
in Bruno forever. And the tradition has continued this year also. 
The Bruno Midget T-Birds competed in the provincial playoffs 
hosted in Debden and brought home gold once again. 
 
Congratulations to the team for your victory and to the coaches, 
Ray Bender and Jeff Basset. 
 
And the Bruno Junior Axemen also captured the provincial title 
this year, hosted in Big River. They went on to the national 
championship held in Kitchener, Ontario at the end of March. 
The team, representing Saskatchewan, played hard in the 
preliminary rounds of the tournament. In the final game the 
Bruno Axemen were up against the defending champions, a 
team from Quebec. 
 
With goals from Cameron Weiman, Jeff Basset, Lee Huber and 
Kyle Soli, the team was victorious, winning the game 4 to 2 and 
capturing the bronze medal. Game most valuable player was 
Ryan Bender. 
 
Besides collecting the team bronze medals, some team members 
were also recipients of special tournament awards: Ryan 
Bender, the Tournament Team Most Valuable Player; Michael 
Weiman, the Tournament Team All-Star Goalie Award; Jeff 
Basset, Tournament First Team All-Star Forward Award; and to 
Ray Bender, the Tournament Coach Of The Year Award. 
 
Congratulations to all those individual award winners and to the 
team, the Bruno Axemen for a very fine effort. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regional Science Fair 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had a wonderful 
experience last Thursday. I was at the regional science fair in 
Lumsden. I was very impressed by the innovative projects these 
young people had developed. The overall winner, who will go 
to the nationals, was Derek Heisler. Derek’s project was called 
fog harvesting. 
 
What is fog harvesting you may ask? Well, Mr. Speaker, it uses 
screens to harvest fog from the air and provide water in desert 
lands. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I want to mention a project that caught 
my eye as soon as I entered into the fair. The purpose of this 
project that I saw was to discover the effects of second-hand 
smoke on mealworms. And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, the 
effects are not good. 
 
The two grade 10 students, Chris Butler and Paul Felix, created 
a project in which half of their worms were subjected to 
second-hand smoke and the control group was not. The 
mealworms who were subjected to the smoke, Mr. Speaker, 
three died, and all of them were slowed down in their activity. 
All this took place in just 24 hours. Imagine the effects of 
long-term exposure. 
 
This project proved that the effects of second-hand smoke are 
very real and very dangerous, Mr. Speaker. No one wants to 
end up like those mealworms, so I’d encourage all those who 
are able to butt out and live a healthy lifestyle. It’ll be good for 
you; it’ll be good for those around you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all of us to congratulate these 
insightful young people and all those who worked so hard to 
make their science fair such a tremendous success. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Governor General Award for Bravery 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
recently over 150 people turned out for supper and an award 
ceremony in the hamlet of Simmie where two young men from 
the community were presented with the Governor General 
Award for bravery, by Her Honour Lieutenant Governor Lynda 
Haverstock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the event that merited this award occurred on June 
8, 1998, when Craig Hoisington and Craig Braun were at the 
local fishing hole to do a little fishing. And seven-year-old 
Jason Hofer was playing along the edge by a bridge and lost his 
balance and fell in. 
 
Seeing young Hofer thrashing in the water, Braun jumped in 
without hesitation. As Hofer grabbed on to him, Braun tried to 
get to shore. Struggling with exhaustion, he called to 
Hoisington for a hand. When Hoisington reached them, he dove 
in and helped his friend and the young boy get out of the water. 
 
What’s most remarkable about these two young men’s heroic 



April 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 483 

 

skills, Mr. Speaker, is their lack of swimming skills. 
 
Jason Hofer’s father, Leonard, said Jason was so lucky there 
was an angel, or maybe I should say two angels were with him 
that day. 
 
It’s all too often we do not recognize people for extraordinary 
deeds. So often we hear anyone would have done the same 
thing. As time passes, this story may fade into history, however, 
the unique bond that was formed between these two brave 
individuals as they risked their own lives to save another will 
last forever. 
 
I think it is appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that we should 
acknowledge Craig Braun and Craig Hoisington for their heroic 
deeds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Districts Receive Awards 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Those in public service usually get noticed when 
there’s a glitch of some kind and they don’t often receive 
recognition for the outstanding work they do as a matter of 
course day in and day out. 
 
So in a small way today I want to help correct this imbalance by 
bringing to the attention of the members of the Assembly, four 
Green Ribbon awards given to health districts in Saskatchewan 
for excellence in particular areas of health care. 
 
And I’m especially happy to make this report, Mr. Speaker, 
because two of these awards went to our own Prince Albert 
Health District. 
 
The first award went to Moose Jaw-Thunder Creek in the 
human resources category for a safety review program designed 
to improve workplace safety. The health promotion award was 
given to Midwest Health District for its Mobile Agriculture and 
Safety Resource Centre program designed to advise farmers on 
how to reduce specific risks on the farm. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert Health District won awards 
in the community involvement category and for the continuum 
of care category. The first one is for the creation of a specially 
designed treatment room for cancer patients receiving 
chemotherapy; the second is for the creation of an early 
childhood development team, a team of professionals who work 
together to streamline work with the families of individual 
cases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I only have time to congratulate the districts with 
each award. Of course there’s a team of dedicated people 
behind all of these awards and I want to congratulate them all. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Girls Basketball Team Wins Championship 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
with a great deal of pride that I rise this afternoon to bring 

recognition to 10 talented young ladies from the constituency of 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
On the weekend of March 17 in the city of Moose Jaw, these 
young ladies brought their A game to Hoopla, our provincial 
basketball championships. Mr. Speaker, on the aforementioned 
weekend, the Birch Hills Marauders girls basketball team were 
crowned the Provincial 1 AA champions. The team, coached by 
Ken Morrison and ably assisted by Cathy Mills, has been to 
Hoopla four out of the last six years. 
 
This in itself is a tribute to the coaches and school. But, Mr. 
Speaker, this is the first time the Birch Hills girls have walked 
away with a first-place finish. 
 
Although these young ladies dominated their division during 
Hoopla, the toughest game they played was in the final when 
they were able to best their long-time nemesis, the Meath Park 
Mustangs, also from Saskatchewan Rivers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
the Birch Hills Marauders girls basketball team on their 
remarkable achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Wildlife Federation Recognizes Schools 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we all hope that what we do 
ultimately is for the good of our children. Regardless of our 
profession, it’s our desire to pass on a community, an economy, 
and an environment that will nurture the next and future 
generations. What we sometimes are not aware of is that often 
the next generation is already ahead of us showing us the way 
to a better world. 
 
This is especially true when it comes to protecting and 
conserving our environment. Two schools in our province, one 
in my constituency of Regina Lakeview and one in the 
northwestern town of Canwood, have received national 
recognition from the Canadian Wildlife Federation for their 
Habitat 2000 projects. And in the process they have provided 
excellent examples for their elders. 
 
The week of April 8 to 14 is National Wildlife Week. Both 
projects are connected to this year’s theme which is “Our 
Community Includes Wildlife: Does Yours?” 
 
Students from all grades at Canwood School, under Principal 
Jeff Kyliuk, created a shelter belt near the school to provide 
habitat for many species, and a teaching instrument for future 
students. 
 
The students of Marion McVeety School in Regina under 
Principal Peter Looysen, have created gardens of native grasses 
and flowers, planted trees, and built birdhouses that create 
wildlife habitat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the students and teachers at these two schools, and 
I am sure at others across the province, deserve our 
congratulations and our gratitude. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



484 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2001 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskPower Management 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
minister responsible for SaskPower. Last Thursday StatsCan 
confirmed that the NDP (New Democratic Party) continues to 
chase people out of the province. In fact, last year the NDP 
posted the worst population loss in a decade. And on Friday, 
StatsCan confirmed that the NDP continues to chase jobs out of 
Saskatchewan — 11,300 of them over the last year. 
 
Yesterday we learned that the NDP is actually paying people to 
leave Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, SaskPower’s senior 
vice-president is being paid by SaskPower to relocate to 
Victoria but keep his job. And just for good measure they’re 
giving him a 7 per cent salary increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this. Yesterday 
SaskPower officials indicated that this was a good move for the 
corporation. The question to the minister today is, does he agree 
with that assessment, and if he does will he table both the new 
contract for the former senior VP (vice-president) as well as the 
early retirement plan that he could have accessed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I said 
yesterday that as a minister I will not get involved in the 
day-to-day operations. It was that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, that asked our Crowns to be more autonomous, Mr. 
Speaker. They asked ministers to get off of the board, Mr. 
Speaker. They asked them to get off of the board. Mr. Speaker, 
I am not on the board. I will not get involved in day-to-day 
operations of our Crown corporations. 
 
While I’m on my feet though, Mr. Speaker, our Crowns provide 
great service in this province and I think it’s inappropriate that 
we go after people who have worked in the Crowns for in 
excess of 30 years, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s just inappropriate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister may not want to answer 
these questions but we will continue to ask them on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people who want some answers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday one of Saskatchewan 
Power’s vice-presidents that’s actually staying here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, confirmed that SaskPower has 
added 200 new managers over the past five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the big question for the government and that 
Saskatchewan people are asking today is why? Why? Is it that 
SaskPower is serving more businesses? No. We’ve lost jobs 
over the last year. Is it that there are more SaskPower 
customers? No. We have 4,200 fewer people in Saskatchewan 
now than we did a year ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why SaskPower under 
these circumstances needs a massive expansion in its executive 
suites? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, I do want 
to point out, under the previous government I would not take 
advice and you do have to be careful when it comes to numbers 
from that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I want to say that on this issue, as on the 
other issue, as a minister responsible I will not get into the 
day-to-day operations of our corporation. SaskPower, Mr. 
Speaker, provides wonderful service across the province, Mr. 
Speaker. They provide reliable, safe service, Mr. Speaker, at the 
lowest possible cost, Mr. Speaker, and we should simply not get 
into attacking the people who work within the corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not talking about minutia 
here; we’re not asking the minister to go over and park the 
president’s car. We’re asking him important questions, general 
questions about the corporation in terms of keeping their costs 
down. If we can keep the corporation’s costs down, maybe we 
won’t have to endure six per cent rate hikes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, according to the former SaskPower 
president, Jack Messer . . . and apparently Mr. Messer has some 
concerns as well. And Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty bad when the 
voice of austerity at SaskPower is the same man that the NDP 
gave a $300,000 golden handshake to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he indicates that there are at least 600 more people 
working for SaskPower today than there was in ’95. The head 
of SaskPower’s largest union says the company has hired 200 
new managers since ’95. And the union says SaskPower has 
hired another 600 consultants. 
 
To the minister: the question is clear. Will he clear up the 
confusion? How many new managers and consultants has 
SaskPower hired in the past five years and why are these people 
being hired when SaskPower isn’t serving any more businesses 
or customers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I see him toss that in the garbage. That’s 
a good place to put that question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last five years, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan’s economy has grown, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 
good thing, Mr. Speaker. Over the last number of years, Mr. 
Speaker, SaskPower’s business has grown. That’s another good 
thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Sask Party has continually called on our government to 
provide better service in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. With 
our economy growing, with SaskPower’s business growing, Mr. 
Speaker, it is logical, Mr. Speaker, that maybe there are . . . we 
need more people, as we do in Highways. They ask for more 
service in Highways. We have more people to provide those 



April 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 485 

 

services, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I do not understand the 
logic from that member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister doesn’t 
understand the logic and believe you me, it’s not hard to see 
why he doesn’t understand it. It’s a lot . . . it’s common sense, 
Mr. Speaker. Here’s the logic of the official opposition. We 
want to ask questions in this legislature about keeping the 
overall costs of Crown corporations down so that we can save 
taxpayers money and avoid rate hikes. That’s the logic, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And you can bet this government doesn’t 
understand it. Mr. Speaker, the big question that we have for the 
minister today is why? Why is SaskPower increasing 
management by 50 per cent? Is it producing 50 per cent more 
power? No. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we also know that SaskPower has 
confirmed yesterday that there are 350 SaskPower managers 
and they will receive a 7 per cent increase in their salary — 
twice the rate of inflation and three times what unionized 
workers are getting . . . (inaudible) . . . SaskPower has decided 
to hire hundreds of new managers. And why are they getting 7 
per cent increases in salary when the corporation is charging 6 
per cent increases in utility bills to Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it incredulous 
that that member would talk about keeping overall costs down, 
that member who worked as an MA (ministerial assistant) in 
Premier Devine’s government who racked up the largest debt in 
this province’s history, Mr. Speaker. That’s a lesson on keeping 
costs down, Mr. Speaker. That’s incredulous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the Times Colonist which talks 
about . . . it’s a quote out of Los Angeles, Mr. Speaker, that 
says: California’s power crisis will likely lead to higher taxes 
and hurt out-of-state investment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we kept our rates 
down. And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, our taxes are going 
down as well, Mr. Speaker. We need to compliment what our 
corporation SaskPower does for the people of Saskatchewan 
and the services that it provides, not ridicule them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister clearly doesn’t 
want to answer some very basic questions that we’re asking on 
this side of the House. These are questions that he should be 
answering as the minister responsible. And if he’s not prepared 
to ask these questions on behalf of Saskatchewan people, he 
should get out of the way and let someone sit there who will ask 
those questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the people . . . He doesn’t want to 
give an answer in this legislature, but he owes an answer to the 
shareholders of this corporation, which is the people of 
Saskatchewan. They deserve to know how many managers have 
been added to the SaskPower payroll and how much of a salary 
increase those managers will be getting. 
 
And while we’re at it, they need to be able to . . . they deserve 
to know, Mr. Speaker, whether the 7 per cent salary increase 
that SaskPower management will be getting this year will also 
be extended to the other Crowns. That’s the question of the 
minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the minister confirm that all Crown corporation managers 
— SaskEnergy, SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), 
SaskTel, CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) — can look forward to a 7 to 9 per cent salary 
increase as well? Will he answer that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, as the 
minister’s office, we’re not going to get involved in the 
day-to-day operations, as I answered this question a number of 
times, Mr. Speaker, to this member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to again, while I’m on my feet and we’re 
talking about power rates, Mr. Speaker, refer to the Calgary 
Herald which talks about California, Mr. Speaker, which will 
face a 50 per cent likely power rate hike. 
 
It says that increase would come on top of already a 9 percent to 
15 per cent increase the Public Utilities Commission approved 
in January as well as an additional 10 per cent increase already 
scheduled for next year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our utilities, SaskPower included of course, Mr. 
Speaker, I think and I think most of Saskatchewan people 
believe, provide great service, Mr. Speaker, across 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, it is just simply inappropriate 
that we go after our public servants who provide this great 
service to the people and the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Corporation Debt 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is also for the minister responsible for 
CIC. 
 
Mr. Minister, according to last year’s budget, Crown 
corporation debt for 2001 was supposed to be about $3.3 
billion. However, Crown debt is projected to be over $3.5 
billion, an increase of over $200 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask the minister: can the minister explain why Crown 
corporation debt jumped by over $200 million over your 
projected estimate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if there’s anybody in 



486 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2001 

 

this province that should know about debt, it’s the members 
sitting over there because they saddled this province with a $15 
billion debt. 
 
But while the member is referring to the budget document — 
and these numbers are at page 84 of the budget, Mr. Speaker — 
and he notes that the estimate, which is an estimate at the 
beginning of the fiscal year for Crown debt, was $3.3. million 
. . . billion dollars and it is . . . the debt forecast now for the 
March 31, 2001 would be $3.5 billion, an increase $200 million 
dollars as the member says. 
 
The next line I notice that the government debt was estimated 
— estimated — at $7.9 billion, Mr. Speaker; it turned out to be 
7.65, a decrease of $250 million but he didn’t mention that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think we’ll take 
that as a confirmation that indeed government debt did jump up 
by $200 million in the Crowns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s also going to 
jump up by another $200 million over the next three years. 
 
Last week the member for North Battleford raised this very 
issue and the minister didn’t seem to have a clue what he was 
talking about. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s all on page 54 of the budget. It says, and I 
quote: 
 

Crown corporation debt is projected to rise from $3.4 
billion at March 31, 2000 to $3.5 billion at March 31, 2001 
and . . . rise to $3.7 billion over the medium term. 

 
Mr. Minister, that’s what it says in your document. Why is the 
Crown debt projected to rise by an additional $200 million over 
already a confirmed increase of $200 million last year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is just how 
ridiculous and unreliable anything that comes from that side of 
the House is. If the member referred to, Mr. Speaker, the last 
line of the page he’s looking at it says: total debt estimated, 
$11.187 billion; total debt forecast at the end of the year, 
$11.153 billion. Mr. Speaker, that is a reduction, as anyone who 
can add can see, of $34 million. 
 
Now the government debt has gone down in the last year — 
both government and Crowns — $34 million. The member says 
it’s going up. The only time government debt ever went up, Mr. 
Speaker, in this province was when those members were in 
office and we’re going to make sure that doesn’t happen again, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 

Speaker, last week the minister responsible for CIC didn’t 
understand the question raised by the minister from . . . for the 
member for North Battleford. Today the Minister of Finance 
does not understand the very paragraph that he has within his 
own document. 
 
So let’s turn, Mr. Speaker, to SaskPower. Last year 
SaskPower’s debt was $200 million higher — from 1.6 billion 
in last year’s budget to well over 1.8 billion. SaskPower rates 
are up; SaskPower’s debt is also up 14 per cent. Yet we see 
SaskPower managers rewarding themselves with a 7 per cent 
salary increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has SaskPower’s debt jumped by 14 per cent, 
over $200 million, from last year’s budget? And why is the 
NDP giving SaskPower managers a big pay hike when 
SaskPower’s debt is increasing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the test of whether the debts 
in the Crown corporation are appropriate is whether they have 
an appropriate debt-equity ratio. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite that yes, yes, as I said 
on budget day — if the member would listen for a second 
instead of just yelling from his seat — as I said on budget day, 
Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporation debt will go up. And in the 
case of SaskPower it will increase by about $430 million by 
2005, as a result of SaskPower’s plans to expand its 
cogeneration capacity at Cory and Muskeg Lake. 
 
These are investments, Mr. Speaker, that will increase 
SaskPower’s ability to produce and export power. And what I 
want to know and the people want to know is this: are those 
members opposed to the expansion of SaskPower’s generating 
capacity? Yes or no, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Finance is using two calculations. He’s 
using government debt and Crown debt. So let’s look at those 
two things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The auditor says that the total debt is actually a lot higher. But 
even using the government’s own figures in this year’s budget, 
total debt will increase by about $175 million over the next 
three years According to the budget, total debt this year will be 
11.153 billion. By 2004, total debt will be 11.328 million. I 
think the Minister of Finance read those numbers to us this 
afternoon. That’s an increase of $175 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is actually planning to increase 
the debt. Mr. Speaker, will the Premier confirm that his 
government plans to increase the debt of this province by 175 
million over the next three years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the test of whether the 
province is on the right track when it comes to debt, is not to be 
determined by listening to the opposition. It’s to be determined 



April 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 487 

 

by listening to the credit-rating agencies. 
 
And what I can tell this House and the people of the province, 
Mr. Speaker, is this — in the last five years this province, this 
government, has received nine credit-rating upgrades. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — What do credit-rating agencies look at, Mr. 
Speaker? They look at whether we have a sustainable debt. 
That’s what they look at, and whether we’re going to operate at 
a balance. 
 
My question to the people would be this, Mr. Speaker: does 
anyone believe that these members over there who created the 
debt in the first place know more about debt management than 
the credit-rating agencies themselves? I don’t think so, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t think so. 
 
When it comes to these members and taking advice from them 
about debt, we’ve been there and we’ve done that and we ain’t 
doing it again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is still for the Premier and I’d ask the 
Premier to answer it. 
 
Mr. Premier, on pages 83 and 84 of your government document, 
you indicate that the government debt plus Crown debt is 
11.153 billion this year, and by 2004 it will rise to $11.328 
billion — an increase of 175 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re simply asking the Premier to confirm the 
numbers in his own budget. Will the Premier confirm his 
government will drive the province $175 million further into 
debt over the next three years? Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, while the member is trying to 
act like he’s somehow revealing information to the House and 
the public, I want everybody to know that these numbers were 
released on March 29, and I think even the day before there was 
a briefing about these numbers to the media. The member isn’t 
revealing anything. 
 
But I’ll say this, Mr. Speaker. The debt to GDP (gross domestic 
product) ratio in Saskatchewan is going down almost as quickly 
as the popularity or lack thereof of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Because the people know, Mr. Speaker, 
that this government has a good record when it comes to debt 
management. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this government is also 
going to build, and we are going to use the Crown corporations 
to build, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to build more in terms of 

power export capacity. And I might add, SOCO, which is part 
of the increasing debt, is going to expand and develop research 
parks, Mr. Speaker. That’s what . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think we’ll take the Minister 
of Finance’s words as confirmation that indeed the debt of the 
province of Saskatchewan is going up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, people in this province have been 
waiting for the new Premier to make his mark on this 
government. Well he’s made his mark and it’s in red ink. High 
taxes, bigger government, and now more debt. That’s the kind 
of government the new Premier is running. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the NDP bus has taken a sharp left 
turn. Mr. Speaker, under Roy Romanow this government used 
to, and I say used to, put a priority on debt reduction. Why have 
they abandoned debt reduction as a priority? Why are they 
planning to drive Saskatchewan taxpayers $175 million further 
into debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you 
what’s taken a sharp turn in the last couple of weeks. It’s the 
political popularity of the party opposite. That’s what’s taken a 
sharp turn. And it’s down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I’ll tell you why it’s down. I’ll tell you why 
it’s down. Because, Mr. Speaker, they sit in their benches day 
after day with their prophecy of doom and gloom while on this 
side of the House we deliver a budget that is going to improve 
the prospects for the future of Saskatchewan people, border to 
border, north to south, Mr. Speaker. Because what you’ve got 
on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, is a government that 
believes in this province and in its people and in investing in the 
future of this province. That’s why the left turn over there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Investment in Potato Industry 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
minister responsible for the Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now know that the Crown debt in this province 
is expected to grow significantly and it’s easy to see why. 
Yesterday I asked the minister how much money Saskatchewan 
Valley Potato Corporation lost last year. And the minister didn’t 
know. How do people expect the NDP government to control 
the debt if the cabinet ministers don’t even know how much 
money their investments are losing? 
 
Mr. Speaker, a CIC official confirmed to the media yesterday 
that the Sask Valley Potato Corporation did indeed lose money 
last year and expects to lose money this year and possibly the 
year following. I ask the minister again: what was the total 
operating loss for this corporation for the year 2000? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



488 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2001 

 

First of all, first of all, Mr. Speaker, as a farm boy, let me say 
how much I love potatoes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, look, I’ve answered this question a number of 
times, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in that area, Mr. Speaker, we 
have over $120 million with the federal government invested in 
infrastructure by way of irrigation equipment. It was a process 
that we went through, Mr. Speaker, to try to add value and 
create jobs out in that area, Mr. Speaker. I think the nucleus of 
that is there, Mr. Speaker. What we have now is jobs and we’re 
going to add value to an industry that I believe will last long 
into the future, Mr. Speaker, and it clearly, that mandate, stays 
in place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, this is amazing. The NDP 
government is forecasting major increases in the Crown 
corporation debt, resulting in higher government debt overall. 
The minister in charge of CIC is refusing to tell the public how 
much more his failed venture in the potato industry has lost. 
And yet . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Question period is not 
over yet. Would you allow the member to put the question 
please. The member will proceed. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They’re still 
meddling in the industry, even though they expect to lose 
money. The potato growers out there are saying, stay out of it. 
They’ve already developed the industry years ago; they don’t 
need the government to come in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — The people who have been stung by the 
government over the SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) fiasco can’t believe the NDP is still 
pursing this. Yet Saskatchewan Valley Potato Corporation is 
still out there buying equipment, leasing land. Mr. Speaker why 
is CIC still pursing this venture? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
understanding that Stockwell Day has an employee that is 
looking for work right now. Maybe they can get him to do some 
investigation on potatoes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, look. Mr. Speaker, day after day, the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, criticize us, criticize this government for 
investing outside of Saskatchewan. So what do we do — we 
invest inside of Saskatchewan. They criticize us for that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, look, what we’ve got, Mr. Speaker, is an industry 
that is growing. We export seed potatoes to Prince Edward 
Island now, Mr. Speaker. And it is my estimation, and I think 
probably the people of Saskatchewan, that we have a good 
industry growing there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Clearly, when we are able to, and when there would be no loss 
to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, this will be turned back over 

to the private sector, as was always our mandate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 207 — The Regulatory Reform Act 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill 
No. 207, The Regulatory Reform Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 15, The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2001 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 16, 
The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2001 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Professional Corporations Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 17, 
The Professional Corporations Act be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, revert to orders of the 
day, with leave. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the 
Assembly to move two motions regarding the sittings of the 
Assembly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Souris-Cannington: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(4) and the Rules and the 



April 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 489 

 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
that when this Assembly adjourns on Thursday, April 12, 
2001, it do stand adjourned until Wednesday, April 18 at 
1:30 p.m. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move as well by 
leave of the Assembly: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(1) the Rules and Procedures of 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, that when this 
Assembly adjourns on Wednesday, April 25, 2001 it do 
stand adjourned until Friday, April 27, 2001 at 10:00 a.m. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great deal of 
pleasure to table the questions to no. 55 through 58. 
 
The Speaker: — The answers to questions 55, 56, 57, and 58 
are tabled. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
would move that at this point we proceed to private members’ 
public Bills, second readings, item 1, Bill No. 202, The 
Holocaust Memorial Day Act. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 202 — The Holocaust Memorial Day Act 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll begin my 
remarks by thanking all members of this Assembly for allowing 
us to proceed with discussion today on this important Bill. 
 
Normally, a Bill of this nature would be brought to the 
Assembly through private members’ private Bills. However, 
because of the time frames involved, the Jewish Council has 
asked that we consider this Bill as a public Bill, and I am 
pleased to sponsor it as such today. 
 
Holocaust Memorial Day is celebrated throughout the world as 
a day of remembrance, a day when we have an opportunity to 
think about some of the enduring lessons from the Second 
World War. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have brought forward this particular Bill so 
that this legislature may enact legislation which will bring 
forward Holocaust Memorial Day, or Yom haShoah, as it’s 
known throughout the world, on an annual basis. 
 
This year, the Yom haShoah will be recognized on April 22nd 

in our calendar. It moves about in terms of a date because it is 
set by the Jewish lunar calendar. 
 
This is a day when we have an opportunity as Canadians — and 
in particular here in Saskatchewan — to reflect on some of the 
important lessons from the Second World War and some of the 
important lessons that we have learned, since that time, about 
the Holocaust. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly need not be reminded 
and of course know that the Holocaust was one of the darkest 
periods of human history and need not be reminded of the 
important role that Canadian citizens —and people, men and 
women, from Saskatchewan — played during the Second 
World War in fighting against these atrocities as well as the 
other many injustices that were occurring in our world at this 
point. 
 
I have agreed to bring forward this legislation, Mr. Speaker, in 
part because I’m of a generation that has largely not known war. 
My grandfather fought in the Second World War; indeed, as 
many other members of this Assembly have spoken during this 
session of relatives of theirs who fought in that war as well. 
 
Today, Canada’s role in the world is largely one of a 
peacekeeper. But I think it’s important that we continue to 
remember that there are great atrocities that occur in our world, 
even today. 
 
Over the past several years, I have had the honour of being 
invited to address the Jewish Council, and speak to people here 
in Regina about the importance of us remembering the lessons 
of the Holocaust. During the Holocaust, more than six million 
men, women, and children were murdered by the Nazi 
authorities. 
 
The vast, vast majority of these were Jewish people. But of 
course, there were others who were singled out because of their 
physical disabilities, mental disabilities, sexual orientation, 
race, and religion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the Saskatchewan Jewish 
Council on the work that they have done to invite in other 
groups to participate in their services of remembrance, and the 
work that they have done reaching out to other communities 
here in Regina and across the province, in terms of making sure 
that we all remember the enduring lessons of the Holocaust. 
 
One of the most important of those lessons, Mr. Speaker, is the 
lesson that basic human rights transcend all laws, and are 
inherent to our nature as people, and that we must work hard 
and remain ever vigilant to ensure that these rights are 
protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact that we turn on the news on, pretty much, 
unfortunately, any given day, and look around the world, we 
can see that many places, the lessons of the Holocaust have not 
been taken to heart, have not been remembered, and in fact we 
continue to see atrocities committed. 
 
The Jewish Council in bringing forward what I believe to be an 
excellent program of education for Canadian people and for 
Saskatchewan people, help to remind us all that in our 



490 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2001 

 

day-to-day lives, there’s much that we can do to ensure that all 
people continue to enjoy basic human rights in our democratic 
societies. 
 
Canada has played a great role in the world as a peacekeeper, in 
ensuring that the atrocities that were allowed to happen 
throughout the last part of the 1930s and early ’40s, are not 
allowed to escalate as they did during that time. 
 
A couple of years ago, Mr. Speaker, the member for 
Kindersley, myself, and two other members of the Assembly 
had the opportunity to travel to Germany to participate in an 
exchange of parliaments. It happened on the 10th anniversary of 
the fall of the Berlin Wall. 
 
I was particularly . . . Perhaps I should say it this way. I was 
unprepared for what I came across when I was in Germany. 
This was, although not my first trip to Germany, certainly my 
first trip to Berlin. As I was wandering about the city the day 
after I arrived, I stumbled across a very pleasant looking small 
park right in the centre of the city, and there was a large sign 
erected on it in front of the train station. On that sign listed 
several communities I guess you would call them, several stops 
that were made there. 
 
And I asked one of the German ladies that was standing next to 
me at the crosswalk what this sign was. She said that the sign 
was there to commemorate the fact that it was from a small 
one-story train station that they had deported the Jews out of 
Berlin to these various locations. 
 
I was, I have to say, quite taken aback that here in the middle of 
this beautiful, modern city was a small stone structure that 
served still today as a train station, but it was from there that the 
deportation of the Jews off to the death camps had occurred. 
 
I was surprised when I was in Berlin, by the way that the people 
there have taken to heart lessons of the war and are ever 
mindful of it. Whether it’s the signs that point out as a constant 
reminder to these commuters of the great terror that had 
happened during the Holocaust and the fact that they had 
exported or deported so many of the Jews off to the death 
camps. Whether it was the fact that they have in the middle of 
their community a large bombed-out church that stays as a 
reminder of the war and of course the destruction that it brought 
about. Or whether it was even just simpler things such as I 
found when I was out for a walk and came across a pawnshop. 
 
In that pawnshop was a beautiful brass menorah. And I stopped 
and I thought not much of it except for the fact that this was 
really quite a beautiful and large menorah. And I came to think 
as I was looking at it, the history that this one item must have 
seen. 
 
These are not items that families would of course pawn, and 
here some 50 years after the war this item ends up in a pawn 
shop. Why? Well obviously, or I would assume it was 
confiscated during the war, had turned up at some later date, 
and now simply had lost track of its original owners. 
 
In Europe people have constant reminders of the war. They 
have constant reminders of the importance of the issues that 
were dealt with by, in my case, my grandparents; in other 

people’s cases their parents, and for many people who still live 
in Saskatchewan that they themselves went through during that 
time period. 
 
There is, however, Mr. Speaker, a new generation of people for 
whom these events are not as clearly remembered. And for 
whom this is merely an item of history. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, I hope will help to provide an 
opportunity for generations of people, different generations of 
people to share their views and experiences so that the younger 
generation may understand the importance of the Second World 
War and the enduring lessons we’ve learned from that 
Holocaust — the importance of multiculturalism, the 
importance of tolerance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I won’t say a great deal more on this, except to 
again thank members for their consideration of this Bill. And I 
would move, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Southeast 
that this Bill be now read a second time . . . sorry, Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When I was 
12-years-old I read the book The Rise and Fall of the Third 
Reich by William Lawrence Shirer. It was an astounding 
revelation of horrors to my young mind and has left an indelible 
impression with me to this day. 
 
My family has strong ties to the Jewish community and I attend 
many Jewish celebrations and memorials. It never fails to move 
me as I witness the strength of spirit and belief that has carried 
the Jewish people through such a catastrophic period in our 
history as the Holocaust. I hope that as a civilization we learn 
from our history and don’t repeat our mistakes. Only by always 
remembering will we never forget. 
 
Edmund Burke once said that all it takes for the triumph of evil 
is for good people to do nothing. 

 
We must remind ourselves yearly, even daily, that what 
happened once could happen again if we allow racial hatred to 
fester and bloom. 
 
Ceremonies like the Living in Harmony Awards in Saskatoon 
recognize our diversities and promote respect for those 
differences. We must continue to encourage more of this 
recognition of people or organizations who show leadership in 
promoting tolerance and understanding of our cultural 
differences. 
 
The enormity of what man did to man in the Holocaust is 
eternally a just cause for grief and solemn remembrance. It is 
my fervent hope that by proclaiming in legislation The 
Holocaust Memorial Day Act, we can at least once a year 
remember and pay heed so that we never again tolerate such 
despicable actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to second this motion. 
 



April 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 491 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
honoured today to stand in this Assembly and just to make a 
few comments in regards to the legislation we have before us, 
The Holocaust Memorial Day Act, on behalf of the official 
opposition, the Sask Party caucus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we give thought to what this Act signifies and 
the importance of the Act, we’re mindful of the circumstances 
that have brought about the debate, and a debate that continues 
to take place in, not only in our country but in other parts of the 
world, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that we need to recognize that 
each and every one of us were created equal. 
 
It doesn’t matter what the colour of our skin is; it doesn’t matter 
what nationality we are, Mr. Speaker. I believe in the mind of 
the Almighty God who created us that he did create us equal 
and he did create us with the value of recognizing that each and 
every one of us are important. 
 
The legislation before us however brings out a specific area and 
a specific people and that being the Jewish people and the 
Jewish nation, and just is a reminder of the atrocities that this 
people in this nation had faced through the years and certainly 
in the Second World War. 
 
Mr. Speaker, anyone who has taken the time to do some 
Biblical studies and certainly has done studies in the Old 
Testament has seen on numerous occasions where this people, 
this Jewish nation that God called his people, were really put in 
very difficult circumstances. And many times those 
circumstances came as a result of their failure to recognize the 
importance of God in their lives. 
 
And however, it also points out the fact that the God who called 
them his own continued to reach out to them even in their 
difficult times. And I think it refers to each and every one of us 
as well that this God who loves us so much is reaching out to us 
even when we turn our backs on him. 
 
And I think it’s important for us to realize how significant it is 
for us to recognize the value of each one in the human race. Mr. 
Speaker, when we think of the atrocities that took place during 
the Second World War — and even today we see atrocities; we 
see just most recently in the Bosnia situation and we see that 
exemplified in the Rwandan situation, Mr. Speaker — it 
re-emphasizes the fact that it’s important for us to really begin 
to evaluate the value that we put on human life and human 
dignity. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, our caucus certainly stands in support of this 
motion today, pointing out the fact that we do value human life. 
We do value each individual for who they are and their 
importance in this broad family of individuals and people that 
we have in this world that we recognize today. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to stand here and offer this voice 
of support for this special recognition. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
trust that as a result of this, that it’s just another motivating 
point encouraging us to have greater value for those around us 

and to show the respect to each individual that we come in 
contact with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am also pleased to 
rise this afternoon to be able to give my support to this 
important motion. But may I say that I hope that this Bill does 
more than just honour one people who suffered a great injustice 
and does more than merely commemorate one historic event — 
the Holocaust — no matter how horrific that event may have 
been. 
 
The event was tragic, but what is even more tragic is that it was 
not unique. Racism remains prevalent throughout our world and 
even genocide is still not unknown. 
 
I hope that in passing this motion it will cause all of us to 
examine ourselves and our society for any lingering prejudice, 
hate, and racism which we may nurture and which continues to 
hamper our spiritual and social progress, both as individuals 
and as a society. 
 
Certainly commemorating the Holocaust is important both in 
terms of those who suffered so at that time. And it certainly hit 
me as an individual that Anne Frank was murdered on the day 
of my birth. 
 
But as I say, it is more than merely commemorating one terrible 
injustice of our history. This is a time when I would suggest that 
all MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly), and I hope 
the people of Saskatchewan generally, come together to combat 
those negative forces and emotions that I frankly doubt any of 
us are totally free from. 
 
But I think this is a time for us to renew our efforts to say that 
racism and prejudice have no place in our society or in our 
hearts as individuals. And on behalf of the Liberal caucus, I am 
pleased to express my support for this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me . . . it’s with a great deal of humility actually that I 
join in on the debate on this Bill. And I would like to say 
straight up that I am very pleased that this Bill has been 
introduced. It’s been a long time coming and I’m very pleased 
that the legislature of Saskatchewan will be recognizing Yom 
haShoah Holocaust Memorial Day. 
 
Even though the Second World War for many people is only 
something that they learn about in their history books and even 
though for many of us the Second World War is a very, very 
dim memory, for all of us who care about democracy, who care 
about tolerance, who care about fighting racial and social 
injustice, it is imperative that we pass this Bill and that we 
understand that all of us have a duty and an obligation to 
remember the Holocaust. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well as understanding and recognizing the 
tremendous loss of life that occurred by the Jewish people, we 
need to also understand that during the Second World War 
many gypsies were slaughtered, many homosexuals were killed 



492 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2001 

 

and imprisoned, people with physical and mental disabilities 
were summarily taken away to the death camps. And we need 
to understand and never let down our guard that this may never 
happen again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I lived for some time in Europe in bombed-out 
Holland. I lived there in the early ’70s. And I was very 
impressed with the Dutch people who, not only as the speaker 
just before me said, sheltered Anne Frank but also had as a 
national sense of mission never to forget about the atrocities 
that occurred during the Second World War. 
 
And that experience of living in Holland, seeing the 
bombed-out homes, seeing the people on the streets still 
remembering the events of that horrible time, talking with my 
parents-in-law who were personally very affected by the hunger 
winter of 1944, talking with my two . . . the brothers-in-law of 
my parents-in-law who had been carted off to the death camps 
but managed to return — all those events left an indelible mark 
on my heart and on my attitudes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I hope through the majority of my actions in my life, I 
have been able to take strong stands to fight against racism and 
to fight against prejudice and intolerance of all sorts. And I 
know that all of us constantly have to look in our hearts to avoid 
the silly little sayings, the easy off-the-cuff remarks that 
somehow manage to creep into our language. And I know that 
all of us as legislators have worked very hard to ensure that we 
are all free of all racism and prejudice. 
 
When I was growing up, Mr. Speaker, it used to be a very 
common statement to refer to Jewish people in a derogatory 
way, as we were talking about trying to get a good bargain 
when we were shopping. That is very wrong language, Mr. 
Speaker, and all of us would be aghast if we heard somebody 
use those kinds of statements that used to be commonplace even 
30 years ago. 
 
And I use that as an example to encourage all of us to continue 
to be vigilant and to constantly examine our behaviour, examine 
our speech patterns, and to ensure that in word, in deed, and in 
thought, we are conducting ourselves in a way that is as free as 
possible of intolerance and hatred. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that this Bill, An Act to recognize Yom 
haShoah as Holocaust Memorial Day in Saskatchewan will be 
an important Bill for all people of Saskatchewan so that we 
recognize that we have to constantly — yesterday, today, and 
tomorrow — be on guard against hatred and intolerance. 
 
So it is with a great deal of humility and a great deal of pride — 
and I realize those are paradoxical — but with humility and 
with pride I will supporting this Bill. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

Bill No. 202 — The Holocaust Memorial Day Act 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This Bill is 
relatively brief, having only three items in it. 
 
I would simply point out to members of the Assembly that the 
Bill has been reviewed by the Law Clerk and meets the 
requirements of this Assembly. 
 
Additionally, I would note for members of the Assembly that it 
is similar in nature to that passed by other legislatures 
throughout our nation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members. I 
think this is a very worthwhile Bill that has been presented 
today on private members’ day and allowed to go forward — a 
private members’ Bill — which is an unusual circumstance in 
this legislature as a whole. 
 
Very seldom, Mr. Chairman, does a private members’ Bill 
actually even receive second reading, let alone go to Committee 
of the Whole and pass through this Assembly. In the time that I 
have been here, since 1991, this will only be the third time that 
that has happened. 
 
I believe that the Bill that the member opposite has presented is 
a good step forward in bringing our communities together and 
in recognition of what has happened in previous times and, in 
some small way, Mr. Chairman, is a step forward in reconciling 
for all of us the events that happened in the past. 
 
I wonder if the member could tell us what the plans are for the 
communities in recognizing Holocaust Memorial Day, when it 
will be celebrated and, to what extent he can, how it will be 
celebrated across the province. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would say to 
the member that April 22, as I understand, is Yom haShoah. 
The Regina Jewish community will be observing Yom haShoah 
on the 22nd and will be having a ceremony at the temple here. 
 
And Saskatoon, as I understand it, will be a week later on the 
29th. I understand that they will be having their service as well; 
they’ll be observing it at that point. 
 
In terms of the details, I can certainly provide members of the 
Assembly with greater detail on those two services when they 
are held. 
 
I trust that answers the member’s question. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, 
Mr. Member of Regina Albert South. We in the official 
opposition, are pleased, Mr. Chairman to be able to support this 
piece of legislation. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 



April 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 493 

 

Preamble agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 202 — The Holocaust Memorial Day Act 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask, by leave of the 
Assembly that this Bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the 
House to revert to the 75-minute debate. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Saskatchewan Rural Revitalization 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of 
pleasure that I rise today to speak in favour of this motion to 
commend the government for initiating a plan to revitalize rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I come to this debate from a fairly 
wide-ranging experience of life in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
I spent the first few weeks of my life in the town of Kelvington, 
and I think if I go through all of the places that I’ve lived in 
Saskatchewan, it sounds like a bus schedule. 
 
But I like to do that. From the time I was little, I moved from 
Kelvington to Assiniboia to Kindersley to North Battleford to 
Regina, and then I left home and moved around a lot. I lived in 
Birch Hills, Alameda, and Indian Head. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much of my life has been spent in rural 
Saskatchewan. And I believe that many of the people in this 
province have deep roots in rural Saskatchewan, either in the 
small towns and communities or in the farms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for many decades now this province has been 
facing the reality of rural depopulation. But rural depopulation 
is not just a phenomenon of Saskatchewan. It is a reality in most 
of the places around this world. As farming practices have 
changed and industrialization has become more and more 
centred in the urban areas, the rate of rural depopulation has 
increased. 
 
People go where there a possibility of getting a job — a job that 
will help them survive and build for a future. Most often, Mr. 
Speaker, the places where there are jobs are in the cities. 
 
Unfortunately this reality is a reality that builds upon itself. As 
people leave the rural areas there are fewer people in the rural 
workforce. Without an adequate workforce, business is not as 
likely to locate in these rural areas. It can, and to some extent 
has, become a vicious circle. Without good jobs available in the 
rural areas, young people will not stay. They will go to the 

urban areas to find work, to seek a future. 
 
In our situation, Mr. Speaker, we have some added difficulties. 
Because of rural depopulation, services have had to be cut. The 
rural tax base erodes and less and less people are expected to 
cover the costs to maintain the services which are essential. 
Because these services have been cut, rural depopulation 
increases. 
 
The local general store that has been run by one family for 
generations closes because there is no one left who is willing to 
take it on; no one left who’s willing to work the long hours that 
a general store in a small town demands; no one who will give 
the seven-days-a-week commitment for the small return that it 
brings. So with no local store, no local grocery, people who 
retire don’t want to settle there. They move to the larger town 
down the way, at least there there’s a grocery store. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as this movement goes ahead the grocery stores 
shut down, the schools amalgamate, and there are fewer 
teaching jobs. Mr. Speaker, it feels like, to the people who are 
living there, that their communities are dying. There is grief. 
There is pain. And there are not the jobs to sustain the 
community. 
 
The hospital isn’t used enough any longer to justify keeping it 
open and so more jobs are lost. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those 
jobs in the hospitals very often are the jobs that supplement 
farm income that enable the farms to continue. This truly is a 
vicious circle. 
 
The elevators are shut down in favour of the new high 
throughput elevator that is capable of serving many 
communities. More jobs are eliminated. With local elevators 
closing down and virtually no grain being hauled on the local 
branch line, the railroad company chooses to shut down the 
branch line and to tear it out. And again jobs are lost. 
 
This is the story of rural depopulation, the story that causes so 
much agony for so many people in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can go on. With fewer jobs available and fewer 
people living in rural communities, the community and the 
volunteer sectors begin to suffer and break down as well. 
 
As the population drops, the churches are no longer 
self-sustaining. They operate with grant money for as long as 
they can, and then they too must amalgamate just so that the 
basic services are provided for people. Sometimes they close 
their doors and again there is grief. The church in which my 
children were baptized, the church in which my parents were 
buried, or my grandparents were buried shuts down and more of 
the community is lost. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we are aware of these kinds 
of grief and when we are aware of the breakdown of 
community, we can understand the emotions and the pain of the 
people who live in those areas as they wonder will there be a 
future here for me, will there be a future here for my children or 
my grandchildren. 
 
These communities have had good histories, a place where 
children could grow up. There were many volunteers in small 



494 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2001 

 

communities that enabled rinks to operate. But as the jobs 
closed down, as the communities grew smaller, as the people 
grew older, they could no longer keep the rinks going and so the 
communities slowly and more and more quietly shut down. 
Many people just gave up and moved to the cities. 
 
This is the story of rural depopulation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
which causes so much pain. This story . . . this vicious cycle 
grinds people down. It leaves them feeling frustrated, angry, 
and hopeless. And in their pain, Mr. Speaker, many of these 
people look to the government and say what can you do to help 
us? How can you help rebuild or strengthen or help us revitalize 
our communities and our rural economy? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have not abandoned the people of rural 
Saskatchewan. In contrast, we have been working with many of 
them, seeking ways to support and to help build rural 
Saskatchewan for today and for the future. This is no small task. 
 
But there are signs of hope. Part of that hope, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is in our government’s view of this province. We see 
Saskatchewan as one province, as a whole. We do not believe in 
the politics of division. We do not hire experts from the East to 
come out here and tell us the way to win elections is to divide 
people one against the other, to pit urban against rural, or 
Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal against each other. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we do not pit North against South. In contrast to that, 
we do see this province as a whole and we recognize that in 
order for the province to thrive, each part must work to sustain 
that whole. 
 
It is in this wholeness, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Saskatchewan 
throughout its history has found its strength — communities 
pulling together against incredible odds. And we just expand 
that sense of community out to the whole province and it 
becomes the people of this province pulling together to 
overcome the odds, to strengthen the weaker neighbour, to 
strengthen the weaker partner. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in trying to deal with the realities that 
some portions of our economy thrive at one time and then fall 
apart at another time, we have to pull together like that. 
 
We look to the North of our province and we see that there has 
been little development in decades past. But, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in this last decade and sometime before that, there has 
been tremendous commitment to help build the North, to help 
develop the economy there. 
 
And in doing that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government set up 
a Department of Northern Affairs, which has been ably staffed 
by the minister from Cumberland. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
Department of Northern Affairs has provided much incentive 
and much encouragement to the people of the North to help 
build their economy. 
 
With this model, we looked at the need in the rural economy 
and we realized that there is special need for a focus on that 
area at this time. And I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
working together we will be able to revitalize the rural 
economy. Our government is not prepared to let rural 
Saskatchewan atrophy and break down. We are no more 
prepared to do that than we would let urban Saskatchewan 

break down or northern Saskatchewan break down. 
 
The work of this new ministry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will be to 
help build the economy of rural Saskatchewan. Now it’s not 
that we have been ignoring the needs of rural Saskatchewan. 
We’ve been working through our departments of Agriculture 
and Food, Economic and Co-operative Development, Energy, 
Mines, and Resources, and most of the other departments to try 
and help encourage and stimulate the rural economy. 
 
(15:15) 
 
But we believe that this new ministry will help to focus the 
work of those areas; will help to facilitate that work and make it 
more productive. We will make sure through this ministry that 
everything possible is being done to help revitalize the rural 
economy. This ministry will make sure that the needs are not 
ignored and that the opportunities are not missed, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
It is vitally important for us to note that there are opportunities 
in rural Saskatchewan. It can be a tremendous place to live. 
Fresh air, fresh water, great neighbours, community, and many 
other resources make rural Saskatchewan a place of countless 
possibilities. 
 
Last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government set up ACRE, 
the Action Committee on the Rural Economy, and I’ve been 
privileged to serve as a member of that committee. Many of the 
members of ACRE live and work in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
They are business people; they are involved in local 
government, in local communities, in schools, in agriculture. 
They are involved in a wide variety of aspects of the rural 
economy. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can say they are a bunch 
of great people who are very committed to economic 
development in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Their committee mandate makes this clear. The 
recommendations of ACRE will be crucial to the work of the 
ministry of Rural Revitalization. 
 
Listen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the goal of ACRE: 
 

A network of strong dynamic rural communities all across 
Saskatchewan, communities that can grow and prosper 
through sustainable rural economic development: a viable 
agricultural sector that provides opportunity and prosperity 
for today’s and tomorrow’s rural residents; communities 
where people are secure in the knowledge that they and 
their children can look forward to a bright future. 

 
This is a laudable goal, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a big challenge 
that is set before the Action Committee on the Rural Economy, 
and a big challenge that is set before the ministry of Rural 
Revitalization. But working together we will reach that goal. 
 
In ACRE the work is divided up as follows: agriculture, dealing 
with the agricultural situation; agri-value, where value is added 
to agricultural products; resources, which can be mines 
resources, it can be oil and gas; rural manufacturing; rural 
service; farm structure and farm incomes . . . (inaudible) . . . in 
evolution, and tools for economic development. Through those 



April 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

 

various areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will work together with 
ACRE and with the rural communities to help develop a great 
future. 
 
The local REDAs (regional economic development authority) 
have been working very hard; have come up with many good 
ideas. This ministry will continue to work with the REDAs to 
help bring those along. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wanted to talk about — but my time is 
running out — I wanted to talk about TWC, the amazing 
corporation, financial corporation, that is set up in Radville. I 
wanted to talk about the potential with ethanol because there is 
tremendous potential for the rural areas, and a whole number of 
other things that are already in place, but my time is running 
out. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my understanding, my belief, that this 
ministry will provide tremendous success for rural 
Saskatchewan. And so I move, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland: 
 

That this Assembly commend the Premier and the 
government for initiating a plan to revitalize rural 
Saskatchewan through a series of new and ongoing 
programs to bring diversity, innovation, and an improved 
quality of life to our rural communities. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Just before the Chair recognizes the 
hon. member from Saskatoon Sutherland, I’d like to point out to 
the hon. member and other hon. members that will participate in 
this seventy-five minute debate, that the display clocks on the 
side indicating their time for debate are not working this 
afternoon, so that they’d keep a close eye on the clock. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I can assure the 
House I had nothing to do with fixing the clocks so they only go 
to 10 minutes, because I’ve become known for my 50 minute 
speeches, so I’ve already used up 45 . . . 15 seconds of my time 
so I’ll move right to my comments. 
 
I’m very pleased to second the motion put forward by the 
member from Regina Qu’Appelle. And I have a couple of 
points that I want to talk about. 
 
The first thing I’d like to do is quote from a book of a good 
friend of mine. The second thing I’d like to do is outline some 
of the plans that this government has in place and also to touch 
on some of the results of our initiatives in the past years and 
share some good news stories with the House concerning the 
entrepreneurial spirit in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The book I’m referring to is Don’t Turn Out the Lights by my 
good friend, Al Scholz. And the subtitle is Entrepreneurship in 
Rural Saskatchewan. And the first paragraph in the introduction 
reads, quote: 
 

“Would the last one to leave, please turn out the lights!” is 
a quip familiar to Saskatchewan residents, particularly in 
times of economic uncertainty. Yet the Human 
Development Index of the United Nations, which has 
consistently listed Canada as the best country in the world 
in which to live, lists Saskatchewan as the leading province 
in this great country. But do we celebrate this achievement? 
Not often enough! Modesty often does not allow us to 
admit that we are not only good, but the best! 
 
“Saskatchewan,” we are quick to tell ourselves — and 
anyone else who will listen — “is far from perfect.” That 
may be true, but we’re still better than anywhere else in the 
world. 

 
It goes on later on, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

It may surprise us to learn that as entrepreneurs, we are 
among the best in the world. And we prove it every day! 
Our province is rich in both human and natural resources, 
and our products and services find their way into every 
corner of the globe. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there’s many good news stories out in rural 
Saskatchewan. But is there enough? Absolutely not. 
 
I was born and raised in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I know about rural Saskatchewan and I know what 
needs to happen to keep people in rural Saskatchewan and to 
grow in rural Saskatchewan. There’s no reason to . . . Unless 
there’s a reason to live there and to grow, people won’t stay in 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Industrial Revolution that started in England 150 years ago 
basically . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I was not there, as the 
member from Estevan attests, and I’m sure she can witness the 
fact that I wasn’t there. She didn’t see me when she was there. 
 
But one of the things that happened during the Industrial 
Revolution, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that people organized and 
provided services on the needs. And a little bit of that happened 
in Saskatchewan. The depopulation of rural Saskatchewan to 
urban; the people moving from rural England to urban England 
— that happened because of the Industrial Revolution. 
 
And I can attest to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The community 
that my father was born and raised in, by all intents purposes 
does not exist. Yet he tells stories of having the three or four 
stores, the grain elevator, the school, all of these wonderful 
things, the gas stations. 
 
In fact, his father told him that he remembers the first time that 
the government of the day decided to clear the roads in the 
wintertime, and he thought that that was the biggest waste of 
money. That’s an aside for the critic for Highways, that we’ve 
come a long way in the last 75 years. But I digress. 
 
What I’m talking about, Mr. Speaker, is that the time . . . the 
distance between communities in rural Saskatchewan is 
shrinking and shrinking. Where you used to be able to haul your 
grain into town and be back in time for supper — that was only 
a six-mile trip. Now it can be 120-kilometre trip. 
 



496 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2001 

 

So what are the plans that this government are implementing, 
basically are in the rural revitalization and on the ACRE 
committee. 
 
Rural Saskatchewan is an excellent place to live and raise a 
family. It affords a quality of life that is second to none, with 
clean environment and safe communities. But is only with the 
co-operative effort through all people in that community that 
rural Saskatchewan will grow and prosper. 
 
Some of the examples in this most recent budget relating to oil 
and gas industries, which are playing an increasingly important 
role in the rural economy. This government significantly 
expands geoscience research, mapping and technical data 
services to encourage further exploration. 
 
Small businesses, Mr. Speaker, are the key — are the key — to 
rural revitalization because without small businesses, small 
businesses are the ones that actually create the vast majority of 
jobs in this province, and all across this country in fact. And 
what this government has done is bring in a small-business 
reduction in the income tax that they’re required to pay; in fact, 
a 25 per cent reduction. 
 
I notice, Mr. Speaker, in some of the clippings a week before 
the budget, some of the business groups in Saskatchewan and in 
my community, Saskatoon, were calling on this government to 
send a signal to the business community all across the province, 
including rural Saskatchewan. What they were asking for was a 
reduction in the corporate income tax rate from 8 per cent to 6 
per cent. The Minister of Finance reduced the corporate income 
tax from 8 per cent to 6 per cent. 
 
They also asked for the amount of income, the tax rate, be 
increased from 200,000 to 300,000. The Minister of Finance did 
that on budget day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Small Business Loans 
Association will make available $5 million in loans to medium 
and small businesses throughout Saskatchewan. Over 80 per 
cent of these loans will be made to companies in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s two important components that are 
required for people in rural Saskatchewan. The first one is 
education. We need to have an educated workforce, and that is 
happening in this budget through education. Some of the key 
points in education are the largest tax . . . largest increase in 
education spending to happen in some time. 
 
In fact, one of the most important points that the Minister of 
Finance pointed out, and seared in my brain, that 10 years ago 
approximately, more money was spent on interest to service the 
debt than was paid in education. That’s horrible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what we’ve done today, with a lot of the good stewardship 
that we’ve been provided with consecutive Finance ministers on 
this side of the House, is that we now spend twice as much 
money on education than we do on servicing the debt. And I 
think that that’s a testament to the forethought of the members 
on this side of the House. 
 
A second point is transportation, Mr. Speaker. I know the 

member . . . the opposition critic on Highways genuinely raised 
some serious concerns on the twinning of the No. 1, and also 
the conditions of the roads. 
 
We’ve responded, Mr. Speaker. It’s important that the market 
. . . the products that the markets are made in rural 
Saskatchewan, can be transported. And that’s happening. 
Another point is technology, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With 
CommunityNet, Saskatchewan will be the leader in bringing 
high-speed broadband Internet access to all of its residents. 
There’s a significant number of building blocks that are 
occurring, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some of the examples in Europe where they’ve been able to 
grow their business and have their economy turn around, is 
Ireland. And what they’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is they’ve 
focused on two points — education, which I’ve already 
covered, and taxes, which I’m now about to cover in greater 
detail. 
 
The personal income tax that was announced last year, over 
three years, is now implementing. That will be putting over 
$400 million back in the pockets of Saskatchewan residents. So 
there’s all sorts of good news stories out there, Mr. Speaker, 
and in the last minute I’d like to talk to a few of them. 
 
Parenteau Gourmet Foods in Langham is one example of the 
business that they’ve had. And this is based on entrepreneurial 
spirit, as well as assistance from the government. 
 
Some of the fastest growing companies in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, are in rural Saskatchewan. IMI Brokerage Company in 
Duck Lake, employing four people. A couple of others ones, 
and many of them are co-operatives, Mr. Speaker. The Lake 
Lenore Co-op, employing eight people. The Tugaske Co-op 
Association, employing 17. Schweitzer Enterprises in Eston 
with twelve. A whole number of communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Used oil recycling depot opens in Meadow Lake — that’s 
another good story. Organic food produces family business. 
Yorkton teen grapples with its success, over 29,000 hits on his 
Internet Web site, Mr. Speaker. There’s all kinds of good news 
that are going on, Mr. Speaker. A local company develops 
software for North American building industry. There’s tons of 
good news stories in this province, Mr. Speaker. And we need 
to ensure that we provide the infrastructure required. And this 
government is doing that. 
 
(15:30) 
 
I’d like to conclude, Mr. Speaker, with a quote again from Al 
Scholz’s book: 
 

It is better to aim for the sky and hit the post than aim for 
the post and hit the ground. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this government is aiming for the sky, and I 
believe that we can succeed in hitting higher than the post. And 
I’m pleased to support the motion put forward by the member 
from Regina Qu’Appelle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 497 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me 
pleasure to stand and to speak today on this particular motion 
that has been brought forward by the member from the 
government side. However, I want to say that when I read the 
motion I was struck by the sheer audacity of such 
self-congratulatory expression. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve had 10 years of this 
government and, all of a sudden, rural revitalization has come 
to the forefront. What happened to the previous decade, the lost 
decade of rural revitalization initiatives? What happened in 
rural Saskatchewan? What concern did this government show to 
rural Saskatchewan in the last 10 years? 
 
I think the answer is very clear and plain. I think the people of 
rural Saskatchewan would say almost unanimously that this 
government has ignored rural Saskatchewan in almost every 
way by their policies and their initiatives and their sheer disdain 
of their concerns in the rural areas. 
 
I’m pleased to stand here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to address this 
issue for one specific reason, and that is that I believe the 
concerns of rural Saskatchewan were what propelled me into 
the political arena. 
 
I’ve said on several occasions previously that I moved to this 
province in 1982, took up residence in rural Saskatchewan, and 
was happy to be part of a very industrious and proud people in 
southwest Saskatchewan. I think I can say with some certainty 
that that industriousness and that pride is exhibited by people 
throughout rural Saskatchewan, throughout the entire province. 
 
I can say with some certainty, too, that those people have done 
everything possible to not just maintain their standards of 
living, not just to maintain their communities and the viability 
of them, not just to maintain the status quo, but to persevere and 
to try and move forward. 
 
In most of the instances where those initiatives have been 
undertaken, it has only been the perseverance of the local 
people that have allowed progress, and many times in spite of 
the policies of this government. 
 
Let me tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the population 
decline in the area where I live. I alluded to this in a speech I 
gave earlier and I accredited the regional library in Swift 
Current with these statistics. So they’re not my own statistics, 
they’re not fabricated in any respect. 
 
But in the last 30 years a population of 15,000 people has 
disappeared from southwest Saskatchewan. That’s roughly an 
area twice the size of the constituency of Cypress Hills. So by 
extrapolation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could say that roughly half 
of those people who have gone, have actually vacated the area 
now contained in the perimeter of the Cypress Hills 
constituency boundaries — 7,000 people gone in 30 years. 
 
If you look at that number of people, that would wipe out the 
entire community of Maple Creek, the entire community of 
Gull Lake, and I believe the entire community of Leader. Those 
are the three largest communities in my constituency. The 7,000 
people that we have lost in the last 15 years would obliterate 
those entire communities. 

Now I have to say that we are sparsely populated and 
underrepresented in terms of government services. But this 
decline in population is, as the member from Regina Lumsden 
alluded to, part of the problem in terms of services in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And even though we might say that the decline in rural 
population is endemic in countries around the world, that it’s 
not unique to this province, the question I need to ask is: why 
did it have to happen at the rate it did? Was it accelerated? Was 
that depopulation trend accelerated by the policies of this 
government over the last decade? I think conclusively the 
answer is yes. 
 
And I believe that this government has to take a lot of 
responsibility for the situation that has developed. When I 
listened to the member from Regina Lumsden speak in defence 
of his motion, I noticed that he gave us a history lesson of what 
has been. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am here today to say that that’s not good 
enough. A government needs to deal with what ought to be, 
what can be, what the promises need to be for the future. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the record of this government 
speaks loud and clear to the failures of this government. 
 
I brought with me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, several expressions of 
concern that have come from constituents. This particular report 
here was prepared by the Cypress Hills Regional Economic 
Development Committee. And it talks about the desperate need 
for highway infrastructure and initiatives in the area of 
transportation renewal for the southwest. 
 
What this document outlines is the intricate and detailed steps 
that voluntary committee went through to put forward a 
workable plan. They brought it to the Minister of Highways in 
May 1998, and I’m quoting from the document here that says: 
 

We presented a brief outlining our concerns, indicating that 
these roads required upgrading, not a lowering of standards 
if economic viability of the region was to be maintained. 
 

They requested that the province lay out a long-term plan that 
would see these routes rebuilt to a standard that would meet the 
current and emerging needs of the region. But this is the most 
telling part of this paragraph, these few short words: 
 

This presentation was for the most part ignored. 
 

Immediately following the appointment of the subsequent 
Minister of Highways, the committee again presented their 
concerns to the department in Regina. Again the presentation 
appeared to fall on deaf ears, and to date no effort has been 
made by the province to sit down with this group to develop a 
long-term plan that would meet the transportation needs of 
this province. 
 
This document goes on to say: 
 

We pride ourselves in self-reliance and in our ability to 
adapt to changing environments. And all that is missing in 
our equation for a prosperous future is co-operation from 
the provincial government in providing a transportation 



498 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2001 

 

system that will accommodate the needs of our residents. 
 

I could go on and quote from this document at length, but I 
think you get the point. The point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
the people of the southwest, and by extrapolation we can 
assume the people of the entire rural region of this province, are 
prepared to take the initiative and do what they can for their 
own sake. They are prepared to invest their time and energy 
into seeing their communities prosper. 
 
What they find to be the most degrading impact on those 
initiatives is a heartless government or a government that has so 
much red tape and bureaucracy associated with regulation that 
these initiatives are stymied right from the outset. 
 
Let me read, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a letter that appeared in one 
of the local papers in rural Saskatchewan. And it comes from 
the mayor of the town of Eastend, and she says that: 
 

After looking at the budget and the lack of support for 
municipalities, there’s one thought on my mind — forced 
amalgamation. The method of forcing and accomplishing 
this has changed but the effect is certainly there in my 
view. 
 

She goes on to express her concern with so much of what has 
happened in rural Saskatchewan, but she goes specifically to the 
issue of municipalities being hit with the high cost of operating 
the communities and the loss of the tax base. In particular she 
mentions elevator closures: 
 

We struggle with our budget, trying to decide what services 
we can . . . (inaudible) . . . in order to protect our property 
owners from large increases in the mill rate. There comes a 
point it is too costly to our residents to live here with the 
loss of services. 
 

She goes on to explain that this government has failed rural 
communities in a big way, not just with this last budget but with 
previous budgets. 
 
This letter here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is from the RM (rural 
municipality) of Frontier. They are talking about removing 
themselves from the province. The frustration levels are so 
great in that RM, they have written this letter to the Premier. 
It’s addressed to the Premier of the province in which they 
outline exactly why they want to leave the authority and the 
jurisdiction of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Do you think that comes as a result of initiatives that a 
government has shown that they care about rural 
Saskatchewan? I think it proves exactly the opposite, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
I have another major letter here from a supplier who had a 
business. He was based in Alberta. He set it up in Gull Lake, 
and all the government regulations that have forced him to 
withdraw his operation and centre it in the city of Medicine Hat. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are positive things happening in 
rural Saskatchewan, but they are not a direct result of this 
government. They are a direct result of the absolute total 
commitment of people in rural Saskatchewan to survive. 

They’re innovative and they are determined. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in conclusion today, I would like to 
move an amendment to the motion. I think the best amendment 
I could summarize would be: too little, too late. But I have a 
little more lengthy amendment. 
 
I would move: 
 

That all the words after the term “Assembly” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 
that we urge the government to finally put forward a real 
vision and a plan for strengthening the economy of rural 
Saskatchewan and the entire province that extends beyond 
slogans and the creation of another government department 
and bureaucracy with a mandate that even the minister 
can’t fully explain. 

 
This is moved by myself and it’s seconded by the member from 
Saltcoats. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m glad 
to have the opportunity today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to take part 
in this that’s something as near and dear to my heart. Because 
I’ve sat out there in rural Saskatchewan for the past 10 years 
and watched what this government has done to rural 
Saskatchewan and, in turn, what hurts rural Saskatchewan, hurts 
urban Saskatchewan, hurts all of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I found it quite interesting that in the budget we have the new 
office of revitalization and, when asked questions, the Minister 
of Highways and Transportation last week couldn’t really 
explain what the office would be doing to revitalize rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well in the media scrum I think her comment was that really all 
they were there for was to coordinate departments that are 
already there. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if these departments 
had anything going for them at all, we’d have seen some life out 
in rural Saskatchewan out of this government, and we have saw 
nothing to this point. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can’t go out into rural Saskatchewan, 
choke them off for nine and a half or ten years and then come 
running around Saskatchewan with a half a little bottle of 
oxygen and say, oh here — air, everything’s going to be fine 
now. I mean, hello, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it just isn’t going to 
work. People out there are not going to fall for this one from 
this government. 
 
I’m glad to join the member for Cypress Hills and to put in an 
amendment to this somewhat . . . Well I won’t go there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but it’s nothing more than a joke — 
revitalizing rural Saskatchewan — after you’ve underfunded, 
choked them off, cut them in every department you could 
probably find, and wonder why in the last election in 1999 you 
pretty well got shut out in rural Saskatchewan; you hardly got a 
seat out there. 
 



April 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 499 

 

And they sit there now and think, well, we’ll turn this around; 
we’ll replace some of the people in this side in the next election. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I got news for them — no one on 
this side in the next election is going to lose. In fact the only 
thing we’re going to lose on this side is this side because we’re 
going to be on that side, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to do a little 
review, a little review for the members opposite. What have 
they done for rural Saskatchewan since they came to power in 
1991? 
 
I’d like to start with agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
agriculture, one of the most important parts of this province, is 
hurting badly out there. And partly because of low grain prices, 
low commodity prices. But partly because this government 
cancelled GRIP (gross revenue income program), said they 
were going to replace it with a long-term safety net, and to this 
point, what have we got? Nothing. Rural revitalization and 
nothing more. Another broken promise by this government, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
(15:45) 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in ’90-91, the Saskatchewan 
budget for Agriculture was $1.1 billion. Do you know what it 
was last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker? — $240 million, less than 
25 per cent of what it was in 1990. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they wonder why rural Saskatchewan is 
going down the tubes. Here is a prime example when you pay 
that kind priority to one of the biggest parts of our economy in 
this province. You pay lip service to it, but that’s all you pay. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a number of other policies that are really 
detrimental to the well-being of our agriculture industry and 
some of the things that that government has actually stood up 
and hollered for, is the protection of our Canadian Wheat 
Board, for an example. 
 
They want to be able to control farmers — where you sell your 
grain, how you sell your grain, how much you get for that grain. 
But when it comes time to helping those farmers, because they 
aren’t getting much for their grain, they run and hide and they 
aren’t there to help us. 
 
That’s why we were stuck with AIDA (Agricultural Income 
Disaster Assistance) and that’s why we’re probably going to be 
stuck with a new program, because they don’t get to the table 
when they should be there and we don’t have part in making up 
these programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’d also like to go on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and talk about 
municipalities. Municipalities, another thing near and dear to 
my heart. Municipalities who were front and centre last week. 
Municipalities that were cut out of this budget completely, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
One thing, if you want to help revitalize rural Saskatchewan, 
help our municipalities build our infrastructure out there, that 
we need for a number of things. We need it for our economic 

development. We need it for tourism. Everywhere we turn for 
business in rural Saskatchewan, we need our road network. 
 
Your government has saw fit to cut two-thirds of the municipal 
budget for rural Saskatchewan in the last 10 years. That’s not 
how you revitalize rural Saskatchewan. That’s how you help 
kill rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s move on to health care, another area 
where this government is definitely lacking. 
 
Tommy Douglas would be just rolling in his grave if he could 
see today what these people have done to medicare and our 
health system, which he was known for helping to build. And 
these people opposite like to say, well Tommy was one of us. 
 
Well I’m sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Tommy had a vision. This 
government has no vision for rural Saskatchewan. In fact for 
that matter, they don’t have a vision for any part of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, part of the leader’s program, when he was 
running for the leadership, said he was going to buy a bus. Well 
my advice to the Premier and to the members opposite, it’s time 
to get on the bus, Gus, because you’ve got to get out there and 
see what’s really happening. 
 
I mean you can sit in here and talk all you want, but the 
members on this side, every weekend when we’re in here, go 
home and talk to rural people. We talk with intelligence, 
because . . . we talk because we know these people out there; 
we know what’s hurting them out there; we know what they 
need out there. And the members opposite haven’t even got the 
bus fuelled up yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, education — another integral part of 
Saskatchewan. And what’s happening to it out in rural 
Saskatchewan? Schools are closing. In every constituency we 
either know of schools that have closed or others that are 
fighting to stay open. It’s on a continuous basis, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
In my own area last year, MacNutt school closed. This year I 
have the school in Bredenbury fighting for their survival, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. In areas around me — the member for 
Yorkton would appreciate this — Ebenezer, Theodore 
downsized, Rhein, all in our local area. That’s five, six schools 
in a small area, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That can’t continue if 
we’re going to survive out there. 
 
When we get to government and get things turned around, and 
the population in rural Saskatchewan starts to grow, we’re 
going to need them schools open, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it 
would be far easier to keep a number of them open now than 
have to build new ones at that point when the government with 
a vision gets in power in this province, turns this province 
around, and instead of a million people we’ll have a 
million-five people in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our towns and villages out there are 
hurting. In every town out there right now we could probably 
show you an example of where a school is closed, a store is 
closed, a restaurant is closed, we may have lost the post office. 



500 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2001 

 

A number of small towns, due to a lot of our environmental 
regulations, don’t even have gas pumps in those towns right 
now. And this government is saying we’re going to help rural 
Saskatchewan. To this point they’ve done everything in their 
power to run rural Saskatchewan into the ground. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, again we have a government that’s old, 
tired, with no vision. It’s time to move over, members opposite, 
call an election, and let a government with a vision take over, 
people that know what it’ll take to get this province back on its 
feet. 
 
As I said before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s time to get the bus 
fuelled up. It’s time to get on the bus, come out and see what 
we’re talking about, what we hear every day from rural people. 
Because I realize they can’t help it at this point. They have no 
rural members on that side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but they can 
come out, visit rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Rural Saskatchewan people are friendly, and even in spite of 
what they’ve done for 10 years, I think will treat them with 
respect and explain to them what we need in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it should have been a sign to these people 
when in the last election we elected 26 rural members. The 
message should have got across. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that was from a party that was two years old. Many in this 
province didn’t even know if we were here for real. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they know now — we’re here to 
stay. The next election, urban Saskatchewan’s coming over like 
that. We’ll be over there, you’ll be over here, the few that are 
left. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m supporting the member from Cypress 
Hills on the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, rural Saskatchewan is a great place to live and 
raise a family. Now this we know from the people we talk to 
and from our experiences in rural Saskatchewan, because it’s 
not something we’re ever going to hear from the members 
opposite. 
 
Rural Saskatchewan offers a quality of life that is second to 
none, with a very clean environment and safe communities. But 
rural Saskatchewan also faces many new, along with old, 
challenges that require a co-operative effort to overcome. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we can speak of this in terms of rural 
Saskatchewan, but really it affects us all in urban and rural. 
These are problems that we all have to look at and address. 
 
That is why this government created the ministry of Rural 
Revitalization to help develop solutions in the long-term plan 
for the future success of our communities. Working with 
provincial departments and other agencies, the Rural 
Revitalization office will ensure that provincial programs and 
services contribute to connecting rural Saskatchewan to the 
future. 
 

Mr. Speaker, on a per capita basis our government provides 
more support for the agri-food sector than any other province, 
and well over three times the support provided by the federal 
government. Saskatchewan’s expenditures in this sector were 
$310 per capita in 1999-2000, compared to the federal 
expenditures of $94 per capita in the same period. 
 
Saskatchewan also provides significant support to our producers 
through tax exemptions, tax rebates for fuel, fertilizer, 
machinery, and a wide variety of other farm inputs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is committed to working with other 
provinces and the federal government to ensure that this 
funding leverages appropriate federal support for farm 
programs that make sense for our producers and our province. 
The 2001-2000 budget provided 95 million in new funding for 
the farm sector initiatives. 
 
This budget also provides a future look with new investments in 
key areas that will help farmers continue to adapt to change. 
There is also increased investment in agriculture research and 
development, and this will help our Saskatchewan producers 
maintain and advance their place in world markets. 
 
The commitment of this government to the growth and 
prosperity of rural Saskatchewan is strong and more alive than 
ever, Mr. Speaker. This commitment was displayed in the 
recent budget through the forum of new and existing initiatives 
to keep rural Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Geoscience research, mapping, and technical data is 
significantly expanded to encourage further exploration of oil 
and gas. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all agree that this is a 
very important part of our Saskatchewan economy. The CO2 
enhanced recovery projects such as the one in Weyburn, as well 
as various tax incentives, will also help the industry expand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Small Business Loans Association will make 5 
million available in loans to small- and medium-sized 
businesses in Saskatchewan. And these businesses are one of 
the largest generators of jobs in our province. 
 
As well, the regional economic development authorities will 
receive more than 2 million this year. And beginning July 2001, 
small-business corporate income tax rates will be reduced from 
8 per cent to 6 per cent — a 25 per cent decrease that was very 
well-received throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I sat for a time on the South Central 
Community Futures Board where we promoted small-business 
creation throughout rural south central area. It was always an 
amazement, the creativeness of the people of Saskatchewan — 
the ideas they had for small businesses in their communities and 
in their rural areas. These businesses were extremely successful 
and there was a number of them. Initiatives like this throughout 
the province have helped a great deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government was proud to announce the 
pushing ahead of plans for twinning on the Trans-Canada 
Highway. The twinning will be completed between the Alberta 
border and Tompkins in the year 2004 — four years ahead of 
schedule. 
 



April 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 501 

 

This year on that section we will pave and open 19 kilometres 
from the Alberta border to the east. We will also begin grading 
21 kilometres that will take road construction to the junction of 
Highway 21 at Maple Creek. 
 
Our budget ensures that rural roads will be improved as well. In 
partnership with the federal government, we will be investing 
67.5 million for major improvements to our rural and northern 
road systems. These roads are the veins in and out of rural 
communities and we must keep them running smoothly for the 
rural communities to survive and prosper. Without the proper 
transportation systems, economic development cannot happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are a province that exports almost 40 . . . or 80 
per cent of the goods and products produced in this province. 
And without good roads, we lose markets. The commitment to 
restore these roads and to expand on the system is a good one 
for all us in Saskatchewan. 
 
The federal government will help by providing $106 million for 
the prairie grain roads program over the next five years to 
upgrade highways and roads impacted by grain haul. The 
province will receive from this program 14.9 million for each of 
the next five years from the federal government and will match 
the funding to enhance this program in our province. 
 
The first stage in connecting rural communities to the future 
will be done through the CommunityNet program. 
CommunityNet will encourage the development of enhanced 
Internet services to rural communities across our province. 
Schools, post-secondary institutions, and the health care sector 
in 366 communities will receive improved Internet and 
networking services. 
 
High-speed Internet access will develop all over Saskatchewan, 
allowing businesses in rural communities to plug in, participate, 
communicate, and thrive in this new digital economy. 
 
The quality of life in rural Saskatchewan has, I mean, just 
tremendous potential, and when you look at our population 
spread over this huge area of this province that we call 
Saskatchewan, the Internet is . . . the opportunities are just 
boundless, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To build on that potential and to help rural communities grow, 
the province will enhance immigration programming. Bringing 
skilled, successful people to this province and keeping those 
people here is important to the rural communities and the 
province as a whole. 
 
As well, making sure that our bright and educated students stay 
in Saskatchewan is another commitment of this government. In 
keeping with this commitment, our government will invest 8.7 
million to upgrade infrastructure, provide Internet access, and 
develop on-line learning resources. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s many more opportunities to speak of 
that affect both rural and urban Saskatchewan. But one thing 
that we know in this province is that the well-being of one 
sector depends on the other, so these are things that we have to 
work at together. 

Despite the challenges, rural Saskatchewan boasts many 
economic success stories. Increases in intensive livestock 
operations, food processing, local businesses, and a strong 
investment in agricultural research and biotechnology are 
creating diversity and growth in many regions of the province. 
Revitalizing rural Saskatchewan is a key focus for this 
government, Mr. Speaker. Working closely with rural residents 
and communities, we will provide the education, transportation, 
and technology needed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment 
but I will be pleased to support the motion put forward by the 
member from Regina Qu’Appelle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
pardon me. Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly a pleasure to stand in 
this Assembly this afternoon to speak to this debate. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as I look at the motion before us, and I’m 
somewhat appalled as I read this motion: 
 

That this Assembly commend the Premier and the 
government for initiating a plan to revitalize rural 
Saskatchewan through a series of new and ongoing 
programs to bring diversity, innovation, and improved 
quality of life to our rural communities. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, why I find this motion very interesting is 
that it appears that this government is finally beginning to 
realize that there are people living in this province who live 
outside of the two major centres of Regina and Saskatoon. And 
it’s unfortunate, however, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it has taken 
the government that long to begin to realize that fact. 
 
I think the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, I believe, just 
talked about the fact that in the province of Saskatchewan we 
trade and we export basically 80 per cent of the commodities 
that we produce, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which shows the 
importance of the rural community in the revitalization of this 
province. 
 
And it’s unfortunate that the government and the newly elected 
Premier have all of a sudden just decided now, we’ve got to pay 
attention a little bit to rural Saskatchewan. In view of the fact 
that when they were elected in 1991 . . . I believe the public of 
Saskatchewan elected the NDP in good faith, or at least they 
thought they were voting in good faith. Unfortunately, they 
barely cast their ballot and the ink barely dried on the ballots 
and then the NDP began their major program of dismantling 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And my colleagues have talked about it; they’ve talked about 
the GRIP contracts, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’ve talked about 
the closure of 52 hospitals in this province, including the Plains 
Health Centre, which is 53 hospitals, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And then I hear members opposite who are talking about debt 
that has been created for a number of years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And as my colleague from Canora-Pelly pointed out 
today, the government likes to talk about and the Finance 
minister and the newly elected Premier of this province like to 
talk about how well they’ve managed. 



502 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2001 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we have seen, as they have done 
with rural Saskatchewan, they are trying to snow the public of 
Saskatchewan again with the way they manage the books, with 
the way they present the books. 
 
And if we want to get into the debate on the budget of this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they really want to talk about 
finances, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will accommodate them. We 
will certainly accommodate them and we will let the public of 
Saskatchewan know that they need to look beyond that nice 
little picture of the General Revenue Fund and begin to look at 
the overall picture. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of 
this province and the taxpayers of this province are responsible 
for that overall debt that is accumulating in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But as we talk about rural revitalization, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
. . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the government would have given 
more consideration, would have given more thought to the 
dismantling of the GRIP program, and if, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
as they indicated when they dismantled GRIP, they indicated 
that they would come up with a long-term safety net that would 
meet the needs of rural Saskatchewan, meet the needs of the 
farm community so that young families could continue to live 
in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, had the 
government even paid attention to the comments and to the 
recommendations that they were making at the time back in 
1991, we may not be debating this topic right now. 
 
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while GRIP was dismantled, 
while people said it was unaffordable, while they said it 
wouldn’t work, the facts are, had that program continued to 
develop . . . It basically had nine years to build upon itself so 
that today it would have something that the farmers could look 
at as a guarantee. And I’ll guarantee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
people would still find holes in it, but would do more than what 
this government is doing today to agriculture in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I believe my colleague from Saltcoats pointed out the fact 
of the commitment that this government has to rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What is their commitment? 
Prior to 1991 when this government was elected to form 
government in the province of Saskatchewan, that agriculture 
was recognized for the importance and the economic value and 
activity, economic activity it presented in the province of 
Saskatchewan. But where do we see it today? It’s basically on 
the bottom of the list, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and yet it plays a 
very integral and important role in our economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well when it comes to health care. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible) . . . we closed 52 hospitals 
across rural Saskatchewan and 53 including the Plains Health 
Centre, Mr. Deputy Speaker. People in rural Saskatchewan need 
access to health care as well. 
 
Not everyone can come and be accommodated in the cities of 
Regina and Saskatoon. In fact I think that people in these large 
urban centres would say we really can’t; we really don’t have 
the beds to look after the patients that we have and the health 
care needs of our two larger centres. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a need for health care delivery 
services in rural Saskatchewan and it’s taken this government 

almost 10 years to recognize that fact. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we look forward to the Fyke Commission report that is 
going to be released, I believe, tomorrow, and then see what 
Mr. Fyke is going to recommend in regards to health care 
delivery services in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we talk about rural revitalization. I 
checked with some of my RMs today just to see exactly where 
they stand in regards to the funding or the lack thereof that this 
government has provided to rural municipalities. 
 
And what I’m finding, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m finding that 
most of the RMs are finding that they are going to probably 
have to increase their mill rate — some marginally, some even 
higher. And in some cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are finding 
that also they’re very worried about what the mill rate will be 
coming from the local school boards, the district school boards. 
 
Some of my RMs are already indicating that they’re hearing 
that they’re going to be asked to add another mill or whatever to 
the tax base, which means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while the 
Minister of Finance, while this Premier, while this government 
talks about reducing taxes, on one hand that may be true, but on 
the other hand they turn around and they reach into your other 
pocket and they actually draw the taxes out in another form. 
 
They draw the taxes out through the rural tax base or through 
the property owner. Let’s, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s get this 
clear. It’s the property owner, not just in rural Saskatchewan but 
in the larger urban centres, that are facing the tax grab in the 
area of property taxes and education taxes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at this motion we have 
to ask ourselves: how sincere, how sincere is this government in 
their commitment to governing all of Saskatchewan, not just a 
small area? 
 
The only reason they’re talking about a bus, the only reason 
they’re talking about revitalizing rural Saskatchewan, is because 
of their desperate attempt to cling to power in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe when the 
next . . . when this Premier calls the next general election the 
people of Saskatchewan will let him know exactly what they 
think of his rural revitalization program. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I wish to advise the Assembly that 
the 65-minute debate has expired and that we will be now going 
into a 10-minute session for questions and comments. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the member from Regina Qu’Appelle, the farmer 
from northwest Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hiring of eight new bureaucrats for $800,000 
to build the Department of Rural Revitalization is nothing but 
featherbedding for the NDP, a place to put people like Dennis 
Gruending, the defeated NDP MP . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, what about John Solomon. The whole NDP initiative, 
Mr. Speaker, has been to build bigger government to aid the 
NDP in the cities, not to provide any revitalization into rural 
Saskatchewan. 



April 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 503 

 

Will the member from Regina Qu’Appelle support our 
amendment to change the wrong-headed direction of this 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m really . . . I 
have some difficulty with the tone in which the question is 
asked. Because I’ve made very clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
I am not a farmer and I resent the sarcasm that continually 
comes from that member pushing on that. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I make very clear that I am not a farmer but I do care about 
farming and I do care about rural Saskatchewan, as our 
government does. 
 
This $800,000 that goes into this department, as you well know 
if you look at it and think about it, is money that will be well 
used — will be well used — to help bring together the work 
that is being done from the various departments. We’ll focus it 
and make it much more effective. 
 
It is absolutely foolish, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to think that you 
can do these programs without people involved and in order to 
get people involved you have to pay them. The foolishness that 
comes from that other side around this issue is unbelievable. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, do they not care about the good 
employees who work to try and improve this province? That’s 
my question to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question 
is for the member from Cypress Hills. I noted with great interest 
that he felt that an impediment to growth in rural Saskatchewan 
was regulations. 
 
So I had a couple of questions for him. The Economic and 
Co-operative Development minister has released a Partnership 
for Prosperity and in that was a goal to reduce regulations by 25 
per cent. But my question for the member from Cypress Hills 
is: does he support that portion of the Partnership for 
Prosperity; and secondly, which regulations would he identify 
that he would like removed as impediments to growth in rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don’t object 
to a question of that nature at all. Frankly I would support any 
initiative by any government to reduce regulation. And if the 
government has undertaken an initiative in that area, I think it’s 
well-intentioned and probably long overdue. 
 
I guess the thing that confounds me about this is that regulation 
has been a detriment to development in rural Saskatchewan and 
indeed all of Saskatchewan for a long time. This sudden interest 
in elimination of regulation, I would say, represents possibly the 
greatest conversion of history outside of the one which St. Paul 
experienced on the road to Damascus some centuries ago. 
 
The fact of the matter is that there are regulations of all types in 
all jurisdictions that confound initiative, that stymie 
development. And I will not speak directly to specific 
regulations, but if the other member would like to look at the 

letter I referred to in my speech earlier today, I’d be glad to 
share that with him. That will give him an idea of some of the 
regulations that need attention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question 
is for the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
In his motion I believe he says, part of it is, to bring an 
improved quality of life to our rural communities. 
 
Well I have a community out there, Marquis; they’re closing the 
school. They’d approached the Rural Revitalization minister’s 
office over a month and a half ago. Never got an answer back. 
 
They’ve got a plan. They’re close enough to Moose Jaw; also 
they’ve got some younger kids, about two, three, four, that they 
know that’s going to be coming to that school; Marquis being 
close to Moose Jaw is going to grow. They wanted some 
direction from that office, minister’s office, to work on a 
business plan. 
 
They’ve got a business plan that they were working on with the 
school board and they wanted some help, and they phoned over 
a month and a half ago. To this day yet, have yet to get an 
answer back. And this is people in that community that are 
fighting to keep that school open. And I thought that’s what this 
office was supposed to be for. 
 
My question is: how come they have yet to get an answer back? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 (16:15) 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the answer to 
that, Mr. Speaker, is no small potatoes. The fact is that we do 
care about the citizens of Marquis. We do care about rural 
schools. 
 
And one of the things that we are doing is we are trying to 
develop distance education which will help in those areas where 
the population can no longer sustain a school building and a 
school operation. We’re convinced that that will help. 
 
In direct concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the last question asked 
about why we were spending $800,000, we’re spending that 
money to try and get staff and we are beginning to build this 
ministry. And when we’ve got the staff in place, I’ll tell you 
those answers to questions that are mailed in/phoned in will 
come a lot quicker. We are in the process of doing that. 
 
We’ve just got this together and they will get some support and 
they will get some help. They will not be left out there hanging. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
member from Cypress Hills. Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the 
member, did he not vote against a budget that put $95 million 
into new farm sector initiatives, Mr. Speaker? 
 



504 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2001 

 

Did he not vote against a budget that put, for the first time, 
community schools in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Did he not vote against a budget that speeded up the twinning 
of a highway in his own constituency that he stood time and 
time again in this House complaining about, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that member, I’ve asked him, did he stand and 
vote against that budget. But that budget also increased overall 
spending in Highways, Mr. Speaker, a significant amount and 
over the next three years will spend $950 million. And he voted 
against it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also ask him, did he not vote against tax cuts, the thing that 
they pride themselves on, they talk about every day, Mr. 
Speaker. Did he vote against it? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I ask the member to proceed directly 
to his question. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I thought we 
were asked to answer one question, not several. 
 
But in reference to maybe the first question, I think that what I 
would like to say is that I’m prepared to give credit where credit 
is due, and I have done it publicly. I have published it in the 
newspapers of my constituency. I did say that the four-year plan 
for twinning the highways in the part of the southwest that goes 
through my constituency was money well spent, and I 
appreciate it. And I don’t mind giving credit where credit is 
due. 
 
I did vote against the budget. And I don’t mind saying that here 
right now because the budget is an all-encompassing document. 
I can’t support all the rest of the stuff that’s in there. There’s all 
kinds of initiatives in that budget that I simply cannot represent 
in fairness and in good conscience to the people of my 
constituency. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 
question for the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. I noted 
with interest that she was talking about the Internet and all that 
the government was doing to connect people in rural 
Saskatchewan to the Internet. 
 
No doubt she will be aware of the initiative in the budget called 
CommunityNet that was brought in with much ballyhoo by the 
Minister of Finance at a cost of $71 million, I think was the 
price tag on that. 
 
I wonder . . . I have a two-part question for the member. Is she 
aware that that particular project will be sole sourced by 
SaskTel? In other words, that it completely excludes all other 
small IT (information technology) businesses in the province 
who would like to get involved in that — good private sector 
businesses. 
 
Is she aware of that, and if she is, does she support that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
CommunityNet is going to provide services to over 366 
communities within this province. And when you look at 
Saskatchewan, that covers a huge area with just over a million 
in our population. This is an ideal way to go for us. It is a 
solution for Saskatchewan for many of the problems that we 
have. 
 
When you look at the people wishing to upgrade education, I 
mean this is perfect. You can stay at home, you can do the 
things that you want to do, you can stay in your community, 
you can continue with your work, but still advance your 
education. 
 
And yes, I support SaskTel supplying whatever they can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time of the 75-minute debate has 
now expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 1 — Information Technology 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is a 
pleasure today to be able to rise and speak to a motion that I’ll 
move shortly in the Assembly speaking very specifically to the 
rapid introduction of modern information technology across this 
province and through the various sectors. 

 
I was interested to listen to much of the debate that just 
occurred during the 75-minute debate and the discussion about 
rural Saskatchewan. I thought it was interesting, the contrasting 
views that were put forward by members on each side of the 
Assembly, with the members on this side taking a rather, a 
rather optimistic approach to how rural Saskatchewan could 
move forward in these times and the very pessimistic approach 
put forward by the members of the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the resolution that I’ll be 
moving at the end of my remarks is: 
 

That this Assembly endeavour to promote the rapid 
introduction of modern information technology to 
education, health care, and to individuals, organizations, 
and businesses across Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many good things that we can 
talk about in Saskatchewan today, not the least of which is the 
way in which our economy has continued to grow during the 
nine years that this government has been in office. 
 
When I was first elected in 1995, we had just come through a 
difficult time of balancing the budget, of seeing the economy 
start to rebound from what had been a very significant recession 
that the province had entered into. A recession that was not 
helped by the dramatic overspending of the previous 
administration or by the fact that it had driven up the debt to 
such an extent. 
 
Today, of course, the members opposite would like to pretend 
that they had nothing to do with that debt being built; they had 



April 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 505 

 

nothing to do with the billions and billions and billions of 
dollars in interest that flew . . . that was sent out of this province 
to pay for the interest costs alone. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have come a long way since 1995, and 
a much longer way since 1991, in terms of the way that this 
economy of this province works. One of the reasons this 
economy has responded as well as it has is because of sound 
investments in infrastructure that we’ve made across 
Saskatchewan. Investments made in large part — and I know 
the member for Swift Current will appreciate this — made in 
large part by none other than that Crown investment of ours 
known as SaskTel. SaskTel is a very important part of the 
economic growth . . . the economic engine of this province, and 
I think people often miss that point. 
 
Technology today is essential for us to have a modern economy. 
Well there are many in this Assembly who — I think at least on 
this side — understand that when that technology is employed 
in support of industrious labour, that when it is employed by 
our community organizations, when it is employed by 
co-operatives across our province, we are able to make better 
connections to an economy that this . . . that is forever changing 
in the world. 
 
Saskatchewan’s economy has always been linked very 
significantly into the world economy. We have been fortunate 
to have enjoyed very good trade relations with many countries 
around the world. We have been fortunate to find good solid 
markets for our agricultural products, for our woods products, 
and for other commodities here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Today, though, we need to think about how to move that 
economy forward in a new way. Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we 
need today is an investment in more than simply lines of steel 
that run across our province. We need more than just an 
investment in good solid asphalt. We need more than just an 
investment in air transportation services. 
 
We need the ability, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to have our people 
connect, our businesses connect, individuals connect with the 
markets across the world. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Permission to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I would like to introduce a very special person who is 
sitting up in the Speaker’s gallery. This is a young woman who 
has just recently graduated with a degree in English literature 
and is incredibly literate, and as a result is using her good 
education to good advantage — she has just recently joined our 
caucus office. 
 
I am referring of course to Miss Sarah Still, who is sitting in the 
Speaker’s gallery. Another reason that I would like to introduce 
her is because yesterday was a very special day for her — 

yesterday was her birthday. 
 
So I would ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming Sarah 
Still to this Legislative Assembly and in wishing her all the best 
with her birthday. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 1 — Information Technology 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s always 
a pleasure to have young people join us in the gallery, because I 
think that they understand a great deal of what we are talking 
about today and the need for us to invest in modern information 
technology. 
 
I’m saying that one of the things we need to understand today is 
that our economy is dependent on a lot more than simply the 
traditional transportation system that has hauled our 
commodities off to world markets. And certainly today we have 
an opportunity through modern technology to really enhance 
the ability for our economy to respond to new opportunities and 
to help Saskatchewan people stay here in Saskatchewan and 
make a good solid living. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk today about really five 
different areas that I think are of very significant importance. 
Let me start by talking about the investments we made through 
our Crown sector, and in particular through SaskTel. 
 
SaskTel is one of the oldest Crown corporations here in 
Saskatchewan. It has a very well-qualified, industrious 
workforce. It is extremely innovative in terms of its approach, 
and it is a very successful corporation for us, not only here at 
home but in terms of its involvement abroad. We’ve been able 
to see SaskTel expand a great deal over the past several years, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And in terms of its investments that it’s 
been able to make, we have been able to see it support a 
transition in our economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that the member for Arm River 
will be interested in SaskTel, even though it has nothing to do 
with potatoes, but will be interested in what it has to do in terms 
of helping people in his riding communicate with markets 
across the world. 
 
One of the things that we have seen members on that side call 
for over the last several years has been an end to agricultural 
marketing boards as we know them; that we have seen a rather 
aggressive attack by several of those members on the Canadian 
Wheat Board. 
 
I think it’s interesting to note that one of the reasons that they 
make this attack is they say today we no longer need these 
boards because people can make the decisions themselves, the 
farmers can make the decisions themselves by working on . . . 
by making use of modern technology. It’s interesting that they 
say that because of the investments that SaskTel’s made in 
terms of making sure we have high-speed Internet in our rural 
communities, that people can connect directly into the markets. 



506 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2001 

 

I would say to a certain extent they’re right, that technology 
investment is there. That doesn’t mean that we should be 
dismantling our marketing boards, as the members opposite say. 
But I say this because I think it’s interesting in the way that 
even they have to recognize that our Crown investments are 
doing a good job of helping Saskatchewan people, 
Saskatchewan farmers, connect to the modern economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are aware that these are changing times 
in terms of our economy. It’s interesting that in the past year 
we’ve seen mining and other . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Would the member state his point of 
order. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, just in the previous 
75-minute debate, I listened with interest to some of the 
questions that were brought forward. And there was a question 
brought forward for the member from Regina Qu’Appelle . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, Regina Dewdney, pardon me, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, referring to the way a member votes in the 
Assembly. And according to rule 32, no member may reflect 
upon any vote of the Assembly except for the purpose of 
moving that such a vote be rescinded. 
 
I would ask the Deputy Speaker to review the question that was 
posed, and whether or not the question did actually supersede 
the rules of the Assembly, and come back with a ruling. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:30) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’d like to thank the hon. member, 
and yes, we’ll come back with a ruling on that. Thank you. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, to bring comment regarding 
the point of order raised by the hon. member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened to the point of order made by the hon. 
member and I listened carefully to the questions raised by the 
member from Regina Dewdney earlier. 
 
The hon. member from Regina Dewdney, if I remember 
correctly, Mr. Deputy Chair, was simply asking for a statement 
as to what a member did, what position the member took 
regarding a vote that has been taken in this House. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that the question as raised is entirely in 
order, is not in violation. It is not unusual in this House. 
Questions can be asked of members not only at question period 
but during debate regarding their position, and it is simply in 
that context that the question was asked. And I would 
encourage you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to rule the point of order 
out of order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I thank the hon. member for his 

comments, and I will be reviewing Hansard and will come back 
and report accordingly. Thank you very much for your 
comments. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That 
75-minute debate caused a lot of interest among members 
obviously as we see. And I want to return to my initial 
comments which were: I think one of the most important things 
that we are seeing shape up in this Assembly today is the 
separation between the government members who have an 
optimistic view for rural Saskatchewan, who have an optimistic 
view of how we can make our economy move forward, and the 
opposition members who seem to be suffering from a sense of 
gloom and doom and unfortunate pessimism about the ability 
for their neighbours to succeed in this society. 
 
One of the things that this Assembly, in this particular session, 
the legislature is focusing in on is the important investments 
that our government are making in terms of infrastructure — 
infrastructure in highways, infrastructure in terms of 
investments in new technology. 
 
The motion that I’ll be moving later on today focuses very 
much on information technology. As I was mentioning, one of 
the things that we are seeing is that new technology is allowing 
us to connect to different markets and to new markets, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and this is of significant importance to us. 
 
One of the things we are noticing as the economy moves 
forward is that people have an ability regardless of where they 
live now to find employment connected to other parts of the 
world. I think of consultants who work in my riding and may 
very well do business with companies in Toronto or in Calgary 
or in the United States. They are able to do this in large part 
because we have the ability through modern information 
technology to communicate. We have that ability now for us to 
hook up and hook into other people’s economies without us 
having the actual . . . having to be there. 
 
That’s a very important change for us, and I think it’s 
something that is very useful for us here in Saskatchewan to 
take a look at. 
 
SaskTel has been a very important part of this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because SaskTel is a leader in innovation. It is a leader 
in terms of making sure Saskatchewan is competitive. It’s a 
leader in terms of making sure we have the technology here at 
home for Saskatchewan people to succeed. 
 
I would say to the members opposite, who I have listened to 
over the last several weeks deride our Crown corporations, I 
would say to them: how else are we going to see those kind of 
investments made here in Saskatchewan, except for the fact 
Saskatchewan people are making those investments themselves 
through the Crown Investments. 
 
Is AT&T going to step in? Is Sprint going to step in? Is Rogers 
going to make the investment? Who are going to make those 
investments on behalf of Saskatchewan people if not 
Saskatchewan people themselves? 
 
Now we’ve seen over the past many years, the members say 
simply let the market rule. Let the market make the decisions. 



April 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 507 

 

They’ll come forward. They’ll put the money up. They’ll ante 
up and not to worry. 
 
Well we’ve waited for years and I haven’t seen the investments. 
We’ve waited for years and we haven’t seen anybody else step 
forward. SaskTel has stepped in, SaskTel has stepped in and has 
acted on behalf of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and it will continue to as long as we make sure those members 
opposite stay on that side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite 
seem to be exuberant today in terms of their sense that 
somehow they are going to transform and transcend their past 
and their history and be able to convince people to once again 
put them into power over on this side of the House. 
 
I think it’s interesting as we take a look at what they’ve been 
saying over the past several months when we haven’t been in 
session. When we take a look at what the Leader of the 
Opposition has been saying in terms of how he would handle 
those major Crown investments like SaskTel that are making 
massive investments in infrastructure. What’s his solution — 
sell them off. He’s going to put the silverware in the garage 
sale, I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is something we 
are not going to allow happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite 
are pessimistic. They say we can’t do anything in 
Saskatchewan. They say, oh, things are going down the drain. 
It’s not true. It’s not true. 
 
I take a look around Regina and I see the growth that we have 
in our economy in a very important area. What’s that area, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? The area’s call centres. We see a lot of growth 
in terms of jobs in call centres. 
 
Now why is that? That investment is able to happen because 
SaskTel’s put in place an infrastructure that allows these private 
sector companies to come to Saskatchewan, take advantage of 
well-educated, well-trained labour, and be able to employ 
Saskatchewan people to provide services across Canada — 
across Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That happens because of 
the big investments that SaskTel’s making here in 
Saskatchewan, here at home. 
 
They’re not doing that because any other private sector 
company has stepped in to help out. They’re doing that because 
they are able to work in partnership with SaskTel and in terms 
of take advantage of some of the major infrastructure 
investments that we’ve made in terms of technology. 
 
Thousands of people today, in Regina, have a job because of the 
infrastructure investments that we have made on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The members opposite will say, and I see the member from 
Wood River leaning back and thinking, you know, that’s 
creeping socialism. That’s not creeping socialism; that’s 
assisting capitalism, I would say to that member. And that is 

what we are interested in as long as people are able to 
participate and Saskatchewan people see some return on that 
investment. 
 
Gone are the days of the big giveaways. Gone are the days 
when we simply open up the bank account to whoever wants to 
come in and temporarily take advantage of a situation. We are 
moving forward in terms of investments and infrastructure. 
SaskTel is moving forward in terms of its investments here at 
home. And we are seeing those benefits across Saskatchewan. 
 
Just the other day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of 
Economic Development was able to go and open a high 
technology communications link, what they call, in simple 
layman’s terms, a big pipe between our two universities of 
Regina and Saskatchewan . . . the University of Saskatchewan 
in Saskatoon. This big pipe is going to be able to move a great 
deal of information back and forth between researchers through 
SRnet. This is a great advantage that we have been able to work 
with our universities to be able to involve them in our 
investment plans and to be able to help spin off additional 
research money, enable to assist them help Saskatchewan move 
forward. 
 
As I look back over the record of this government and this 
administration — for even just the brief six years that I’ve been 
here — I reflect on some of the thoughts that we were going 
through back in 1995-96 about how to better integrate our 
approach to government; how to get things out of the stovepipes 
that they came in with the various departments and the various 
Crowns all operating separately; how were we going to be able 
to integrate our investment platform so that we could move 
forward and employ Saskatchewan people and help them move 
in the next economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a big part of that was the work that we had 
done through the Department of Post-Secondary Education in 
terms of making sure Saskatchewan people have access to the 
knowledge that it takes to participate in the new economy. Part 
of that has been through investments we’ve made through 
SaskTel, part of that has been through investments that we have 
made by employing very specific tax credits, part of that has 
been by being able to reduce the sales tax in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of these things have helped moved our 
economy forward into the new information age. And I think this 
is something we have a great deal to be proud of. 
 
SaskTel has done a great job in terms of helping to make sure 
that very core infrastructure is there for Saskatchewan people, 
not just here in Regina, not just in Saskatoon or Swift Current 
or P.A. (Prince Albert), but throughout the province. 
 
This August, this past August, I was particularly pleased to be 
in Minneapolis, Minnesota at a conference. It was through the 
CPA (Commonwealth Parliamentary Association). It was with 
the . . . it was the Midwestern Legislative Conference, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. One of the things that we were discussing at 
this conference was how to take better advantage of technology 
in terms of helping to stimulate rural communities and to be 
able to backfill some of the job losses that we were seeing 
across the Great Plains states and across the Canadian Prairies 
in the agricultural sector. 



508 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2001 

 

It was a particularly interesting set of discussions to listen to 
American legislators talk about some of the problems they were 
facing in their communities because indeed they’re very similar 
to some of the problems that we face in some of our rural 
communities today. 
 
As we see a decline in employment related to agriculture, we 
know that in order to keep our rural communities stable, in 
order to maintain services we need to be able to maintain a 
good, solid economic base. Saskatchewan communities have 
been able to see a fair amount of diversification and we’ve seen 
a great advance in terms of the amount of manufacturing that is 
going on, but we’ve also been able to see them be able to take a 
better advantage of the modern infrastructure, technology 
infrastructure that’s in place as well. 
 
Senator Paul Wellstone of Minnesota has proposed a Bill in the 
American Congress which would assist Americans and 
American communities to be better able to take advantage of 
this technology. As I reviewed Senator Wellstone’s Bill, I was 
impressed by how similar it was to many of the initiatives that 
we have introduced here in Saskatchewan in terms of providing 
incentives, both through SaskTel, through our Department of 
Post-Secondary Education, and through the telecommunications 
SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network) network that 
we have in place. 
 
I thought it was interesting because often I think that we feel 
somewhat isolated here in Saskatchewan and we think, oh . . . 
And certainly if you listen to the opposition, they think it’s 
something only unique to Saskatchewan that we’re seeing a loss 
in agricultural employment. That’s not true. 
 
What we’re seeing is across the Great Plains states, across the 
Prairies, many of the similar circumstances, and I think it is 
interesting that we’re are looking at many of the same solutions 
to respond to them. 
 
I think it’s interesting that many of the solutions that we’re 
looking at actually cross partisan lines. Certainly nobody would 
accuse us on this side of being like the American Republicans. 
Certainly nobody would accuse us of being like the Democrats 
in the US (United States). And yet many of the initiatives being 
taken in American states are very similar to initiatives being 
taken here. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about two other 
areas that are particularly important to us here in terms of new 
technology and information that are happening in terms of 
support of our economy. One of those is the investments that 
we have been able to make in terms of our Petroleum 
Technology Research Centre here in Regina. New technology is 
important for us to make sure that we have a sustainable 
economy, both that we’re able to make the most of our 
resources but we’re able to do it in an environmentally sensitive 
way as well. 
 
The PTRC here, the Petroleum Technology Research Centre, is 
a premier centre in terms of us being able to focus on better 
resource recovery. We’re able to do this in large part because 
we’re able to make use of research that happens across the 
country and be able to work with private sector companies here. 
An important part of that is the sharing of information and the 

information technology component which links up the 
universities. 
 
This is extremely important to us as we move forward, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, into a new economy, an economy that is more 
conscious of how we should make use of our natural resource 
wealth which Saskatchewan has an exuberant amount of. But 
we also are very aware that we need to be cautious in our 
development approach, that we cannot afford to waste resources 
through bad technology and through bad decisions as may have 
happened in the past. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this past month we have been very 
fortunate by working with the federal government, and I want to 
congratulate the federal Liberal government for their assistance 
in establishing the Greenhouse Gas Research Centre here at the 
University of Regina. 
 
I want to talk just briefly about some of the issues which are 
happening to shape our economy right now and some of the 
pressures and how technology makes an impact on our 
information technology. 
 
Five years ago nobody was talking really about greenhouse 
gases. We didn’t really think it was a great concern. There was 
a sense that, well this was simply bad science, that there was no 
need for us to deal with greenhouse gases. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that as we have come to pay 
attention to what is happening around the world, as we look at 
things in terms of the technology that’s available to us, we have 
a better understanding of the impact of some of these issues on 
our economy. 
 
(16:45) 
 
In the olden days of the 1980s, in those olden days of the 1980s, 
we may have had to respond to this issue province by province, 
university by university, in terms of setting up research. Today 
we don’t need to do that because we are able to have one centre 
to focus in on greenhouse gas research. That centre will be here 
in Regina. It will move forward and take advantage of all the 
information technology access that will be provided to our 
campuses in terms of making sure researchers across the nation 
are able to access some of the good work that’s going on here. 
 
In addition to the work that we do with the economy and the 
support that information technology has, there’s also a very real 
social component to it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I believe it was 
two years ago that we announced that we would be moving 
forward with a Telehealth project. 
 
Telehealth, as members will likely remember from discussions 
we had in the Assembly at that point, focused in on the ability 
for us to make sure that people regardless of where they were in 
Saskatchewan, were able to have contact with the best of 
specialists in the nation. That we were able to have a direct 
contact between doctors in smaller communities who may feel 
that they were operating an isolated practice to be able to talk to 
their colleagues in other centres . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
The member opposite says, well we call that the telephone. Yes, 
in the olden days that would be the telephone. It’d be pretty 
hard to send an X-ray across the telephone. It’s pretty hard to 



April 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 509 

 

send a CAT scan (computerized axial tomography) back across 
the telephone. 
 
Today we are able to make use, today we are able to make use 
of the new technology through the Internet, and through this 
high-speed connection we are able to transfer a great amount of 
data back and forth. But people are able to see, particularly in 
the northern part of this province, better access to health care 
professionals. I think that we will see in terms of members 
across the province, doctors talk about the abilities that they 
have to feel less isolated. 
 
This is probably a good point for me to allow the seconder of 
this resolution, the member for Saskatoon Eastview, an 
opportunity to speak. And as such I will move — as soon as I 
find the motion — I would move, seconded by the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview: 
 

That this Assembly endeavour to promote the rapid 
introduction of modern information technology to 
education, health care, and to individuals, organizations, 
and businesses across Saskatchewan. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
happy to second this motion. And today I’d like to talk about 
the benefits of information and the technology to support the 
gathering and the sharing of that information. 
 
I want to focus my comments on areas in health and in health’s 
role in our CommunityNet initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a million people spread over a vast 
geographic area. Directing these people . . . connecting these 
people to health services, education, and business opportunities 
is critical to our growth and success as a province and to our 
health as a people. Government and business must work 
together to ensure that all citizens are able to participate 
successfully in the digital world. 
 
Information technology is not about using technology for 
technology’s sake. It is about using technology to 
fundamentally change the way we do business, be it in health, 
education, economic development, or any other sector of our 
endeavours. Technology is very dynamic and it requires all of 
us to adopt a culture of innovation and co-operation to mutually 
succeed. 
 
The key point in information technology is that it is forcing us 
to fundamentally rethink how we organize our work and our 
everyday lives. We need to embrace this new way of thinking 
and use technology to our full advantage. To achieve our 
potential however, Mr. Speaker, I think government must show 
leadership. We will help drive the change. It is essential that we 
provide the tools, the service, and the information that people 
need along with leading-edge projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as an original member of the Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network Board, I have maintained a keen interest 
in health information, its collection, and its use. When SHIN 

(Saskatchewan Health Information Network) started, the board 
had a major challenge to convince stakeholders that investing in 
information systems was necessary and a prudent expenditure 
of scarce health dollars. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, SHIN is coordinating the CommunityNet 
into 250 health facilities that will be directly connected, and 150 
facilities that will use other cost-effective means of access. We 
put all our long-term care facilities as a high priority to receive 
CommunityNet access and SHIN is in charge . . . is playing a 
key role in coordinating a common security approach for the 
health sector. 
 
As the infrastructure and infostructure has slowly been put into 
place, the necessity of having quality, accurate, and timely 
information has become even more imperative to the operation 
of the health system. Our need for information is acute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to make sound decisions, especially in the health 
sector, we need that quality, accurate, and timely information. 
We need to decide which services that the health sector delivers 
actually make a difference to people’s health, actually make a 
difference to people’s health — it’s worth repeating. Simply 
doing more or adding more money does not necessarily make 
the system better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1999 a study was done by the Health Service 
and Utilization Research Commission assessing the impact of 
the 1993 conversions of hospitals to health centres in 52 
communities. Interestingly enough the findings were, and I 
quote the report: 
 

That despite widespread fears that health status would 
decline, residents in these communities reported that their 
own health was not adversely affected. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 

Although some communities continue to struggle with 
changes to health care delivery, others appear to have 
adapted as a result of strong leadership, the development of 
widely accepted alternative services, and local support for 
creating innovative solutions. 

 
Mr. Speaker, many of these communities have a primary health 
care model in place which delivers health services that directly 
impact on the health of their population, such as promotion of 
active living, healthy eating, and accident prevention. These are 
key components of making and keeping people healthy. 
 
As we see more and more of these types of centres going into 
communities, both urban and rural, we see a need to identify 
what types of programs will have the most benefit on the people 
that they serve. This is when we need information. 
 
We have to be able to collect data about people in a given area, 
say for diabetes health services. We have to know how many 
people are diabetic; if they follow their diet and their exercise 
programs. Are they following up on foot care to prevent further 
damage to their feet and legs. Primary health centres have a 
computerized recall program for diabetic patients. Any 
necessary follow-up is automatically flagged by the computer 
program to prompt follow-up appointments. 



510 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, another area where we are using information and 
technology to assist planning for the best use of our resources is 
in our tracking of critical care beds. We communicate with all 
the districts that have critical care beds. We find out how many 
beds are available and where they are available for time periods 
when there may be less coverage by personnel and increased 
demands due to emergencies or accidents. We can then best 
direct the movement of patients in an efficient manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are planning to connect all laboratories and 
doctors’ offices and health facilities in the province. We can 
streamline booking tests and sharing test results. Follow-up 
treatment could be started earlier if test results were known 
sooner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another exciting use of technology that is not far 
away from implementation in our province is the connection of 
all pharmacies so that all prescriptions written can be tracked. 
When you go into a pharmacy to fill a prescription, the 
pharmacist will know your previous drug history and this may 
help avoid overmedication, polypharmacy, and even harmful 
drug interactions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, waiting lists must be decided by using standard 
criteria for determining who should be on the list and when they 
should go on. The terms emergent, urgent, and elective, must be 
defined and people should have the option of seeing where they 
are on the list. We will need also to have a mechanism to be 
reassessed so you can move up on the list if your condition 
changes. 
 
A system for one million people should be able to be designed 
for maximum efficiency and the best possible uses of our 
resources to deliver quality services to all the people of the 
province. Mr. Speaker, all of the situations I have mentioned are 
possible. We have the technology and we are putting it to use. 
 
Technology is also key to learning. Connecting people to 
education centres by technology helps us recruit new learners, 
especially in the health sector. If you can learn in your home or 
community, there’s a greater possibility you will stay in that 
community. It also helps us to retain health providers. 
 
With innovations like Telehealth, as the member from Regina 
South was talking, we cannot only have specialists consult and 
diagnose connected to remote areas, but we can connect 
providers up to each other for sharing learning experiences and 
to support each other in decision making. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recently received the emergency medical 
services report with recommendations on how emergency 
services could be best delivered to a million people, given our 
unique challenges of geography. The report has shown us that 
what is most important is to have the best-trained provider at 
the scene of an emergency in the quickest possible time. 
 
The standard of excellence that we can attain is to have an EMT 
(emergency medical technician) in a well-equipped emergency 
vehicle respond 90 per cent, 90-plus per cent of the time in 30 
minutes or less. In the North and very remote areas we need to 
have more discussions with the communities and existing 
systems to determine how we best use our resources to deliver 
emergency services there. 

The golden hour, Mr. Speaker, does not start when you arrive at 
the hospital; it starts at the scene of the emergency. So we need 
to have the individual with the highest possible training at the 
scene in the shortest time. We need to have the best-equipped 
vehicles on the road. We need to have a central dispatch system 
so that we know where our personnel and equipment is at all 
times. 
 
I’ve seen the system where you can literally see the ambulance 
moving along the road on the map. This eliminates the need for 
someone standing on the highway to direct an ambulance into a 
farmyard. It reduces the need for ambulances to travel empty on 
a return trip, as trips can be coordinated better for transport or 
transfer of patients. 
 
This in no way undermines the value of the first responders, 
local ambulance drivers, or of volunteers. It does however show 
us that we can have a standard of service to over 90 per cent of 
our population that is in keeping with technology and citizens 
expectations of excellence in emergency response and 
non-emergent transport. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recently heard that it is not how many people 
you have working in the health system, it is more important to 
know what they are doing. It’s imperative that what we do, 
what we spend our money on, is going to make us healthier as a 
population. We’ll only be able to track that progress if we have 
good technology and well-trained personnel to gather 
information. 
 
And we need to be ready as a population to move ahead with 
the results of that information. We need to make decisions 
about where we will have certain services and who will deliver 
those services. These decisions will have to be made based on 
information and not on an attachment to what we had or what 
we did. We are hanging on to the definition of a hospital when 
what we really want is reassurance that we will have access to 
the services we need — emergency, home care, mental health, 
long-term care, acute health . . . acute care, and public health. 
 
We cannot circle the wagons and fire inward. Our communities 
will suffer, as will our people and particularly our health. We 
are ready now to connect to the future and our government is 
providing the opportunity. It is up to us as Saskatchewan 
citizens to say yes to the future. And I proudly second the 
motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
my pleasure to enter into debate in support of the resolution 
before us. We’ve had outlined by both hon. members a 
significant reason for Saskatchewan making a significant 
investment in information technology, to improve the quality of 
life of many of our people. I support its many applications in 
the education world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And having said that, let me simply move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:59. 
 


