















































Hansard: June 04, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1545 
 June 4, 2001 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Impact of SaskEnergy Proposed Rate Increases 
(continued) 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
pleased to enter into debate today, a debate put forward by the 
Saskatchewan Party member from Swift Current on a motion to 
refer the decision to hike rates in natural gas back to the rate 
review panel so that they can reconsider that decision. 
 
Thirty-four percent is one major jump, Mr. Speaker. Thirty-four 
percent would, in fact, put many, many homeowners looking 
for another place to live. This is not unusual in this province. In 
the last 10 years, Mr. Speaker, we have had people exiting the 
roads of this province on a constant basis in the last 10 years. 
We have had serious rate hikes right across the board with all 
utilities, as members of this Assembly well know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is indeed a very serious, serious matter. We 
have been getting phone calls on this side of the House from 
many, many citizens within our constituencies that are simply 
saying they cannot afford any more. They will not tolerate any 
more. They are exasperated. They feel defeated by this 
government, this NDP (New Democratic Party) government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have had calls in the last couple of days from 
many citizens out there, from farmers, from industry in my 
constituency, from homeowners. But I guess one of the most 
compelling phone calls that I had asked me to address the 
government of the day and plead with them not to increase 
these rates this high. 
 
One of the groups of people that spoke with me, Mr. Speaker, 
were those people that are on Canada Pension disability. One 
gentleman in particular is suffering from multiple sclerosis. He 
has four children that he is raising. He says that there is no 
possible way that he will be able to continue with his payments 
in order to keep his home functioning. He won’t be able to keep 
up with raising those children and supporting their needs if in 
fact this kind of an energy increase happens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another constituent that I have and brought to my 
attention, that she’s a home care worker in the town of 
Humboldt. Now she’s one of the workers under the CUPE 
(Canadian Union of Public Employees) union that are asking 
for government to consider giving them a wage increase. She 
finds it so very, very unfair that government doesn’t want to 
give them any kind of a wage increase; that they’re forever 
having to beg, for having to strike. But government she says can 
increase the rates and the costs of their living any time it feels 
like it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in this province are reasonable. People in 
this province have put up with major increases in taxation, 
major increases in utility rates in the last 10 years. They have 
bit the bullet; they have tried just about everyway to continue 
helping your families to function, but we are pretty well at the 
end of the line. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have spoken with citizens of Regina just over the 
supper hour, and it was interesting because I was at a restaurant 
here, and people generally just were talking about this projected 
increase in energy rates, and it was quite surprising that around 
one table of six people, three of those people were indicating to 
the others that they are going to be leaving this province. 
They’re going to Alberta. Unfortunately, we’re going to be 
losing more people over this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people elected this government in order to ensure 
that Saskatchewan would be a good place to live. They have 
received from this government nothing but hardship in many 
ways and forms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are really very concerned about our health 
care and everyone knows that. And I am not going to mix that 
into debate because it’s not permissible as I understand. But 
there are a number of issues that people have brought to our 
attention over the years that lead you to sort of almost commend 
these people for having the tenacity and the stamina they have 
to try to work out new ways that they can manage here. And 
many of them, Mr. Speaker, many farmers in particular have 
gone into different diversified ways of trying to ensure that they 
can make it go. 
 
Some of these farmers, Mr. Speaker, have been farmers that 
have done seed cleaning, that are drying grain. They have tried 
a number of different things. And when natural gas came into 
being, especially for the rural communities — some 
communities received it, some did not — those that did receive 
it felt quite fortunate because they felt they were having a 
means whereby to make a living in another way. 
 
But as prices have increased, these very people are saying now: 
what was this all for; I’ve set up a business that I can now not 
afford to continue. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to, on behalf of my constituents, ask the 
NDP government to really, really take into consideration the 
pleas of the people out there in Saskatchewan to think about 
those farmers, many of whom are right up against the axe at this 
time. We have low commodity prices. We have transportation 
price increases. Farmers are suffering a great deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one constituent from the Humboldt area told me 
today that it is this kind of a situation, these kind of issues that 
happen to people, these increases that they cannot bear any 
more, that lead people to suicide. Many, many farmers out there 
and many people have a great deal of pride, Mr. Speaker, and 
they will not speak about their distress. 
 
But when it comes to the point where people cannot pay their 
bills any more in order to feed their families, they many times 
will consider suicide just as a matter of despair. And, Mr. 
Speaker, many of them have already taken their lives because of 
things like this, because of the farming crisis in the past, and 
this is part of what is making this crisis in farming an even more 
disastrous situation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to add my support to the motion 
put forward by the member from Swift Current. And I will now 
take my seat in order for other members of the Assembly to put 



1546 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

forward some of their very thoughts and their views that 
government should consider . . . reconsider this decision. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — I want to thank the members opposite for 
their warm round of applause for recognizing me. I am actually 
quite happy to enter into this debate tonight, Mr. Speaker, 
because I think that there’s a couple of important points that we 
all want to emphasize. 
 
The House is set up so there’s an adversarial approach but I 
think, having listened to the debate this afternoon, there are 
many things that are being said on both sides that we have in 
common. 
 
First of all, I think we’re all interested in ensuring that we have 
the most affordable rates available to Saskatchewan people. 
That’s certainly the interest of the government members, and I 
believe it’s the interest of the members opposite. 
 
The Minister of Finance this afternoon in addressing this 
question, I think, made a very important point . . . or perhaps it 
was the Minister of Energy. That point was that there’s a very 
different approach on the two sides on how we achieve that. 
 
On this side of the Assembly, we believe that public ownership 
has allowed us to make sure we have the lowest possible rates. 
The members opposite would rather put the hands of the private 
sector on these companies and allow them to simply dictate the 
rates and then us move along in that system. 
 
We have seen what that Alberta-style model has done in 
Alberta. This is not something Saskatchewan people want. 
Saskatchewan people I do not believe want to see the vagaries 
of the market simply take over. 
 
They don’t want to see wild fluctuations in rates as we’ve seen 
in Calgary and Edmonton. The approach that we have taken 
here in Saskatchewan through SaskEnergy with its purchasing 
division have worked to the advantage of Saskatchewan 
residents for years. And I want to congratulate the good people 
over at SaskEnergy for the work they’ve done in doing that. 
These are not easy things to predict. 
 
Now I find it somewhat duplicitous of the members opposite to 
come into this forum today and say that we have got to turn all 
of our attention to driving down the rate based on something 
that they found on the Internet this morning — something they 
found on the Internet this morning that says that prices are 
dropping. That’s fine. That’s fine, Mr. Speaker. If the prices are 
dropping, then we’ll make sure Saskatchewan consumers get 
that. 
 
But let’s remember this: while natural gas is being sold on the 
spot market for up to 12 to $14 a gigajoule, over the last six 
months Saskatchewan people have been paying $4 a gigajoule 
— 4.52. That has led to a deficit in the gas variance account. 
 
Now deficits are nothing new to the members opposite. But 
what this has meant is that there has been a deficit in that 
account. Saskatchewan people have already been subsidized to 

the tune of $80 million for what we have been purchasing the 
gas for, Mr. Speaker. What we have . . . what we now have to 
figure out is what is that stable price, what is the price we want 
to sell, and how do we recoup some of that money. Or do we 
want to recoup that money that Saskatchewan residents have 
already benefited from by the good decisions of the people at 
SaskEnergy. 
 
This is the central question. It is not a question of how bad off 
people are by having to pay these rates. It is not a question that 
these rates are hard for people to afford. It is not a question that 
the members opposite are going to break into tears because the 
rates have gone up. What we’re dealing with here, Mr. Speaker, 
is the question of how do we set a stable rate, and what should 
that rate be. 
 
They would have us believe that because they went surfing the 
Internet this morning and they found a rate that was cheaper in 
Alberta, that that’s the rate we should use. I find it interesting 
that they weren’t clamouring for that rate six months ago, as the 
rates soared in Alberta, as the rates soared in British Columbia, 
as the rates soared in Ontario; everywhere except 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Nothing was said at that point, and 
I remember having a debate in this Chamber not that many 
months ago where we were talking about the purchasing 
policies of SaskEnergy. And the members opposite had very 
little good to say about SaskEnergy. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we have the opportunity. We’ve gone 
through the independent rate review. We’ve seen their 
recommendation. We’re able to take a look at this from a few 
steps back, and the cabinet in due course will make a decision 
as to what to do about the rate increase, what level of subsidy, if 
any, there should be, and how we deal with it. But the members 
opposite cannot simply wish away the $80 million deficit that’s 
in that gas variance account. That is not possible to wish away 
any more than I can wish away the $15 billion deficit that they 
left us when we came to power, much as I wish we could. 
 
What we are now dealing with is having to set a base rate for 
SaskEnergy. I have great faith in the officials over at 
SaskEnergy to have come forward with a reasonable request. I 
trust the independent panel, and I believe that the members of 
the cabinet when they get a chance to take a look at it will take 
into account all of the factors — all of the factors . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well the member for Humboldt says she bets 
my constituents love this. She bets that my constituents love 
this. I don’t know anybody that likes sitting down and doing 
their bills at the start of the month. I don’t know anybody that 
likes doing that, and whether that is with the current rate or at 
an increased rate or at a reduced rate, I don’t know. 
 
I find it interesting though that the members opposite refuse to 
pay any credence to the fact that we have already given a 
rebate. We have already given a rebate to Saskatchewan people. 
The members opposite don’t seem to take into account anything 
in terms of the fact that we have the lowest natural gas rates in 
the nation today, Mr. Speaker. And we will still have among the 
lowest gas rates once the cabinet adjusts that rate based on the 
review that has been undertaken. We will still have among the 
lowest gas rates in the nation, and certainly in North America. 
 
The members opposite sit there and giggle and laugh because to 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1547 

 

them this is nothing more than just cheap politics; this is cheap 
theatrics. And I think that that shows where they’re at. Let’s not 
forget, Mr. Speaker, that this is the same opposition that only a 
few months ago was standing up and saying that we had to put 
every last penny that we were getting from the rate increases 
into what? Into a cut on the gasoline tax. 
 
Now let’s not forget about this. All of that money had to go to 
cut the gasoline tax. Oh, but wait. All of a sudden that didn’t 
work; all the money’s got to go to cut the natural gas rate. Oh 
wait, that didn’t work; all the money’s got to go to cut taxes. Oh 
wait, none of that works. We’ve got to increase spending. 
That’s the way we got into a deficit to start with, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s one of the things that the members opposite have got to 
grapple with if they ever want to come across as a credible 
opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(19:15) 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this is an important question. 
It’s one that I am certain that my colleagues in the cabinet will 
take into consideration as they take a look at the independent 
rate review panel. It’s one of the things that I believe the rate 
review panel has taken into account. 
 
We on this side believe that public ownership in a competitive 
environment is the best way to protect Saskatchewan 
consumers. We are not about to go back to the way that those 
members opposite wanted when we got SaskEnergy set up to 
start with so that it could be sold, so that somehow the private 
sector could run things, so that somehow that we could just trust 
that capitalist system and it would look after everything. That 
was the approach they had, Mr. Speaker, and we saw how that 
worked in Alberta. And you know what? People don’t like it 
very much there. I don’t think they’d like it very much here. 
 
So while the members opposite say, yes it’s painful to see the 
rates increase, I have to agree it is. But unlike the members 
opposite, we believe here that things . . . that bills have got to be 
paid. And you can’t simply run up deficits whether it’s in the 
gas variance account, whether it’s in the GRF (General Revenue 
Fund). You can’t do it. 
 
That money has got to come from somewhere and so long as 
the price is fair, the price is stable, Saskatchewan consumers 
will continue to benefit from the lowest . . . among the lowest, if 
not the lowest rates here in North America today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to belabour this 
point. We . . . despite the fact this is a priority debate I note that 
we will have the opportunity again tomorrow to discuss similar 
issues during the 75-minute debate and I look forward to 
addressing it at that point. 
 
I will allow other members to stand up, hopefully from the 
opposition, in an attempt to justify why this is now the single 
most important issue as opposed to tax cuts, the reduction in the 
gas rates, any number of spending priorities they bring forward. 
And I look forward to being enlightened in that way. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to enter into debate on the emergency motion as 
proposed by the member from Swift Current. Well I will give 
the member from Regina South one thing, Mr. Speaker. I agree 
this is a motion that shouldn’t have been necessary. 
 
Had the government done the right thing in view of the recent 
developments and the falling of natural gas prices and referred 
it back to the rate review panel given that new information, we 
wouldn’t have to be here asking them to do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other issue I think that needs to be illustrated a little more 
clearly here, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that we as an opposition 
have a responsibility to bring this issue forward and to make 
sure that the government is going to look at this in a responsible 
fashion. 
 
Because given the facts — and they have been outlined very 
clearly by our member from Canora-Pelly — we’ve got a 
situation here where we’ve got the corporation and we’ve got 
the government using two different sets of numbers. So if there 
isn’t an opportunity to discuss this, Mr. Speaker, and allow the 
people of Saskatchewan an opportunity to be able to take a look 
at the facts and understand how this has come to be, then I think 
it would be very, very difficult for people not to be cynical and 
not to be frustrated with the actions of this government over this 
issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are some very, very, very strong and credible sources 
indicating, Mr. Speaker, that natural gas prices will continue to 
decrease. In the words of one analyst referring to it as even a 
dramatic slump. So given that, Mr. Speaker, with the minister’s 
numbers and the president of SaskEnergy’s numbers, which are 
we to believe? 
 
And I think at this point people do understand that natural gas 
prices are falling, Mr. Speaker, and that the government should 
look very, very, very seriously at referring this back to the rate 
review panel. 
 
We’ve got a situation where SaskEnergy is basing its request on 
$7 a gigajoule forecast and yet the minister has a different 
forecast. So these things, Mr. Speaker, have to be referred back 
to the panel for their further consideration and for their further 
action. 
 
I think one of the things too, Mr. Speaker, we want to talk about 
a little bit is what the social impact of this kind of a rate 
increase would be on the people of Saskatchewan. And when I 
was thinking about this a little earlier today, I sort of thought 
back to my previous occupation. And I thought about people we 
used to employ in group homes, Mr. Speaker, as care workers 
providing services to people with disabilities. We still have in 
group homes, Mr. Speaker, people working 24-hour days, four 
days in, four days out, at minimum wage — at minimum wage, 
Mr. Speaker. How are those people expected to absorb this kind 
of an increase, around the $400 a year? This is, as has been 
illustrated by a number of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, one of 
our gravest concerns, is this is going to affect the seniors, this is 
going to affect low-income individuals the most. And these are 
the people that, Mr. Speaker, need to be protected. 



1548 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

There is also the whole issue of the impact on the 
small-business community, Mr. Speaker. We have in my 
constituency a number of different small businesses that will be 
affected very, very dramatically, and have been affected already 
by the increases to date. And this proposed increase, Mr. 
Speaker, may be the increase that actually puts the last nail in 
the coffin. 
 
I have raised the issue of two alfalfa dehy plants in my 
constituency previously, Mr. Speaker, but I would just like to 
go back to that issue for a little bit here. 
 
I, not too long ago, received a letter from the Hudson Bay 
Dehydrators Mutual Ltd. and the Arborfield Dehy Ltd. And 
these two dehy plants, Mr. Speaker, were struggling with the 
last round of natural gas increases and were doing absolutely 
everything they could to cope. But even at that, they weren’t 
sure they could survive. This round . . . if this rate increase is 
approved, Mr. Speaker, these two dehy plants will probably 
cease to exist. 
 
And just to make sure that everyone understands what we’re 
talking about here, Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote from the 
letter sent to me by the Hudson Bay Dehydrators Mutual Ltd., 
and I quote: 
 

We are an alfalfa processing plant located in Hudson Bay, 
Saskatchewan. Our farmer co-operative, incorporated in 
1973, has been brunting the full force of the income 
disaster that so negatively affected farm income in Canada. 
Since the loss of the WGTA our freight costs have 
currently peaked at $40 per tonne to ship our pellets to 
Vancouver. 

 
Then they go on, Mr. Speaker, to talk a little bit about how 
they’ve managed to deal with some of the issues they’ve faced. 
They’ve reduced their costs. They’ve attempted to build in any 
efficiencies that they could possibly build in. They talk about 
employing 40 people in the community of Hudson Bay. And 
they talk about some of the other cost increases, Mr. Speaker, 
that they’ve had to face — diesel fuel price increases, that kind 
of thing. When they get to the area of gas, Mr. Speaker, they 
say: 
 

We are expecting the price of natural gas to be in the $6.40 
gigajoule plus area for the upcoming season. We know now 
that it will be substantially more than that. After projecting 
our finances for the next 18 months, we realized that we 
cannot continue to operate with these high costs. We cannot 
afford to continue to produce product when the price of 
natural gas is over $5 a gigajoule. We will need assistance 
to bring our natural gas prices down to a level to allow us 
to operate on a fair and level playing field. 

 
They go on then to explain, Mr. Speaker, that should the prices 
increase beyond what they were referring to here, that this plant 
may very well cease to exist. 
 
Just to give an idea, Mr. Speaker, of how much the last round of 
gas price increases affected them, in the 1999 operating year 
their prices were $315,000 annually. In the year 2000, 
$450,000. And in 2001 their prices were expected, expected 
before this last recommendation, to be around $720,000, Mr. 

Speaker. That is something that they will not be able to sustain. 
 
What I found particularly interesting, Mr. Speaker, was that 
when they relayed their concerns to the Minister of Economic 
and Co-operative Development, he wrote a letter back to them 
and indicated that, and I quote: 
 

Unfortunately I am not in a position to suggest any quick 
solutions resulting from these gas price increases. Officials 
from SaskEnergy have indicated to my officials that gas 
prices at the current rates in Saskatchewan are still the 
lowest in North America. 
 

And how many times have we heard that today, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Consumers of gas in other provinces in Canada and the 
United States are experiencing higher natural gas costs. 
 

Then, very interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say: 
 

My hope is that in the longer term natural gas prices will 
stabilize at a much lower level than current prices. 
 

Well surprise, surprise. It doesn’t look like that’s going to 
happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the case of the Arborfield Dehy Ltd., this is a lot larger 
facility, Mr. Speaker, it employs a 106 employees during its 
peak processing months. It’s an operation that’s been in 
existence for over 30 years, and by far and large has been quite 
a financial success story. But once again, they are facing some 
very real challenges even prior to this last recommended 
increase. They talk about their cost being, for natural gas, in 
1998, 348,000. Went to 804,000 in the year 2000. 
 
And as of March 31, 2001, they were anticipating natural gas 
costs of $1.7 million. And I think there’s one paragraph in here 
that I would like to pay particular attention to, Mr. Speaker 
because it speaks to the pride of this organization and the fact 
that they have been able to stand on their own two feet, the fact 
that they have been successful, the fact that they have been able 
to do it on their own, but now they find themselves in an 
untenable position, and they are put in the position of having to 
actually look outside for some help. 
 
And I quote the president: 
 

As president of ADL (Arborfield Dehy Ltd.) I do not 
normally look to government for assistance because I 
believe that industry must be able to survive on its own, 
and I believe then, in the long term, ADL will again be 
viable when energy costs return to more reasonable levels. 
Unfortunately ADL cannot survive another year with 
current natural gas prices. 
 

And I point out, Mr. Speaker, this letter was written February 
14, long prior to this last set of recommendations. It has already 
refinanced . . . ADL has already refinanced its debt resulting for 
the loss of the past years, and all of its assets are mortgaged to 
its major creditor. 
 

I believe (this is once again the president, Mr. Speaker) I 
believe that ADL has done all that it could reasonably be 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1549 

 

expected to do to survive this financial crisis, and it is now 
the appropriate time for government intervention to assist 
this organization and the dehy industry. 
 

They also, the president also makes some very poignant 
references to the government’s revenue sources. He goes on to 
say: 
 

The province of Saskatchewan has benefited financially 
from increased loyalties due to soaring energy costs, and it 
is reasonable that those funds be used to protect existing 
industry in Saskatchewan. This letter is both a request for 
financial assistance to offset higher energy costs and notice 
that if such assistance is not forthcoming, I will recommend 
to the Board of Directors of Alberta Dehy Ltd. that ADL 
begin to wind down its operations. 

 
So there we have it, Mr. Speaker: two businesses that this last 
round of recommendations may very, very well put right out of 
business, right out of operation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(19:30) 
 
We talk about the cost of the health care system to the health 
districts. We talk about the cost to the school boards, the 
division boards, all of the impact that will have on the local tax 
base. But, Mr. Speaker, I think where we’re going to see it and 
where it’s going to be felt more immediately is at the municipal 
level. 
 
This afternoon I spoke to a number of municipalities in my 
constituency and a number outside my constituency, and I 
would just like to relay the comments and the concerns that they 
wanted me to bring to the House. 
 
When I talk about the impact on these communities, Mr. 
Speaker, that would be both rural and urban. In the RM (rural 
municipality) of Moose Range, the comments were as follows: 
the government gives us money here and there and then takes it 
away by increasing costs elsewhere. 
 
The industries that they are concerned about the impact that this 
increase will have on — firstly, the dehy plants that I just 
referred to, Mr. Speaker. One of those dehy plants is very near 
the RM of Moose Range. The other industry that they are very, 
very concerned about, Mr. Speaker, is Premier peat moss, the 
only peat moss plant in Saskatchewan. This will have a 
tremendous impact on that industry. 
 
They as a rural municipality are concerned about the effect that 
an increase such as this would have on recreation facilities such 
as swimming pools, curling rinks, skating rinks, those kinds of 
things. They as a rural municipality are concerned about the 
effect that this will have on the agriculture industry — 
everything from drying grain to all the additional costs in 
agriculture. Concerns with seniors and with individuals on fixed 
incomes. 
 
The town of Nipawin, Mr. Speaker. Their concerns primarily 
are around recreation areas — arena, swimming pool, the 
Evergreen Centre in Nipawin. But two things that I found very 
interesting about their comments, Mr. Speaker. One was they 
thought that this increase would have a tremendous adverse 

effect on the cost of operating their water and sewage plants. 
Now we’ve heard an awful lot about water quality and safety in 
this province in the last couple of weeks, Mr. Speaker, and I 
find it absolutely reprehensible that this government would go 
ahead with something that could very well compromise a 
community’s ability to safely operate their water and sewage 
plants. And they conclude their remarks, Mr. Speaker, by 
saying that if this increase goes ahead they will have no 
recourse but to raise their property taxes next year. 
 
The town of Hudson Bay, once again, are concerned about the 
effect that this will have on recreational facilities. They go on to 
say that they have various facilities; they have various services 
— that they are all ready running at deficit levels. And the 
increase, the increased costs, Mr. Speaker, will not be able to be 
made up in user fees. They, too, indicate directly that they will 
have to increase property taxes. 
 
Interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, the town of Hudson Bay 
makes the same observation as the town of Nipawin. That this 
could even compromise their ability to maintain, upgrade, and 
to operate their water and sewer systems. And I think that, Mr. 
Speaker, is something that should concern all of us. 
 
The town of Hudson Bay also indicates that they’re now 
looking at all sorts of other options as opposed to purchasing 
the gas from SaskEnergy given the increase. 
 
The town of Carrot River, Mr. Speaker, once again, concerned 
with recreational facilities in the community, and concerned 
with their ability to be able to delivery basic sewer and water 
services and those kinds of things. And they as well, Mr. 
Speaker, talk about having to increase taxes in order to able to 
cope with this increase. 
 
From the town of Porcupine, Mr. Speaker, I got a rather 
detailed breakdown of the costs and how it will affect them 
directly. The town administrator forwarded to me the costs of 
energy for each of the facilities and services directly operated 
by the town. For a small community, Mr. Speaker, of 
approximately 850 people, those costs approximately $16,672. 
This increase, Mr. Speaker, will cost them in excess of $6,000, 
or perhaps to put it in terms that the government may better 
understand, approximately $7 per capita, per citizen in the 
community. This is getting dangerously close, Mr. Speaker, to 
one mill of taxation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to see some very, very negative 
impacts on our business community, on our farming 
community, on our municipal infrastructure, on our health 
districts, on our school divisions. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that 
the government constantly criticizes the opposition for not 
being reasonable, for not being . . . putting reasonable options 
forward. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can’t think of anything more reasonable 
than this particular resolution. A resolution that just simply asks 
the government, very simply and very clearly, please refer the 
recommendation back to the rate review panel. Given this new 
information, perhaps they now would be able to find a way to 
come back with another recommendation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, nothing unreasonable, nothing very difficult to 



1550 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

accommodate, but yet by the same token it’s either their way or 
it doesn’t happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I think that we have probably pretty well 
illustrated the difficulties that there would be if this government 
remained stubborn in its desire to not follow this motion and to 
not refer it back to the rate review panel. So with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I will be supporting the motion and not the 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my . . . I don’t know whether to say my 
pleasure or to my distress that I find myself entering into this 
debate. And I think I’ll mark my territory by saying it’s to my 
distress because it’s just after 7:30 this day, what . . . And as the 
member for Arm River says, we’re missing a hockey game for 
gosh sakes. Absolutely. And indeed it is my desire to give you 
all kinds of time to watch a hockey game. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this motion is about is a simple referral of 
SaskEnergy. The decision that the rate review commission 
made and shared with us Friday, June 1. Today is June 4. Four 
days ago . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, just for some history about rate review 
commissions. In the 1980’s the then Conservative government 
set up a rate review commission. They called it PURC, public 
utilities rate commission. Retired Justice Ernie Boychuk, Chair; 
a blue-ribbon commission. Well what happened. They made a 
few rulings; the then right-wing Conservative government said, 
oh we don’t like what this commission’s doing. So they 
dismantled the commission. They dismantled the commission, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then in all kinds of shades of déjà vu, the government changes 
and guess who is calling for a rate review commission? The 
right-wing opposition now. 
 
In opposition they say, ah, rate, rate review committee is just a 
wonderful thing. That’s what they say. They push for it and 
push for it, and they say that way it isn’t this big cabinet alone 
making the decision. Instead, we have a public rate review 
committee. Everyone welcome to make comment. Everyone 
welcome to make their best argument before the rate review 
committee. 
 
Well then fast forward, fast forward to Friday, June 1. Not a 
month ago — three, four days ago, Mr. Speaker. Three, four 
days ago, the public rate review committee gives a report to the 
government calling for . . . saying they modified the request of 
SaskEnergy, modified it downward to a 42 per cent, which is a 
huge increase — not, not trying to even go there. I’m talking 
process here for the moment — more about rates in a minute, 
Mr. Speaker — I want to talk process first. 
 
We get the recommendation. The first opportunity what do they 
say? No, send it back to the rate review committee. We’ve had 
the rate review committee opinion for three whole days and 
we’re supposed to send it back. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I ask them if we sent this back to the rate 
review committee, would you respect their answer next week or 
the week after? And of course the answer is, no, you wouldn’t. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member to direct all of his 
remarks through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The opposition, 
of course, would not recognize what the rate review committee 
did if we were to review this . . . refer this back to them. Why 
wouldn’t they recommend . . . or recognize it, Mr. Speaker? 
Because they’re too busy playing cheap, petty politics with 
people’s lives that’s why. 
 
They asked for a rate review committee. We agreed that that 
would add some transparency; would make it where the people 
had an opportunity to talk to their government MLA (Member 
of the Legislative Assembly), had an opportunity to make their 
feelings known to SaskEnergy and to the rate review committee 
— to all three of those, Mr. Speaker. And the people have done 
it. 
 
None of us are happy about a 42 per cent rate, proposed rate 
increase — none of us are, none of us are. But you know, Mr. 
Speaker, we believe in process on this side. We believe in 
process. 
 
We put together the rate review commission. That is there. It’s 
not necessarily the be-all/end-all. I believe the Minister of 
Finance earlier has said certainly we’ve got to look at this, and 
we’ll want to do what we can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard much about the prices of natural gas. 
We’ve heard much about Saskatchewan having the lowest or 
second lowest natural gas rates in North America. That’s a 
matter of fact. What astounds me is that the members opposite 
have held up ATCO in Calgary and said, gee this is wonderful. 
They’re going to a rate of $6.69 a gigajoule. And they would 
have us believe that we should move to Calgary so we could 
enjoy $6.69 gigajoule natural gas. 
 
Well amazingly enough, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s natural 
gas is $4.52 a gigajoule. That’s what our price is today. It defies 
all logic why someone would move from paying $4.52 a 
gigajoule to a place where they could spend $6.69 a gigajoule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to touch a bit on ownership of Crown 
corporations. We believe that the people own the Crown 
corporations. We believe on this side of the House that you 
cannot . . . if . . . let me rephrase this a little bit. If you had a 
situation where a Crown corporation earned an extra $25 
million, Mr. Speaker, that $25 million or whatever the amount 
would wind up back ultimately in the treasury. 
 
Or in the case of SaskEnergy, we’ve done one other thing, and 
that is there’s a reserve stabilization fund that has been going 
into deficit for certainly this past winter now, and we need to 
replenish that. Mr. Speaker, you cannot, you cannot make 
money from yourselves. You cannot. 
 
I understand that before I get finished, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
do just one other thing in this debate. And that is to remind 
members opposite who it was that sold our natural gas. Who 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1551 

 

was it that sold our natural gas? 
 
(19:45) 
 
I think we’ve hit a sore spot, Mr. Speaker. They’re saying not 
me, not me. Well not you, not you, not you, but only by virtue 
of the timing, Mr. Speaker, of their arrival in this legislature, 
only by virtue of their arrival are they not guilty of having sold 
the natural gas resources of the people of the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It is a shame that there’s three members sitting there now that 
were part of that Grant Devine Conservative government and 
they claim now there’s something different. It’s a shame that 
the member for Swift Current who sat on what was the 
euphemism for privatization. He worked in the office of public 
participation, Mr. Speaker, which is the office of selling 
everything off — privatization — and it’s nothing more than 
privatization. He was successful in the ’80s, sold our natural 
gas, as a result we are stuck being purchasers of every gigajoule 
of natural gas that is burned in the province of Saskatchewan. 
We have to first purchase it through SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a resource that the people of the province 
owned; the people owned them. They sold them and now 
they’re saying oh, woe is us. We sold it, we privatized, we 
deregulated, and woe is us. The prices are going up and 
somehow they’re trying to pretend they’re the champions of the 
people. What a disgrace; what a shame, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is obscene that we’re at this point in this Legislative 
Assembly talking about this particular issue. This issue that’s 
very important to everybody, but this issue that you just watch 
tomorrow there’s going to be a private members motion on this 
very same issue — on this very same issue — and it’s going to 
come tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am not going to be supporting the amendment. I will be 
supporting . . . I think I better say it the right way, Mr. Speaker, 
just so there’s no concern here. I will be supporting the 
amendment, and of course I do not agree in the slightest with 
the main motion that was put forward by the opposition. It’s 
been a distressful time to enter this debate, but my pleasure to 
help correct some of the public record. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an important 
topic that we’re dealing with today, and there is a few directions 
that I want to take as I discuss the particular motion and its 
effect on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the things I’m going to want to do is to go through the 
various aspects and how it affects my constituency. And this 
morning, Mr. Speaker, as you will recall we asked a number of 
questions from cabinet ministers as to exactly what effect this 
would have on their particular portfolio with this increase. 
 
We didn’t get a single answer from any of those. We had the 
Finance minister, the only person that I believe we didn’t ask a 
question of, got up and gave a similar answer to all sorts of 
variety of questions. We asked the question specifically of the 
person in charge of Crowns — didn’t get up once this morning. 

We went all the way through Education and Health and Social 
Services. They wouldn’t answer. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to take some time this evening and 
discuss what the effect of this kind of a raise is going to be on 
those areas in my constituency. But before I need to do that, Mr. 
Speaker, I need to sort of underline why this debate is taking 
place. 
 
We’ve had two ministers give two totally different values on 
the price of gas. And both of them claim that they are setting 
policy for government. Both of them claim they know what’s 
best for the people of Saskatchewan. The minister in charge of 
Crowns gets up and comes up with one price, Finance with a 
different price, and the fight is on. 
 
It seems that as of today the Finance minister must have won 
because at least he’s the only one answering. The other one’s 
quiet, somehow he got muffled or got a snowball put in his face 
or something. It’s amazing that the Minister of Finance could 
do that to anyone, but he seems to have done that today. So it’s 
been a great day for him. 
 
But they just didn’t know . . . they just didn’t know which 
member to pick. And that, for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, is a very frightening situation, when they know we’re 
going to have something happen to the price of our gas and they 
listen to two ministers from the Crown get up and constantly 
offer different prices, and they say, what is going to happen? 
That kind of insecurity, the people of this province don’t need. 
That kind of insecurity, the people who want to invest in this 
province don’t need. 
 
Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, someone from another province 
or another country looking at Saskatchewan and maybe 
watching the legislature channel just to see how this place is 
run, and see one minister pop up, give one price, the other 
minister pops up and gives another price — almost double, Mr. 
Speaker, almost double — and say, now we’re going to come to 
Saskatchewan, and the leadership has no idea what in the 
world’s going on, no idea what’s going on. That’s a scary 
situation to put this province into. And therefore we need to go 
ahead and clarify some of those situations. 
 
We have the House Leader from the other side right now, Mr. 
Speaker, who is braying about all sorts of things. I haven’t seen 
him get up and give his offer. He used to be minister in charge 
of the CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) 
and Crowns. Why isn’t he getting up and picking a number? It’s 
some sort of a lottery like get up and pick whatever one you 
want. We’d like to know what he would pick. He was in charge 
of that department for a long time. He’s been amazingly silent 
except when someone else speaks tonight, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The speaker that spoke just before me, just to underline how 
this group doesn’t know what they’re doing, said that the 
increase was going to be 42 per cent. That was about 10 
minutes ago. He stood in his place and he said, the increase is 
going to be 42 per cent, and we don’t like to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that. 
 
Well I think they need to go ahead and check exactly what their 
Minister of Finance and minister in charge of Crowns said. I 



1552 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

think it was some place in the middle 30s. And now again we 
have this House Leader from Prince Albert get up and say, go 
check Hansard. Well he and I discussed this last time when he 
wasn’t checking Hansard. He should check it tomorrow 
morning, and he’ll find out that the previous speaker said 42 per 
cent. They don’t know. They have absolutely no idea. 
 
Into that sort of thing, Mr. Speaker, is where we need to 
interject some sanity, so let’s discuss what’s going to happen in 
various areas in Saskatchewan. 
 
What’s going to happen in agriculture with a government that 
doesn’t know what it’s going to do? But we know the price is 
going to go up. Now what do we pick? Do we pick the 35 per 
cent? Do we pick the 42 per cent? Or do we take their various 
prices on the cost that they’re going to have to pay? We don’t 
know. Agriculture is very dependent on the price of gas, not 
only for heating their homes. One of the very important things 
that creates a major cost for agriculture on an ongoing occasion 
is if we happen to have a fall that’s very wet and all the drying 
that farmers have to do of their grains. Unbelievable amount. 
 
In fact when this government put the lines into the various 
farms, they put the lines in so small they can’t even run half the 
dryers properly. I guess they probably thought, we’ll put in 
small lines, then we’ll up the price of gas, and they’ll use less 
and it’ll all work out fine in the end. Now that’s a socialist cure. 
When the lines are too small, up the price of gas, and you’ll use 
less. 
 
That’s going to be a major cost, a major cost to agriculture. 
That’s something that they need to sort of analyse when they 
look at that. 
 
Let’s look at what’s going to happen in the municipal situations. 
One of the key things that makes municipal areas, small-town 
Saskatchewan, a good place to live is that there’s usually 
recreational facilities that you can get at and you can use quite 
readily. So what happens, for example, with the heating costs 
that are involved when you’re talking about our rinks or our 
swimming pools in summer? Some of our communities like 
mine has a swimming pool; it’s heated. Now I don’t know if 
they’ll be able to keep on heating it; they’ll probably have ice 
water compliments of the socialists. They’ll have a big sign up, 
right at the end of the diving pool: feel free to jump in; it’ll be 
ice cold; thank your local socialist for that. That’s the kind of 
country they want: ice cold water in the swimming pools. What 
else are we going to have? 
 
Now I really don’t think that’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s not going to happen. And why won’t it happen, Mr. 
Speaker? Because the people in rural Saskatchewan are going to 
say we want something better for our children. And so they’ll 
probably have to raise taxes again. They’ve had to raise taxes 
because the minister in charge of Municipal Affairs has ensured 
that over the last decade we’ve had less and less money go to 
municipalities and the municipalities have had to keep on 
raising taxes. This will result in another raise in tax — in 
another raise in tax, Mr. Speaker. All those sorts of things that 
come through that municipal bodies have to take care of. 
 
Let’s spend a little bit of time and see how this is going to affect 
education. And some of them would say well, what difference 

does it make to a student or a teacher or a textbook what the 
price of gas happens to be? However, in most of our 
communities, our schools are the largest buildings. In most of 
our communities our schools are the buildings that have had the 
least repair done unto them because again the Education 
budgets have been cut time after time after time. And money for 
repair of buildings has really been cut and dropped. 
 
So now we have large buildings that haven’t been kept properly 
in repair but the heat’s got to be there. So what do you tell your 
school child? Well we’ll pack you an extra big lunch, keep on 
your mitts, have a good time in class. That’s not good enough, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s not good enough. 
 
But that’s what’s going to happen with the way this NDP is 
running the province. We have price of gas increases. We will, 
one or the other, if they figure out which one it is. Is it 42 per 
cent? Is it 35 per cent? What are they going to have to pay for a 
gigajoule of fuel? They don’t know. They don’t know. One 
minister gets up with one price, one with another one. 
 
Cost of education is going to be a key one that is going to be 
affected in a major way. School boards have very little control 
over their various costs. About 80-some per cent is basically the 
cost of personnel. The other 20 per cent is what they can have 
some influence in. This government has just influenced that 20 
per cent decision as well by increasing the cost to education. 
 
And we can say almost exactly the same thing for health, Mr. 
Speaker. The large buildings, for the most part not having been 
kept up very well, and what are we going to tell those people? 
Well first of all when you come into a hospital waiting room, 
you won’t get your service in 15 minutes as these people 
promised. You’re going to wait an hour, or 10, or a day before 
you get taken care of. Not because of the people who want to 
help you. It’s just because they’ve downloaded so badly that 
that service isn’t there. 
 
Now not only are people going to go and have to bring a lunch 
because they have to wait so long, they’ll have to bring their 
own blankets and comforters to keep warm. This is really 
bizarre, Mr. Speaker. This is the kind of province that this 
particular government is creating. 
 
Earlier on today, you heard the NDP over there totally insulted 
that we raised a concern for the plight of the poor in our 
province, but the plight of poor in our province are affected 
most seriously and most drastically when you don’t have 
someone in charge of the cost of gas doing it in a proper sort of 
a way, Mr. Speaker. They have no extra money left over. With 
the money they have, they’ve got to take care of a few 
essentials. Basically they have to take care of their insurance on 
the building, to take care of their food, and they want to keep 
the utilities going, at least have, you know, a warm place to stay 
and some food on the table. 
 
So when you have a government, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t 
know what it’s doing, and we know that the costs are going to 
go up, as I said, 42 per cent if you talk to some of them, and you 
heard it yourself, Mr. Speaker, probably not more than about 
ten minutes ago. He stood in this place. He said the gas cost is 
going to go up 42 per cent. And these people saying, I’m trying 
to stay alive on my fixed income — my fixed income from a 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1553 

 

pension, my fixed income from a farm I sold, my fixed income 
from a business I sold, a few RSP’s (Retirement Savings Plan) I 
managed to put in place, and now suddenly this cost is going to 
go up 42 per cent. It puts those poor people in our province in 
serious jeopardy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have to look at this carefully. The problems that they’ve 
created when we look at the cost that they said — either $7 or 
it’s $5, give or take a few cents. We can’t let this go on. 
 
Now they complain that we’re saying this should go back to the 
rate review board. Well there’s a very good reason for that. This 
is not petty politics as the previous speaker tried to say because 
when the rate review board did its work, and I believe they did 
a fairly good job, they went and they looked at information. 
They took the information they had. They made a decision on 
that, based on that. 
 
However, after they made that decision, there’s some totally 
different information came out. They didn’t have it. It wasn’t 
their fault. It wasn’t the fault of the NDP government this time 
that it wasn’t out there. Most things are. This wasn’t. This 
wasn’t their fault. It just showed up on the scene, very critical 
that the price of gas may actually be going down substantially. 
 
(20:00) 
 
Now the rate review committee asked for an increase, which in 
the light of the information that they had was a good decision. 
And we expected probably that cabinet, based on that good 
information, would have to go along with it to some extent, and 
that’s some of the concerns that we had. 
 
Now we find out that the cost of gas actually isn’t going to be 
anywhere near that high. The rate review committee didn’t 
know that. So that is the key factor — that’s the key factor — 
that they had to consider. They could go around the province 
for 10 years, Mr. Speaker. But if they don’t know what the cost 
of gas is going to be they have nothing that they can 
recommend. That’s the key factor in any decision that they’re 
going to make. 
 
Now, after they make their decision, the price changes 
drastically, so suddenly the decision that they made is no longer 
valid because of that one item. That’s why we recommend one 
of the things this government needs to consider. And they have 
many options, Mr. Speaker. This government has many options 
what they can do with that report. But that’s one of the ones. 
 
And if they’re thinking about it, there’s a good reason for it. 
Cost of gas is different than the rate review committee thought 
it was going to be, why not go back to them and say you’ve 
done all your research on the difficulties it would create 
throughout the province — some of which I’ve already 
discussed, Mr. Deputy Speaker — you put that all together but 
we now have a new price we have to factor into that. In light of 
that, what do you recommend? I’m sure it wouldn’t take that 
committee more than a day or two to do that, maybe even one 
day. There is only one factor they have to change in their 
decision. Come back, make the recommendation on that. That’s 
one of the things they can do. 
 
This government has many other options out there as well. 

They’ve made some money in some places, they’re sitting on 
some other money in some other places, probably waiting for an 
election, and I don’t imagine they were going to call an election 
about the same time that they increase the price of fuel. And the 
interesting thing that’s been as we’ve discussed this, Mr. 
Speaker, almost invariably — almost invariably — as the 
government’s side has discussed this, somewhere as usual 
they’ve dipped back into the ’80s. It’s strange. This is a 
government that has only one piece of glass that they look at 
and it’s a rear-view mirror. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — It’s time they look ahead for a change; look 
to the future of this province. This province has a lot to offer, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s why we’re here. This province has 
a lot to offer. 
 
I received a letter in the mail today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Today. And in that letter a young person who is going to 
university is discussing what’s happening in his situation. The 
amount of money he can earn, the cost that this province has for 
him, and he very seriously asks me . . . I’m supposed to give 
him some advice whether to stay in Saskatchewan or take some 
of the other possibilities that he sees outside of the province. 
 
I will be telling him, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to stay in this 
province. I will tell him to stay in this province because this 
province has a future. This province has a future, and it has a 
bright future. It has a very bright future if we put some policies 
into place, Mr. Speaker, that are going to make people realize 
there’s an opportunity here for investment. There is an 
opportunity for work; there is an opportunity to raise families 
that’s better than it’s been for most of the last 50 years — for 
the most of the last 50 years. And one of the key things that’s 
going to trigger that new change and that new possibilities and 
those kind of things that are going to make people want to come 
to Saskatchewan is when that group of people over there, Mr. 
Speaker, are cut in about half and they’re sitting over here and 
that will be happening after the next election — it will be 
happening after the next election. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are tired of this sort of thing. Can 
you imagine the people of Saskatchewan . . . the Minister of 
Finance out there is chirping again. But can you imagine this, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? Can you imagine this? Someone deciding 
how to vote and they recall the Minister of Finance, the one that 
is chirping from his seat over there, jumping up and giving his 
price on gas and right beside him the minister in charge of the 
crowns getting up and giving a different price and they’re 
saying now, who are we going to vote for? The NDP or the 
NDP or is this the same group. If its the same group its very 
scary. Because you don’t know which one they’re going to be 
when they get to be in government. Very scary. 
 
We’ve given the government a number of options this evening, 
Mr. Speaker. We’ve raised the concerns of what is happening 
out there in Saskatchewan, how the cost that they’re going to go 
ahead . . . they’re discussing 42 per cent — the affect it will 
have all over this province on all the people. 
 
The NDP like to sort of divide things into rich and poor, black 
and white, up and down, left and right, this is going to affect 



1554 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

absolutely everyone. There is not a single person in this 
province that is going to be able to say this affects somebody 
else. And for that reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be 
supporting the motion and not the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I heard just recently perhaps a glimmer of hope that the 
opposition has finally come to its senses and may quit 
trash-talking Saskatchewan. I’ve heard the debates and listened 
with interest and its almost as if one side is saying they know 
more than the experts and the other side trying to point out 
some facts which they refuse to listen to. 
 
When I read what the experts say they say that no one can 
predict the future. Yet, the members opposite speak like they 
have a crystal ball. They earlier talked about navel gazing. Well 
I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what they’re doing now 
because they choose not to listen to the facts, they choose not to 
allow the rate review committee — that was so desperately, 
desperately asked for and now has done its job — and they’re 
not prepared to accept what they’ve come up with. 
 
They’re not even prepared to accept any further deliberation on 
the recommendations that have been made. That’s kind of 
dangerous, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think, because I can recall 
back in the ’80s when things were referred back to people by a 
government that didn’t like what they heard. They were 
intimated to make changes, to make changes. 
 
Well there’s some integrity being mentioned from across the 
way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don’t think those people should 
start casting aspersions about impugning motives and the 
question of integrity, about releasing facts, because that’s not 
really one of their strong points, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They talk 
about allegations of impugning motives. Well that’s like the pot 
calling the kettle black when it comes from that opposition, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. The opposition has proven to the people of this 
province, not only on this issue but on others, that they do not 
believe in proper process. They’re exhibiting that now. 
 
We’ve gone through the process of SaskEnergy referring their 
issue to the rate review committee, something that was 
demanded by the opposition. I sat in the opposition and 
demanded that. We have that. And now they don’t believe that 
those people should be allowed to do their job. They would 
sooner want to see them intimated and told, no, we’re not going 
to accept what you propose; you don’t know what you’re doing. 
I can’t believe that. I mean, why would you have a process if 
you don’t care to follow it? 
 
No different than an investigation process, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
You get all the facts, you review it all, and then there’s a 
decision rendered. And not everybody always likes what 
decision is made, but you know something, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? I’ve found that people in this province have been 
resilient through all the years. They’ve faced all the challenges 
and gone over some very serious hurdles because they believed, 
they were not intimated, and they did not believe in the doom 
and gloom. And they always met the challenges that were far 
less, not as great as those challenges that were faced by the 

people earlier, that built this province. They met those 
challenges. They were not dissuaded from saying; well we have 
to face this. We don’t like it but, you know, if we get together 
and we meet this challenge head on, we will make . . . continue 
to make this province a great place to live. 
 
Yes, there are challenges, but people come together and they 
meet those challenges. The debate that’s been going on, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, again goes back to one side giving some facts, 
the other side . . . that’s what debate is all about. But to what 
extent does this debate need to be continued in order to prove a 
point? 
 
The fact remains there is a rate review committee that has made 
its recommendations and there are now deliberations with 
respect to the outcome. So the members opposite say they have 
people phoning them. I have people asking me as well. What 
purpose . . . is that a waste of time? You people just keep 
hollering and screaming at one another, and one says we’re 
right, the other says . . . Why don’t you just sit down and wait 
until the outcome and decide what’s best for all the people in 
this province? 
 
That’s why we sent you there — to work together to make sure 
our lives are better tomorrow. And hopefully that’s what we try 
to accomplish, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by working together. 
We’re sent here by the folks from our constituencies in their 
best interest. Not in any party’s best interest, but to make sure 
that we work together and get things done, to point this 
province in the right direction regardless of the challenges and 
the hurdles that we have to overcome. 
 
We need some reality checks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Earlier I’d 
thought that . . . well I’m sure that the award presentations for 
people who are impressionists and whatnot have already been 
decided and that the Academy Awards are over, so now we’re 
faced with dealing with the facts. 
 
We have a recommendation that’s been put forward by the rate 
review committee on energy prices. Everybody knows the 
volatility of prices for natural gas is such that it is very difficult 
to predict what’s going to happen even tomorrow or the next 
day with these prices. 
 
I understand that if I were to speculate — and some of my 
colleagues who are not in the business of selling commodities 
into the future — I would be speculating on what a price might 
be three months, six months, nine months, or whatever down 
the road. In the agricultural community and in a lot of other 
commodity businesses, my understanding is that people that are 
in the know, they hedge. They do the best they can to make sure 
they can lock into a price of a commodity to their advantage. 
And they try to do it so they don’t have a loss but so that they 
make money. 
 
And from seeing what SaskEnergy has been doing over the 
years to ensure that we have had the lowest natural gas prices, 
that’s what they’ve been doing. But we don’t seem to hear 
anybody applauding those efforts. We now hear from the 
opposition all the negative aspects of a corporation, a Crown 
owned corporation, that’s done excellent work on behalf of the 
people of this province to maintain some stability in lower 
prices for a commodity so desperately needed. 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1555 

 

The demands into the 21st century are such now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that prices are catching up. We’ve been enjoying 
prices thanks to people in SaskEnergy who have been doing the 
hedging and working on behalf of people of this province. And 
now we see that the demands are so great, the prices have 
escalated and we’re still, if not the lowest — the lowest — then 
way down there near the bottom of being the lowest that we pay 
in North America, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now how can not that be cause for celebration, for 
congratulations to those people that have been able to maintain 
that level of cost for that commodity, for that energy cost. I 
guess what I’m saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that hearing 
throughout the debate from the opposition words like 
hairy-fairy decisions and comments that are almost degrading to 
the people, to the people that have worked over the years to 
ensure that a commodity is provided for the benefit of the 
people of this province at a rate lower than anywhere else in the 
country. 
 
How can you argue that? And how can you not applaud and be 
congratulatory to that corporation who continues its very best to 
maintain that resource at an affordable cost to the best of their 
ability and in the best interests of all the people of this province. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again I just want to suggest that 
people in our province generally accept and appreciate that 
there’s only so much can be done. And they do appreciate, and 
I’ve heard people say, well thank heavens because I know what 
they’re paying in Manitoba and I know what they’re paying in 
Alberta. 
 
And I know it’s a tough thing that needs to be faced, but we’ve 
got to consider ourselves pretty fortunate that we’re not paying 
the prices they’re paying elsewhere. And that people in 
SaskEnergy and the powers to be in that respect should be 
congratulated for being able to maintain a level of affordability 
that otherwise may have created a situation far more serious — 
far more serious — than what we are facing. 
 
And it’s a situation and it’s an issue that people of this province 
recognize and understand, and are prepared to accept the 
challenge and have the confidence that the coalition 
government, that the people in SaskEnergy will continue to 
work and do their very, very best in the best interests of the 
people of this province. 
 
And on that note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to say I will 
be supporting the amendment and I will be voting against the 
main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(20:15) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, much of the debate that we’ve been treated to today on 
this particular motion and the amendment to it has been around 
the price of natural gas. We’ve had a discussion about what the 
price has been, what it’s likely to be, who’s charged what, 
who’s higher, who’s lower, which province is better off. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I dare say that the biggest cost of this 

particular issue is the one that’s being extracted from the 
government’s reputation. I think the real issue here today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is the government’s credibility on this 
particular matter. The member from Indian Head-Milestone and 
many of my other colleagues alluded to much of the confusion 
on the pricing issue in their presentations today. But in case 
anybody is viewing the Assembly session tonight and wasn’t 
party to some of the discussions earlier, I would like to reiterate 
for them some of the figures that have been talked about today. 
 
At the end of March, the Finance minister calls for a projected 
price for natural gas of $3.39 a gigajoule into the next calendar 
year. In the last week or two, SaskEnergy has asked the rate 
review panel for a price increase in the vicinity of $7 a 
gigajoule. Now if approved by the rate review panel, that 
particular amount of money would be charged for natural gas 
right through until the fall of 2002 — $7 a gigajoule between 
now and the fall of 2002. 
 
Natural gas today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is trading for $5 a 
gigajoule or less. And I dare say that if you looked at some 
bid/asked quotations on the futures market, you would probably 
be able to buy natural gas today through to the 
October/November period of 2002 for something in the range of 
$5.12 a gigajoule — $5.13 a gigajoule. So, if as has been 
recommended by members opposite that we look at the futures 
market, there isn’t the volatility there that they’re talking about. 
The price of natural gas doesn’t take leaps and bounds up and 
down on a daily basis. If it moves, it moves steadily. 
 
But right now every credible analyst in the business is 
predicting prices in the range of $5.12 to $5.20 at the outside 
per gigajoule through to October/November of 2002. 
 
What makes it necessary for the rate review panel to suggest 
that something in the range of $7 a gigajoule would be 
acceptable? We know that that’s the amount of money that has 
been asked for by SaskEnergy, and we know that the rate 
review panel has suggested something a little less than that 
might be adequate. 
 
We’ve heard much in the speeches today about SaskEnergy’s 
skill in forward contracting, which allowed them to keep natural 
gas prices down. I don’t deny that that may have played a role. I 
wouldn’t for a moment suggest that they didn’t do a good job in 
that regard. 
 
But here’s the rub, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If the natural gas 
supplier was that skilled in using forward contracting to protect 
us from the worst excesses of natural gas cost increases during 
the winter, why are they not using the same skill to lock in low 
prices that are available today through to the fall of 2002? Why 
was their skill so adequate last winter and last fall? Why are 
they not using the same skill to provide us the same level of low 
pricing on a long-term basis today? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I suggest that it’s possible that 
SaskEnergy has already locked in prices. I suggest, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that they have locked in prices in the range of $7 a 
gigajoule, so that their vaunted ability in locking in low pricing 
last fall has already been undermined by an error in judgment 
this year. I suggest it’s very strongly possible that locked-in 
prices will range in that $7 a gigajoule vicinity. 



1556 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that part of the answer also is 
directly related to SaskEnergy’s pricing policy. All spring long, 
every time a question was asked of the government in this 
spring session about the price of natural gas — the cost to 
consumers of gas supplied by the Crown corporations — every 
opportunity was taken by the minister of CIC, by the Finance 
minister, and anybody else who cared to defend the situation, 
that Saskatchewan had the lowest natural gas prices in North 
America. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve just learned last week that the 
gas cost variance account is $80 million in the red — $80 
million in deficit. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that suggests to me that the government 
deliberately kept gas costs low for political gain during the 
winter time when they knew that SaskEnergy was losing money 
on every gigajoule they sold after the initial supply of low-price 
gas ran out. 
 
Now SaskEnergy, via the NDP cabinet, needs a big increase to 
cover its previously hidden and incurred losses. And who will 
pay the price for this government’s political machinations and 
ineptitude? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the answer is pretty 
simple. Every gas consumer in this province will pay. Every 
small business operator in this province from Consul to 
Nipawin, from Redvers to Meadow Lake, will pay. Every small 
farmer, all 50,000 of them — or however few are left — will 
pay. And every large business and/or manufacturer will pay. 
Every homeowner will pay. Every hospital, every school, every 
other public facility will pay. Every arena, every recreational 
centre will pay. And every person on a fixed income including 
the elderly, the sick, and the poor will pay. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that last group of people I find particularly 
disturbing in this list because this is the group of people that is 
the natural consistency . . . or constituency, rather, of the NDP 
and they have now been abandoned by this government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s look at some of the people in closer 
detail who will pay. Many of my colleagues have talked about 
the farmers. As you know, most of my constituency is made up 
of farm families. These people are struggling under what have 
been known as some of the toughest conditions in the 
agricultural sector that anyone has experienced since the 
Depression era of the ’30s. 
 
If you take into consideration the inflationary factors and adjust 
the costs today versus what they were in 1930, many farmers, 
many ranchers today, are experiencing tighter costs, tighter cash 
flow squeezes, tighter profit margins, than they did even in the 
’30s. We have never seen a time as tight as this financially as 
we have in the last decade or so. 
 
And I have many farm families in my constituency who are just 
barely meeting their financial obligations now. If they are 
charged with a 42 per cent increase for natural gas costs or 
more, as farm families are expected to be charged, some of 
them are not going to be able to meet that obligation. And I 
have no hesitation in saying that that is patently unfair and 
certainly an abuse of the people who find themselves in those 
tight cash flow situations right now. 
 

Farmers from day-to-day struggle to meet their obligations. 
They’re proud people. They are honest people. They pay their 
bills. But when the costs of their operation escalate far faster 
than their income, they certainly cannot be expected to meet the 
obligations that are being placed on them by this kind of an 
increase. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that every farm family is going 
to not just suffer from this, but they’re going to resent this 
because I think that they are being attacked unfairly in this vast 
and unnecessary price increase. 
 
I’d like to talk about the average homeowner. It’s been 
suggested that this increase is going to represent about $360 a 
year to the average homeowner. I would submit that $360 is the 
average increase, but that would be on a home roughly of a 
thousand square feet. There aren’t many homes in this province 
that are a thousand square feet any more. And I would think that 
$360 of increase would represent not the average but the 
minimum increase that homeowners are going to experience. So 
if you have a house any larger than a thousand square feet, you 
can expect your gas costs to be considerably higher than $360. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is another area, there is another that I 
think is going to be very hard done by as a result of this natural 
gas cost increase, and I would think the health sector is 
probably one of the areas that is going to find it most difficult to 
adjust to this cost. 
 
And I can speak with some assurance on that particular point 
because I was just talking to the CEO (chief executive officer) 
of the largest health district in my constituency yesterday. And 
he was telling me that they are expecting, in that particular 
health district, a drop in their provincial funding of 1.2 percent 
from last year. 
 
They’re already expecting a 3.5 percent increase in nursing 
salaries for this year. They’ve already built into their budget 
costs that are escalating in every other sector. Because it’s a 
large health district and much travel is required of the people 
who work for that district, they’ve had a tremendously large 
increase in terms of gas costs for travel allowances. As you 
know, gasoline prices have escalated rapidly as well. These are 
all costs that they have not been able to handle easily, but they 
have adjusted. 
 
But now, out of the blue, comes word that they’re going to have 
to pay this huge natural gas cost increase. And they haven’t 
allowed for that. They haven’t budgeted for that. They might 
have thought some increase was coming, but nobody expected 
42 per cent or more. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what are health boards, what are health 
districts supposed to do in this situation. They are asked to 
squeeze every last nickel out of their budget; they’ve pinched 
pennies until there is nothing left of them. And now, they’re 
asked to pay for a drastically increased natural gas cost when 
their budgets, in many instances, have been cut by this very 
government. How in the world are they supposed to handle that 
kind of a situation? 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s another area that isn’t 
given a lot of consideration. It’s been mentioned briefly by 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1557 

 

some of my colleagues previously, but I’m particularly sensitive 
to this issue because it’s been raised, it’s been brought to my 
attention, it’s been raised by civic leaders in several 
communities which I represent, and it’s the issue of utility costs 
in recreational facilities, and especially arenas. But we’re also 
talking about senior citizens’ halls where they gather to play 
cards. But we’re talking about all types of facilities, whether it’s 
a Kinsmen club hut or some other service club, but I’m 
especially concerned about the large recreational facilities that 
are such a prominent feature in the social fabric of many of 
these rural communities. 
 
You know a lot of these communities are down to maybe a 
school — maybe not. Maybe a health centre, maybe a hospital 
— maybe not. Maybe one or two restaurants — maybe not. But 
almost all these communities still have as the focal point of 
their social milieu a reasonably decent recreational facility. 
 
The community of Eastend approached me last winter when the 
rate increases for power and natural gas came into effect. At 
that time, those two combined increases doubled the cost on a 
per month basis for utilities in the skating and curling rink in 
the community of Eastend. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you have communities that are just 
barely hanging on when this particular venue is the last vestige 
of a social fabric, a place where people can meet on a daily 
basis, when you have those kinds of situations and those very 
facilities are under threat of not opening at all because of this 
latest increase, this government has spelled death for those 
communities. And I think that that is probably one of the most 
disturbing elements to this whole situation. 
 
(20:30) 
 
If we had utility cost increases that were virtually doubling their 
operating expenses previously, what will this do? I’ve been told 
by several people now that they have no intentions of opening 
their facilities this fall if these increases go ahead. There is no 
way, there is absolutely no way that the community can afford 
that kind of a cost. And the responsibility will be on the head of 
this government when those arenas do not open. Every small 
community will hold this government responsible for that 
decision. 
 
I’m glad to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I’m not the one 
making this decision. We’re talking about communities such as 
Eastend. We’re talking about Cabri. We’re talking about the 
town of Frontier, the town of Gull Lake, the town of Maple 
Creek. We’re talking about Leader. These are communities that 
all have arenas that are under threat because of this particular 
increase. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the independent rate review panel frankly 
is a handpicked panel, handpicked by the NDP government. 
And their decision is going to reflect the best interests of the 
government and SaskEnergy. A thirty-four and a half percent 
increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not in the best interests of the 
people of Saskatchewan, nor the struggling economy of this 
province. The cabinet tomorrow will make its decision, and if 
the government wants to be consistent, it will need to look very 
carefully at the projections of the finance minister in his budget 
this spring. If they want to show consistency, they better pay 

careful attention to what the finance minister said in his budget. 
He said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that gas costs would be $3.30 a 
gigajoule through to the fall of 2002. Long-term gas costs are 
coming down. 
 
Now if the NDP cabinet wants consistency, their decision will 
have to come at a significantly lesser rate than the $7 per 
gigajoule proposed by SaskEnergy or even the slightly lower 
figure proposed by the rate review panel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP government wasn’t in such big trouble 
on this issue, they wouldn’t constantly raise the bogey man of 
the privatization issue, accusing this side of having such a 
hidden agenda. Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t this side of the House 
that ordered evaluation of SaskTel as a preparatory step to a 
sell-off of that Crown. And it certainly wasn’t this side of the 
House that introduced Bill 9 in this legislative session, allowing 
for deregulation of the power industry. That Bill will subject 
SaskPower to new competition in electrical service delivery in 
this province. It wasn’t the opposition that introduced that Bill. 
 
These two separate events are not the doing of the official 
opposition. They are not the doing of the Saskatchewan Party. 
These two pieces of legislation and activities are the creation of 
the NDP Crowns and their political masters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a classic example of double-talk: say one 
thing, do another. It’s just another reason why the people of this 
province have lost faith in the NDP government. It’s really an 
issue of credibility. And all the things being said by the 
government benches have done nothing to eliminate the 
credibility gap created on this particular issue. 
 
Compounding the problem is the news that Crown corporations 
make millions of dollars a year. And all the while, this 
government has a stabilization fund worth hundreds of millions 
of dollars. That’s a problem of credibility for the people who 
survive paycheque to paycheque. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that money sitting in the fiscal 
stabilization fund is generated as a result of the high royalty 
fees associated with the ever-increasing natural gas and oil 
costs. And because of that, this government has much more 
money sitting in its coffers than it might otherwise have. 
 
I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, that it’s sitting there until the next 
election. But it’ll take more than those millions of dollars to 
assuage the anger and the distrust this government has 
inculcated into the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy, or Mr. Speaker — I’m sorry — I felt this matter 
was so important I included it in my legislative report in the 
paper. It’ll be coming out tomorrow. And I’d like to read just a 
little bit of that report if I could. 
 
In making its case for the rate review panel, SaskEnergy pegged 
natural gas costs at $7 per gigajoule. We’ve learned that the 
current price is $5 per gigajoule and industry analysts are 
predicting the price will stay in that range for the foreseeable 
future. That being said, it is hard to understand why the Crown 
utility thinks it’s in need of such a tremendous increase. 
Complicating the picture even more is the fact that in this 
spring’s budget, the government predicted, by its own figures, 



1558 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

that natural gas prices would be in the range of $3.39. 
 
Whose estimate are we to believe, that of the Finance 
department or of SaskEnergy? It seems the right hand doesn’t 
know what the left hand is doing. Mr. Speaker, just as an aside 
to that, maybe the problem here is that we have two left hands. 
 
In light of the falling price of natural gas the Sask Party has 
called on the government to cancel this disproportionately high 
rate increase. While some increase may be necessary, this latest 
proposal will put the government deep into your back pocket, 
gouging Saskatchewan families in the process. 
 
My message is clear: when my constituents read this, they will 
understand the impact that they can expect from this particular 
rate increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have more things to share but I think I’ve run out 
of time, as is often the case. So I would just like to close by 
saying that I will be supporting the motion as put forward by 
the member from Swift Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to enter into this debate as well and I have a 
few points that I’d like to make, and in particular I would like to 
point out some of the inaccuracies or the fallacies that people 
seem to be basing their debate upon. 
 
First of all, the opposition is asking us to send this back to the 
rate review panel based on a prediction, and they say that the 
prediction is that the prices will fall and that SaskEnergy will be 
charging too high a price for its gas in the long run. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that if you refer to some of the pages 
in the paper and the market views, they say that views differ on 
what the price for gas may be in the future, and although a 
decline is predicted in natural gas prices, the Saskatchewan 
Party has decided to grasp on to the fact that they may be 
decreasing and raise a lot of political noise about what they say 
is an unfair and uncalled for increase. 
 
So they say that SaskEnergy’s prediction or projection was $7 a 
gigajoule, and they’re saying that today’s price is $5 and that 
they believe that it will stay at $5 for some time to come. And 
that if the cost of buying natural gas drops, so will SaskEnergy 
bills. 
 
This newspaper article that I’m referring to, which is The 
Leader-Post of Saturday, June 2, says that: 
 

While industry watchers agree that natural gas will cost less 
in 2001, most analysts are not predicting the dramatic 
decrease predicted by an analyst the Sask. Party chose to 
quote. 
 

It says that: 
 
Many other analysts say the commodity price this year will 
average about $7 a gigajoule — (which is) the price 
SaskEnergy wants to raise its rates to from the current price 
of $4.52. 

And it goes on to say that: 
 

Len Coad, a vice-president of Calgary-based (Canadian 
Research) Canadian Energy Research Institute is also 
predicting an average natural gas price this year of between 
$7 and $8 a gigajoule. 
 

And he says, goes on to say that: 
 

“Once we get into the air conditioning season, natural gas 
demand could increase because of power-generated air 
conditioners,” Coad said, adding that could push prices 
even higher. 

 
Now, I think it’s important . . . And I don’t think there is any 
difference on that side of the House or on this side of the House 
that nobody likes increased costs. I don’t like them. You don’t 
like them. The consumers don’t like them. The Crown utility, 
I’m sure, doesn’t want . . . would have it otherwise if there was 
any other way but to raise them. 
 
But I think we should remember that the issue of higher prices 
is not unique to Saskatchewan. It’s not as if we’re the only 
place in the world that’s suddenly facing higher energy costs. 
It’s faced by all four million natural gas consumers across 
Canada and all 60 million consumers across the United States, 
and all of them face a gas or an energy increase and none of 
them like it. I can almost be . . . I can almost give you a 
personal guarantee that nobody wants that to increase. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as a result of some privatization and 
deregulation that took place, SaskEnergy has to buy its gas on 
the world market. And the world market prices fluctuate, and 
they have gone up. And there is obviously a dispute at the 
moment as to whose prediction is the right prediction. 
 
When we made predictions for low prices in the budget so that 
we would be realistic and not overestimating our revenues, the 
Sask Party screamed and said, you’re not . . . you’re 
underestimating it, and you know you are going to get more 
revenue then that and why are you not granting that to the 
people of the province. And now when we need an increase, 
they say you are overestimating the price. 
 
Now you can’t suck and blow at the same time, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s one way or the other and you can’t do both. 
 
I think it’s also important to remember that SaskEnergy has 
done an outstanding job so far in shielding Saskatchewan 
consumers from the dramatic effects of market shifts, and 
anyone who would deny that is not would need a reality check 
because they have done a very good job of that and I think that 
is one of the reasons why this proposed increase seemed so 
dramatic. 
 
If it had risen $1 last year and $1 the year before and another $1 
this year, it wouldn’t seem such a high price to pay. But 
because SaskEnergy and our family of Crown corporations did 
a very good job and shielded Saskatchewan consumers from 
having to pay those high prices for a very long period of time 
— and I believe that the statistics are that they saved 
Saskatchewan consumers $150 million over the last 18 months 
or . . . I’m not positive about that figure; it could be $125 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1559 

 

million over the past 18 months — against true market prices, 
then that certainly could have happened. They could have raised 
it $1 and $1 and $1, not saved them the money and people 
would think, oh well, $1 increase isn’t that bad. 
 
But in this case the proposed increase is closer to $3 and so, 
obviously, that hurts consumers. But it’s unavoidable, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I think that for the opposition to say that we should send it 
back to the rate review panel when this panel is set up and 
chaired and has the expertise and the advice of experts in the 
field, and they come up with an increase not quite but close to 
what the Crown corporation asked for . . . And although the 
opposition likes to say the government is asking for an increase 
and the government is charging this money to the consumer, 
they should really put that into the proper perspective and say 
that the Crown corporation who is responsible for buying a 
commodity on world markets has found that in order to buy 
their product without losing money, they are required to ask for 
an increase. 
 
And although the opposition would love to make it all sound 
like it’s the government’s fault, the reality is that because of the 
previous administration that privatized and put it on the world 
market, that’s why it has to be done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And to sell it for less than what it costs us is absolutely not 
something that we couldn’t afford to gamble the people’s public 
purse on. And we won’t do it, Mr. Speaker, and we won’t let 
them sell our Crown corporations. 
 
(20:45) 
 
Because we have a gas variance account, we were able to shield 
people and protect them. We locked in prices. And I would 
hope, and I am sure, that when that opportunity presents itself 
again, that that’s exactly what will happen. We will lock in 
prices at the best possible rate to provide a commodity needed 
for the Saskatchewan people at the best possible price, Mr. 
Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you very much. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I just feel that sending it back to the panel as I 
said is not a wise thing to do, it’s not a necessary thing to do, 
and SaskEnergy is absolutely unable to pay less than what it has 
in its rates. They have to buy the gas at the current market price 
and they can’t afford to pay less than that and they can’t afford 
to charge less than they pay for it. If indeed it turns out that the 
predictions are correct and that gas does fall to a price lower 
than that fixed by the rate review panel and eventually by 
cabinet, then that benefit will flow back to the people of 
Saskatchewan, something that would not happen if indeed the 
Crowns were sold as the opposition would do if they ever got 
the reins of power. And that would not happen. It would not 
flow back to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the members opposite asked for a panel and now they 
don’t like the job that the panel has done. And as I said earlier, 
you can’t suck and blow at the same time; you can’t have it 
both ways. So, we respect the panel’s decision and I know, 
although I don’t sit in cabinet, that it will be considered 
carefully in cabinet and the people of cabinet will be sure, and I 
trust them to do what’s in the best interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan. And if there are other options available, I’m sure 
that those will be taken into account as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s been my pleasure to enter into this 
discussion this evening and to add some perspective. I notice 
that there’s a lot more participation tonight than there was 
earlier today, so I hope that it’s as important as it’s made out to 
be to the members opposite. And I want to indicate to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that I will be supporting the amendment, and I will not 
be supporting the main motion. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m very pleased to enter into the debate this evening on the 
issue of gas. We seem to have been getting an awful lot of hot 
air from the other side that can be termed as gas. 
 
But I’d like to start out . . . I really want to concentrate on my 
constituency, but I’d like to start out with just a couple of issues 
that members opposite have talked about. 
 
The member from Melville said, Mr. Speaker, we have to be 
dealing with facts. I believe that’s the way he put it. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to give the member the facts. For an 
example, the budget based gas at $3.30 a gigajoule. Fact: $7 a 
gigajoule is what SaskEnergy is calling it. Fact: now on the 
market today, the price per gigajoule was under $5. Fact: I 
would like the member from Melville to listen to the facts and 
we can deal with the facts. 
 
The member from Melville also suggested that, let the process 
run its course; it hasn’t even gone to cabinet yet. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to remind members of the House to go 
back and look at the forest amalgamation issue. Did we want 
that to run its course and have that rammed down the throats of 
people of Saskatchewan? No. It was brought up in due time so 
it could be debated and stopped before it was rammed down the 
throats of people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I would like, I’d like to also go back to what we were 
talking about the facts of the price of gas. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
the president of SaskEnergy commented, and it’s in Hansard 
and I quote: 
 

We’d love to have some of that 3.59 gas that they’ve got. 
We don’t think it’s going to be that low. If you’ve got $4 
gas, I’d love to buy some of it. 

 
Well it’s four-something now, Mr. Speaker. My question would 
be: is the minister of SaskEnergy going to buy some as he has 
suggested in Hansard of the $4 gas because it’s four dollars and 
some cents. 
 
My question now to the members opposite is: why are they 
defending the $7 gigajoule, per gigajoule when we have heard 
today, and it’s listed as fact, the gas price is $5 — little lower, 
little more depending on which one of the companies — but 
they’re within the range of $5? 
 
Could it be, could it be that members opposite are defending 
this because they have locked in at a higher price? I think that’s 
a fair question to ask. If they’ve locked in at $7 a gigajoule, 
then definitely they’re going to be wanting to recover that 



1560 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

money. Is that fair to the people of this province? My answer is 
no. 
 
We hear, we hear an awful lot . . . we hear an awful lot about 
SaskEnergy and hedging. One of the biggest problems we had 
with hearing about the hedging and the money saved was 
members opposite lining up at the clinic to get rubbing alcohol 
for their arms because it got sore from patting themselves on the 
back when they said they’d hedged the gas and saved $100 
million or something. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m wondering . . . I’m wondering if this is 
reverse hedging. Have they bought high when the prices are 
going low? And, Mr. Speaker, I do want to comment also . . . a 
couple of comments from the member from Regina Dewdney. 
He was talking about consistency — the opposition; there’s no 
consistency. 
 
Well I wish he would listen to his own members. Is it 42 per 
cent increase or is it 35 per cent increase? The only thing 
consistent about that government is inconsistency, Mr. Speaker. 
They are right now living in the ostrich theory. They put their 
head in the sand and hope the problem goes away. Well this one 
is not going away. 
 
Another little . . . it’s a side issue, Mr. Speaker, but the member 
from Regina Dewdney brought it up in one of his rants. He 
talked about taxes, how we want to lower taxes and that’s going 
to take money away from the coffers. And I would just like to 
remind the member how successful the film corporation was 
that they are boasting about where they cut taxes to the film 
industry and look at the money it brought in. Cutting taxes 
makes money. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to comment for a few minutes 
specifically on my constituency . . . reference this gas hike. Mr. 
Speaker, we know the burden in rural Saskatchewan and we’ve 
heard previous speakers talk about it. And it’s not just . . . This 
is one that’s not just rural Saskatchewan; this is every 
individual in this province is going to get tapped by this 
increase. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency I’ve already witnessed 
two hotel closures because of . . . I won’t say in total but 
partially because of the assessment. Two hotel closings in my 
constituency is quite devastating, the jobs lost and the people 
moving out. Now, Mr. Speaker, with this gas rate increase I can 
foresee more facilities closing in my constituency. 
 
We’ve heard people talk about how it’s going to affect 
businesses. We’ve heard people talk about how it’s going to 
affect sports arenas. We look at . . . We promote recreation, we 
promote youth and culture, and then we turn around and have 
an increase such as this that is basically going to destroy a lot of 
those initiatives. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve also talked and heard about churches 
that are going to have to close their doors with this gas increase. 
It’s going to be extremely interesting to see the vote from 
members opposite when they’re voting to close churches. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about gas increases for 
some of our most vulnerable people, is our seniors. I have . . . I 

have a letter from a duplex, senior’s duplex complex in the 
town of Assiniboia. They have had a price increase for the total 
complex that has gone from $3,300 to $5,100 in the first three 
months of this year. With this next increase coming, Mr. 
Speaker, that cost will go to $7,600 for the complex. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is $100 per unit increase due to the gas price 
increase that’s already been announced. Mr. Speaker, these 
seniors are on fixed income, most of them are on fixed income. 
 
The $100 a month income, or increase, has put them basically 
flat broke. Now, Mr. Speaker, we have another increase coming 
that is going to be equal to or more. What, pray tell, will these 
people do? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have received a petition from these folks 
that are completely devastated by the last increase. What’s this 
one going to do to them? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also would like to touch base on one of my pet 
topics for my constituency is the Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia. 
We know, we know what this government is doing, trying to 
do. It’s forcing people out of the Pioneer Lodge. This is another 
step in making that come true for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier this year they upped the rates at the Pioneer 
Lodge, and I brought it up in the House, to put the rates just 
slightly higher than the income of the people that were there. 
This is what this government is doing to our senior citizens. Mr. 
Speaker, I think this is absolutely terrible. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, with this new gas price increase, what are 
they going to do in the Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia? Absorb 
the increase? I don’t think this government would even consider 
absorbing an increase for the seniors. 
 
So what it’s going to do is put the seniors in the Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia even deeper down in debt. They can’t afford it 
now, some of them can’t afford it now; what are they going to 
be doing after this increase? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am going to curtail my remarks now but I can 
assure you I’ll be supporting the motion and not supporting the 
amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
tonight to stand on behalf of the government and table 
responses to questions 212 through 220 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to 212 to 220 are tabled. 
 
(21:00) 
 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1561 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Domestic 
Relations) Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
today to rise to move second reading of The Miscellaneous 
Statutes (Domestic Relations) Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
In May of 1999 the Supreme Court of Canada released its 
decision in M. v. H. This case considered the issue of whether 
spousal maintenance obligations should apply to former 
same-sex spouses. The court found that the exclusion of 
same-sex couples from spousal maintenance obligations 
violated the equality rights guaranteed in section 15 of the 
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the court suspended the effect of its judgment for 
six months to allow legislatures the opportunity to review all of 
their statutes and amend those that were found by this decision 
to offend the Charter. In the court’s view, this was preferable to 
having these issues resolved by the courts on a case-by-case 
basis at great cost to private litigants and the public purse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government agrees that legislation is a better 
approach than litigation to the resolution of these issues. The 
Bill before us today, and its bilingual companion Bill, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Domestic Relations) Amendment Act, 
2001 (No. 2) represents this government’s response to the 
decision in M. v. H., as well as trends in case law that require 
equal treatment of married and common law partners. 
 
The amendments are needed to protect people who are 
vulnerable because they are in dependent relationships. These 
Bills amend 14 Acts to provide for same-sex couples to be 
treated the same way in law in Saskatchewan as our common 
law couples. In each of these 14 Acts, benefits and obligations 
have already been extended to unmarried opposite sex couples. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other major set of changes to legislation 
affected by this Bill are amendments to eight Acts to extend 
benefits and obligations to unmarried couples where they are 
currently provided only to married couples. 
 
Since July of last year, the Department of Justice has been 
served with five challenges to The Matrimonial Property Act 
and two challenges to The Intestate Succession Act which claim 
that these Acts are contrary to the Canadian Charter of Rights 
and Freedoms because they discriminate against people on the 
basis of their marital status. In one of these cases, the court has 
rendered its decision and has stated that the interpretation that 
best supported the constitutional validity of the Act and best 
accorded with Charter values included both married and 
unmarried couples. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Supreme Court of Canada has stated that 
distinguishing between cohabiting couples on the basis of 
whether they’re married or not fails to accord with current 
social values and reality. Courts across Canada have 
consistently held that persons involved in an unmarried 
relationship constitute an historically disadvantaged group and 

must be given equal protection under the law. In two other Acts 
amendments were made to ensure consistent rules respecting 
when a common law or same-sex partner is eligible to make an 
application to the court under these Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to clearly understand what 
this Bill does not do. The Bill does not redefine marriage in any 
way. The definition of marriage remains federal jurisdiction. 
The federal government has recently affirmed in the 
Modernization of Benefits And Obligations Act that marriage is 
the union of one man and one woman. Mr. Speaker, provincial 
governments have no jurisdiction to change that definition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the following Acts are amended by this Bill. The 
Adoption Act is amended so that a person may make an 
application to the court to adopt a child of his or her same-sex 
partner. As in all step-parent adoption applications, the court 
will consider the views of the other birth parent and must be 
satisfied that the adoption would be in the child’s bests 
interests. The effect of this amendment, Mr. Speaker, is to 
ensure that the children who are living in these families have 
legal rights against both the people who are acting as their 
parents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment applies only to step-parent 
adoptions. When The Adoption Act was passed in 1989, it 
extended to same-sex partners the ability to apply to a court to 
adopt an unrelated child. 
 
The Attachment of Debts Act is amended so that common-law 
and same-sex partners are included in calculating exemptions 
from wage garnishments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Fatal Accidents Act is amended to reduce 
from three to two years the length of time that common-law or 
same-sex partners must cohabit to be eligible to sue for 
damages if their partner dies as a result of a wrongful act, 
neglect, or default. 
 
The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act and 
The Local Authority Freedom and Protection of Privacy Act are 
amended to add sexual orientation to the list of information 
that’s considered personal information and cannot be disclosed. 
 
The Homesteads Act of 1989 is amended so that its protections 
apply to common-law and same-sex partners. 
 
The Land Contracts (Actions) Act is amended so that a judge 
may order service on the surviving common-law or same-sex 
partner of a landowner of an application for leave to commence 
a foreclosure application if there is no personal representative. 
 
The Landlord and Tenant Act is amended to allow a landlord to 
collect unpaid rent from a tenant’s common-law or same-sex 
partner. This Act, Mr. Speaker, does not apply to residential 
tenancies. 
 
The Pension Benefits Act, 1992 is amended so that private 
pension plans may provide survivor benefits to same-sex 
partners. Mr. Speaker, this change is something that pension 
plan administrators have been asking the government to do for a 
number of years. 
 



1562 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act, The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Act, The Public Employees 
Pension Plan Act, The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund 
Act, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act, and The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act are amended 
so that survivor pension benefits are payable to the same-sex 
partner. Again, Mr. Speaker, these changes are made with the 
full support of pension plan administrators. 
 
The Saskatchewan Insurance Act is amended to extend the 
prohibition against an insurer lending funds to the wife of a 
director or officer to husbands in same-sex or common-law 
partners. The definition of family insurance is extended to 
include common-law and same-sex partners. 
 
The Securities Act, 1988 is amended so that same-sex partners 
are added to the list of persons who are not in an arm’s-length 
relationship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislature has an obligation to act when a 
court makes a finding that our laws are unconstitutional. And 
these amendments ensure that when two people enter into a 
relationship that is like a spousal relationship the obligations 
they have towards each other’s economic well-being is the same 
no matter what their sexual orientation or marital status. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend Certain Statutes respecting Domestic Relations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to — before we go on to the next 
order of business here — I would just like to welcome all the 
guests to the galleries, but I would ask guests that they not 
participate in anyway in the proceedings. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to join in on second reading of Bill No. 47, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Domestic Relations) Amendment Act, 
2001. And after listening to the minister speak on this Act, he 
talked that it was going to impact 24 different Acts, which is 
really quite significant. 
 
In the short time that I’ve been here I don’t know if there’s been 
too many Bills passed that has that much of an impact on so 
many different Acts. And so it is really quite significant. 
 
I want to give the minister credit for, for coming and talking to 
our caucus prior to this second reading. It was informative for 
us and we had some of the questions answered. And we got a 
bit of an idea of where this Bill was being driven from. 
 
The minister talked about the Supreme Court and some of the 
actions and rulings that the Supreme Court has put forward and 
how it’s impacted on a number of provinces already that have 
moved forward on this Bill. Not all provinces have yet so far, 
but a number of them have and I believe that we’re kind of in 
the middle of the pack when it comes to that area. 
 
The minister also had talked to us and assured us that we would 
be given any sort of ruling and judgment from, from his office 
as to whether it met all the criteria of the supreme Act . . . or the 
Supreme Court and their rulings, whether it went further and 

just the whole gamut and the whole range, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s really incumbent upon us until we know the full 
impact of the 24 different Acts that it’s going to be affecting 
and see how it’s going to impact each Act and see how it relates 
to the Supreme Court decisions that have been put forward, Mr. 
Speaker, that we would move adjournment of debate on this 
motion until we receive further information on that and get a 
better grasp on how it’s going to affect on these 24 Acts. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Domestic 
Relations) Amendment Act, 2001 (No. 2)/ 

Loi corrective (relations domestiques) de 2001 (no 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased also to 
move second reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes (Domestic 
Relations) Amendment Act, 2001 (No. 2). 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill before us and its English-only companion 
Bill, the Bill that we just addressed, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Domestic Relations) Amendment Act, 2000, represents this 
government’s response to the decision in M. v. H. and trends 
and case law that require equal treatment of married and 
common-law partners. 
 
As I said in the last Bill, Mr. Speaker, these amendments are 
needed to protect the people who are vulnerable because they 
are in dependent relationships. 
 
These Bills amends 14 Acts to provide for same-sex couples to 
be treated the same way in law as common-law couples. In each 
of these 14 Acts benefits and obligations have already been 
extended to unmarried opposite-sex couples. Amendments are 
made to eight other Acts to extend benefits and obligations to 
unmarried couples where they are currently provided only to 
married couples. In two other Acts, amendments are made to 
ensure consistent rules respecting when a common-law or 
same-sex partner is eligible to make an application to the court 
under these Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the following Acts are amended by this Bill. The 
Adoption Act, 1998 is amended so that a person may make an 
application to the court to adopt a child of his or her same-sex 
partner. And as I said, as an all step-parent adoption application, 
the court will consider the views of the other birth parent and 
must be satisfied that the adoption will be in the child’s best 
interests. 
 
The Change of Name Act, 1995 is amended so that the special 
rules respecting surnames for married people applied to 
unmarried people cohabiting as spouses who file proof of the 
relationship with the vital statistics registry. 
 
The Dependents’ Relief Act, 1996 is amended to allow a court 
to make an order requiring that reasonable maintenances be 
paid to a person out of the estate of his or her deceased 
same-sex partner. 
 
The Family Maintenance Act, 1997 is amended so that the court 
may order a person to pay spousal maintenance to his or her 
former same-sex partner. The Intestate Succession Act, 1996 is 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1563 

 

amended so that where a person dies without a will, their 
common-law or same-sex partner would receive the same share 
of the estate that a legally married spouse would otherwise 
receive. 
 
The Matrimonial Property Act, 1997 is amended so that the Act 
applies to persons of the same sex or opposite sex who are 
cohabiting or have cohabited as spouses, and the name of the 
Act is changed, Mr. Speaker, to The Family Property Act. 
 
The provisions in The Wills Act, 1996 that states that a will is 
revoked by a marriage is extended to revoke a will when the 
maker has cohabited in a spousal relationship for two years. 
Divorce revokes a devise or bequest to a spouse and the 
appointment of a spouse as executor. This is extended to the 
breakdown of the spousal relationship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments ensure that when two people 
enter into a relationship that is like the spousal relationship, the 
obligations they have towards each other’s economic well-being 
is the same, no matter what their sexual orientation or marital 
status. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend certain Statutes respecting Domestic Relations. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 
again, Bill No. 48 as mentioned by the minister deals primarily 
with the same Acts. I realize another 24 Acts are going to be 
amended and worked on and that is what this Bill is dealing 
with. 
 
As I said in my response to Bill No. 47, we do appreciate the 
minister coming and giving us a heads up and giving us some 
idea and shedding some light as to why these Bills are coming 
forward and why these changes are necessary, again mainly 
driven by the Supreme Court. 
 
But once again, as I mentioned in Bill No. 47, we’ll be looking 
forward to the legal opinion of the Minister of Justice, their 
department, as to whether these Bills go further than the 
Supreme Court had ruled on or whether they’re up to the grade 
and that type of thing. 
 
So until we are able to hear a little more information on that, as 
well as taking it to some of the stakeholders that we know are 
going to be very, very interested in these changes, Mr. Speaker, 
I would move to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned 
 
(21:15) 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Police Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise 
today to move second reading of The Police Amendment Act, 
2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Police Act, 1990 provides the basic 
framework for both municipal policing and the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) provincial police service in the 
province of Saskatchewan. The amendments to this Bill are to 

make changes to the municipal policing provisions of The 
Police Act, 1990. The existing Act sets out detailed provisions 
for the governance of the municipal police force by the 
Saskatchewan Police Commission, the local police boards, and 
the chiefs of police. The Act also sets out the procedures 
pursuant to which public complaints and internal discipline 
proceedings are conducted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will amend The Police Act, 1990 in order 
to implement a series of changes. The first change is the 
introduction of a consensual process for the mediating of public 
complaints and disciplinary matters under the Act. This change 
recognizes that the best solution of a dispute is one which the 
parties themselves reach. This Bill will also allow for the 
independent hearing officers and then the Chair of the Police 
Commission to be the decision makers on the continuation of a 
decision to relieve a police officer from his or her duties 
pending a disciplinary or public complaints proceeding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill introduces the process whereby a chief of 
police or other official under the Act could be temporarily 
relieved of the requirement to provide notice to a member being 
investigated or to a complainant. The ability to provide 
temporary relief of this requirement is required to safeguard the 
security of police operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, effective law enforcement is an integral part of 
building and maintaining safe communities. People must have 
confidence in law enforcement to maintain peace, order, and the 
rule of law. This Bill will introduce the ability for the 
Saskatchewan Police Commission to issue a province-wide 
code of ethics for police officers, yet one more important step in 
maintaining police . . . public confidence. 
 
The Bill will also permit the Saskatchewan police complaints 
investigator to initiate his or her own complaint for an 
investigation with respect to police conduct, as well as the 
ability to extend the limitation period for a public complaint 
where the public complaints investigator views it to be 
appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another important change is the provision to make 
all hearings under the Act open to the public except where the 
hearing officer is satisfied that exclusion of the public is 
necessary to maintain security of police operations. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the Bill recognizes good faith liability 
protection for local police boards and police officers as well as 
civilian members acting under the authority of this Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to inform you and members of the 
House that this package of amendments is the result of an 
extensive and constructive consultation conducted with 
representatives from municipal police boards and their legal 
counsel, the Saskatchewan Association of Police Chiefs, the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Police Officers, the Saskatchewan 
Police Commission, hearing officers, and the public complaints 
investigator. And I want to thank all of those people, Mr. 
Speaker, for their assistance in the preparation of this Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this package of amendments was developed in 
consultation with the police community to reflect the shared 
goal of modernizing the Act to ensure continued 



1564 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

professionalism in the delivery of policing services in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 
Police Act, 1990. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a privilege to 
stand today and speak on Bill No. 43, an Act to amend The 
Police Act, 1990. 
 
Unfortunately as we know, in the past few months and years 
there have been concerns brought forth from citizens about 
possible police misbehaviour or circumstances around certain 
things that have happened in the public. And it’s very important 
that we do take a look at the rules and regulations concerning 
policing in this province. 
 
It’s very important to have a very adequate police force, both at 
the municipal and at the provincial level with the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police). And it’s very important that the 
police give our society safety, and the rule of law, and order to 
protect our families and maintain order in our society. 
 
There are a number of the things the minister has spoken on, at 
first glance, seems to be common sense. And hopefully they 
will help the police force in dealing with their very important 
job of protecting us in our society and allow them to have the 
. . . The other very important thing, it’s one thing to bring in 
rules and laws and concern and procedure, but the police forces 
of our province have to be given the resources to adequately do 
their job. And that’s an issue that I think has to be addressed as 
well, and concerning detox centres possibly in the larger cities, 
and issues concerning that whole area. 
 
So at this time, I’d like to . . . as the official opposition, we’d 
like to take this and discuss this with the stakeholders and look 
into more detail the number of changes that this Act will bring 
to our police forces in the province. 
 
And at this time, I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 37 – The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to move second reading of The Statute Law 
Amendment Act, 2001. This act, Mr. Speaker, makes several 
very minor amendments to a number of existing statutes. It 
corrects inaccurate references, numbering errors, typographical 
errors and other minor mistakes in statutes. It also corrects 
errors made in previous consequential amendments or makes 
consequential amendments that were previously missed. These 
amendments ensure that minor, technical errors in legislation 
are removed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend the 
statute law. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After listening to 
the brief words that the minister opposite had to say about this 

Bill, Bill 37, it sounded, yes, just changing a few words here 
and a few phrases there and some punctuation and that type of 
thing, Mr. Speaker, so I really can’t see too much with this Bill 
other than until we have a real quick look at it and make sure 
that it’s okay with us. I’d move adjournment of debate on it. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2001 
(No. 2)/Loi corrective de 2001 (no 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I’m pleased to rise, Mr. Speaker, to 
move an equally controversial Bill, the second reading of The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2001 (No. 2). This act provides 
. . . I don’t think there are any more of them, Mr. Speaker. No. 2 
is the end of this. 
 
This Act provides for technical amendments to numerous 
existing Saskatchewan bilingual legislation. The Bill will 
correct reference errors, grammatical errors, and other 
typographical errors, update references to statutes and correct 
other minor technical errors of approximately 14 Acts. It also 
corrects errors made in previous consequential amendments or 
makes consequential amendments that were previously missed. 
These amendments ensure that minor technical errors in 
bilingual legislation are removed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend the 
statute law. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 38 seems 
very similar to Bill No. 37 but I’m sure there are some 
differences. And we will be very interested to see the changes 
that are made even though it may be a word here or some 
punctuation and that type of thing. But one never knows until 
he has a really good look at it and researches it thoroughly to 
see what impact it will have. Because, Mr. Speaker, we have 
seen different times in the past where things are taken for 
granted and not looked at and the next thing you know, it was 
an issue that should have been followed up an awful lot further. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with experience like that, you can understand 
why we move adjournment of debate on this Bill until we do 
further research. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:27. 
 
 


