















































Hansard: May 28, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1335 
 May 28, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents of east-central 
Saskatchewan very concerned about the possible closure of 
hospitals. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that health care services in the 
Kamsack Hospital be maintained at its current level of 
service at minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency 
and doctoral services available. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from, largely 
from the community of Kamsack, but also from Pelly which is 
in the Canora-Pelly constituency. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
to present today on the Fyke report. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena health centre 
be maintained at its current level of service at minimum, 
with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral services 
available, as well as laboratory, public health, home care, 
long-term care services for users from our district and 
beyond. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
Elfros, and Paswegin. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on the 
continuing concern of people with high energy costs. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Melfort, from 
Fairy Glen, from James Smith Cree Nation. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to rise today to present a petition on behalf of citizens 
of Saskatchewan who have expressed interest in the 
Government of Saskatchewan’s decision to increase the 
foundation operating grants to school divisions. And the prayer 

goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ask the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue with its foresight and its vision 
of increasing the foundation operating grant to school 
divisions by $40.8 million for the fiscal year 2001-2002, 
the largest increase in 15 years. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Colonsay, Allan, Saskatoon, Young and Watrous. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned about 
ambulance services. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by the good citizens of Rockglen. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
to present a petition on behalf of those who are concerned with 
environmental tobacco smoke. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban on smoking in enclosed public places 
and workplaces, and on school property within the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf of 
people who have signed a petition regarding a hospital in the 
city of Swift Current. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer of this 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed today by residents of 
Wymark, of Neidpath, Stewart Valley, Waldeck, Simmie, 
Ponteix, and Gull Lake in the southwest; and of course by 
residents of the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 



1336 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy and specifically 
the Weyburn Council on Alcohol and Drug Abuse, a charitable 
non-profit organization which has submitted a proposal to build 
an in-patient treatment centre in the city of Weyburn to the 
Government of Saskatchewan. WECADA’s (Weyburn Council 
on Alcohol and Drug Abuse) objective is to build an in-patient 
treatment centre to serve the needs of South Central Health 
District. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
support this in-patient treatment centre in Weyburn and 
provide funding for the same. 
 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens concerned with smoking. The petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban on smoking in enclosed public places 
and workplaces, and on school property within the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed on behalf of citizens from 
Spruce Home, Prince Albert, Yellow Creek, and Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present petitions 
on behalf of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan regarding 
the EMS (emergency measures services) service. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the fertile 
Redvers, Storthoaks, and Alida areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Yates: — I rise on behalf of concerned citizens in 
Saskatchewan concerned about the harmful effects of tobacco 
smoke. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban on smoking in enclosed public places 
and workplaces, and on school property within the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
present a petition on the Redvers Health Centre. Mr. Speaker, 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral 
services available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to users from our district, southeast Saskatchewan 
and southwest Manitoba, and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Redvers, 
Storthoaks, Bellegarde, Antler, Sinclair, Reston areas — both 
the last two are in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition by citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the harmful effects of tobacco smoke. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban on smoking in enclosed public places 
and workplaces, and on school property within the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by citizens — I think 
students — from Shellbrook and Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about inadequate 
cellular telephone coverage. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of Rabbit 
Lake, Hafford, Blaine Lake, Leask, Radisson, Borden, 
Perdue, Maymont, Mistawasis, and Muskeg Lake. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Marcelin, Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition opposed to the possible reduction of health services in 
Kamsack. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that health care services in the 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1337 

 

Kamsack Hospital be maintained at its current level of 
service at minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency 
and doctoral services available. 
 

The signators, Mr. Speaker, are all from the community of 
Kamsack. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here of people 
opposed to the possible reduction of services to Davidson and 
Craik health centres. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and 
doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users in 
the Craik and Davidson areas, and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Craik, Aylesbury, and 
Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of concerned citizens. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent improve community-based services. 

 
And signatures to this petition come from the communities of 
Regina Beach, Wynyard, Mozart, Day Star First Nation, and 
Elfros. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition 
regarding concerned citizens with the Fyke report: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce current levels of available 
acute care, emergency, and doctor services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Saskatoon, Spiritwood, Shell Lake, and Leoville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with respect to the Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia, and 

as beds are continuing to close, there’s an increasing concern 
from the citizens. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the folks of 
Congress, Mazenod, Mossbank, and Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of the citizens of the province asking for a total ban on 
smoking in enclosed public places and workplaces, and on 
school property. 

 
And 12 other petitions that are addendums to previously tabled 
sessional papers. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 49 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

How much money did the SLGA pay to Larson Consulting 
in 1997-98; what services did Larson Consulting provide to 
SLGA; and what were these services tendered for — or 
pardon me — were all these services tendered for bids from 
other countries; and if so, what was the tendering process? 

 
And I would also ask the same questions for the year ’98-99, 
’99-2000, 2000-2001, and 2001-2002. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 49 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Post-Secondary Education: which 
community-based organizations received funding from 
your department during 2000-2001; and how much funding 
did each receive? 
 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 49 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of SERM: how many quarters of land are 
deemed critical habitat wildlife land in Saskatchewan to 
date; and how many quarters of the said land has, or is 
being turned over to TLE, which is treaty land entitlement 
land? 
 

I also give notice that I shall on day no. 49 ask the government 



1338 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs: how much 
land was purchased by First Nations for treaty land 
entitlement purposes in the year 1999; and how much of 
this land has been turned into reserve status? 
 

And one more. I give notice that I shall on day no. 49 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs: how much 
land was purchased by First Nations for treaty land 
entitlement purposes in the year 2000; and how much of 
this land has been given reserve status? 

 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased today to introduce to you students, 33 students from St. 
Henry School in Melville sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
And this great bunch of young people are accompanied by 
Tracey Kiliwnik and Brenda Ostopavitch. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to meeting with these young 
people in a little while. And I want all the members here to 
please welcome them to the . . . what’s going on here this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and to all the 
members of the House, 34 grade 10 students from Robert Usher 
Collegiate who are seated in your west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
And the group here today is accompanied by their teacher Rick 
Ast. They will be taking in some of the proceedings of the 
House, doing a tour of the legislature, and I look forward to 
meeting with them later for a photo and some refreshments. 
 
Thank you very much. And I’d ask all members to offer them a 
very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly today, in the east gallery, a group of grade 8 students 
from the Turtleford School, which is just outside my 
constituency. The member from Lloydminster, that’s in his 
constituency. And there are 25 students here today to view the 
proceedings of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And the teachers are Carmela McNinch — I hope I get these 
names said right — Brian Hammer. Chaperones are Sharon 
Macnab, Donnelle Gervais, Val Muller, Randy Diehl, Maureen 
Craig, Lynda Andres, and Trudy McMurphy. 
 
And I’ve already met with them already, and now they’re going 
to view the rest of the Legislative Assembly. So I’d ask all 

members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
actually in my capacity as Minister of Energy and Mines that 
I’m introducing guests today. As many people in this Assembly 
will note, this week is Saskatchewan Mining Week. 
 
In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce a 
number of special guests. We kicked off Mining Week this 
morning with a number of events and a nice dinner. 
 
In the gallery is current president, Mr. Josef Spross. Also Mr. 
Norm Beug, first vice-president; Mr. Tim Gitzel, second 
vice-president; Mr. Kent Cahoon, member at large; Mr. Moe 
Davyduke, past president; Mr. Al Shpyph, chairman of the 
uranium section; and Mr. Phil Reeves, executive director. This 
is the delegation that is with us today. 
 
I would encourage members, first of all, to get out and enjoy 
some of the festivities and the different events that are taking 
place this week. As a matter of fact, to the members of the 
opposition, you could actually leave before question period, if 
you like, to take in some of those events. That wouldn’t bother 
me at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you would join me though, please, all members, in 
welcoming our special guests to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 
join the Minister of Energy and Mines in introducing and 
welcoming our special guests from the mining industry. 
 
We appreciate the mining industry very much on this side of the 
House, and the contribution that they make to Saskatchewan. 
They have a week in front of them — Saskatchewan Mining 
Week — which will be jam-packed with activities in both 
Regina and Saskatoon. And we wish them well with that, and 
we’re sure it will be a very productive week for them, and we 
look forward to meeting with them later this afternoon. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to add 
my voice to that of the member from Regina Northeast in 
welcoming the grade 10 class from Robert Usher. The teacher 
for that particular class is an excellent, skilled educator, and 
he’s also my former grade 7 teacher. 
 
It’s a pleasure to see him here today, and I’m sure the students 
in your class enjoy your education and the time with you as 
much as I did. And I hope to see you later on today. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I would 
also like to introduce to members of the Assembly some special 
guests in your gallery. In my office, actually, working and 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1339 

 

serving the members of this Assembly is Anne Marie 
Heffernan. But with her is a special friend of hers, actually her 
future sister-in-law from Kentville, Nova Scotia, who is visiting 
us today, Jennifer Henshaw on the right, and she’s here just 
observing the proceedings and getting more familiar with her 
future sister-in-law. 
 
So welcome, Jennifer, to the Assembly today, and I’d ask all 
members also to join in welcoming Jennifer. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Access Awareness Week 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
May 27 to June 2 is National Access Awareness Week across 
Canada, and I’m pleased to rise today to inform all members of 
the House about this very important week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, National Access Awareness Week was 
implemented in 1988, following Rick Hansen’s successful Man 
in Motion world tour. At that time, Rick had asked that a week 
be recognized to promote access for persons with disabilities. 
 
National Access Awareness Week seeks to fulfill four 
objectives: assess the accessibility of services and facilities, set 
measurable goals, make practical improvements, and celebrate 
achievements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must remember that not all disabilities are 
always visible. There are some disabilities that we can not see 
but their existence can still deeply affect an individual’s quality 
of life. 
 
I personally have spent many years advocating on behalf of 
people with disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a group that still seems to have to work 
harder to earn that respect. Citizens with disabilities can make 
many valuable contributions in communities across the 
province. They deserve to be respected and recognized for these 
contributions. 
 
Their full participation as members of the community must be a 
priority for all levels of government. By improving accessibility 
of services and facilities, we can all share in and celebrate their 
achievements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the House to recognize 
National Access Awareness Week. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Memorial Cup 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
hockey in Canada ended this week in our province leaving 
hockey fans only the Stanley Cup finals left to watch on 
television. 

Mr. Speaker, the Memorial Cup went to the Red Deer Rebels 
after an overtime victory over the Val d’Or Foreurs. 
 
Even though Regina Pats did not make it to the final, they 
proved to all of Canada that they are a class organization with 
the skill and the will to win. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the good news is this, it took a young man from 
Regina by the name of Jeff Smith to end the overtime session 
with a goal giving Red Deer the championship. 
 
Even though the attention was on the Red Deer Rebels, Mr. 
Speaker, it was the city of Regina who were the real champions 
throughout the Memorial Cup. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this entire legislature, I would like to 
thank Ron Clark and his organizing committee for a job well 
done. As well, our thanks should go to the other 700 volunteers 
who were responsible for the smooth running of the cup. 
 
Regina, you truly put on a fine event. My son and I can attest to 
this as we were at most of the games last week. I might even 
add that on Saturday’s game in the Agridome, Mr. Speaker, if 
not the most emotional, but certainly the most exciting I think 
that has ever been in that building. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I would like all hon. members to join with 
me in congratulating the teams, especially the Pats, the coaches, 
staff, organizers, the volunteers, and the city of Regina who 
deserve the championship even though they didn’t win it. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
join with the member opposite and especially congratulating all 
the volunteers that put on what a lot of people are saying is one 
of the most successful Memorial Cups in history, whether it was 
from the opening parade to the opening banquet, street hockey 
games and — of course, Bobby Orr’s presence didn’t hurt those 
games at all — right down to my favourite area, I guess, was 
The Penalty Box. The organizing committee just did an 
absolutely great job. 
 
The Regina Pats didn’t disappoint either, having a great 
tournament, beating Red Deer and losing out only to Val d’Or 
in the semifinal. 
 
Special congratulations to the Red Deer Rebels for a great 
tournament. Their coach, Mr. Sutter, of course has got much 
hockey experience. But a special congratulations to Carter 
Sears, a close personal friend of mine that scouted that team and 
drafted a lot of the juniors that went to that team. 
 
So congratulations to all the volunteers, to all the teams that 
treated Saskatchewan residents and really residents across 
Canada to some excellent junior hockey. And we look forward 
to it coming back to the city of Regina in the next few years. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1340 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

Moose Jaw Tunnels Win Tourism Award 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to report 
to the Assembly that what was once one of the best-kept secrets 
in Moose Jaw is very quickly becoming one of the best-known 
tourist destinations in North America. I’m talking of course of 
the tunnels of Moose Jaw, our downtown tourist attraction now 
in only its second year of operation. 
 
The tunnels have just won its second major tourism award. And 
as you know, Mr. Speaker, in March they won the New 
Attraction of the Year award from Tourism Saskatchewan, and 
last week we went national. At the Attractions Canada awards 
in Halifax, the two tunnel tours won in the leisure/amusement 
centre category, beating out supposedly better known venues 
like the West Edmonton Mall and Grouse Mountain Ski Resort. 
 
The two tours depict the plight of early Chinese immigrants to 
Canada, and the Al Capone era, when that famous resident of 
Chicago may or may not have come to visit us during the 
Roaring Twenties. 
 
As marketing manager Brian Bowman said, these two awards 
signify that Moose Jaw is a definite tourist destiny worthy of a 
visit. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but we are very like . . . but 
we very likely may see the Moose Jaw tunnels in future 
programs on the history channel and others. 
 
The success of the Moose Jaw tunnels is indeed a legitimate 
good news story. It is a private sector operation describing the 
history of Moose Jaw. We invite everyone to bring their friends 
and family, and come to visit an excellent attraction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Mining Week 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to talk about provincial Mining Week in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province’s mining industry employs about 
20,000 people. That’s 20,000 residents making a living and 
remaining in Saskatchewan at a time when so many others are 
leaving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the world’s largest producer and 
exporter of both potash and uranium. We also have the largest 
reserves of these commodities on earth, which leads me to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that so much more can be done in this industry. So 
much more can be done to help expand and grow 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate that despite the success this 
industry has in our province, it could be so much better. 
 
The Saskatchewan Mining Association states that the mining 
industry will shy away from further northern development if 
current circumstances do not change. They say that provincial 
royalty fees and red tape that they have to go through are not 
helpful to the industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province has great potential in untapped 
resources. We could realize much of that potential if this NDP 

(New Democratic Party) government would wake up and move 
away from its status quo policy of high taxation and an 
ever-growing bureaucracy which hinders growth. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Care Providers’ Week 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we all know, 
Mr. Speaker, children who get a good start early in life have the 
best chance of succeeding in life. And receiving good care in 
the formative years of a child’s life greatly impacts their future. 
Whether a child who’s parents work outside the home is looked 
after by early childhood educators, caregivers, or babysitters, 
those who nurture and ensure the safety of children share in the 
shaping of those children’s lives. 
 
Because of the important job these people do, May 27 to June 2 
has been designated Child Care Week. This week serves to raise 
public awareness of the importance of child care and to 
recognize the invaluable contribution that child care providers 
make to our society. Though child care providers are working to 
keep our children healthy, safe, and happy, the lessons children 
will learn in their early years will aid in determining their future 
health, safety, and happiness. 
 
As a government we can aid in the delivery of quality child care 
by helping those children who are at risk and by helping those 
who provide care. In this year’s budget, 1.5 million was 
provided to develop child care services for high-risk families, 
and early childhood services grants to increase wages and 
benefits for child workers, this was increased by a $519,000. 
Though money can aid in the delivery of services it can never 
replace the hands-on work that child care workers provide. 
 
On behalf of all the members of this Assembly, I want to 
congratulate and thank all child care providers for their 
important role. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Celebrity Sports Dinner 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
Saturday the Estevan Bruins held their ninth annual Celebrity 
Sports Dinner. This event drew a huge audience as the male and 
female athletes of the year were honoured. 
 
Female athlete of the year was 17-year-old Jennifer Coulter. 
Jennifer is a water skier and claimed the gold medal in trick and 
the silver in the slalom at the provincial championships. She 
won the gold medal in the Western Canadian championships. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Male athletes of the year went to the Estevan Bordertown 
Midget AA Bruins. This team won the championship at the 
2001 Western Canadian Invitational Tournament in Regina. 
This would be the first time Estevan has ever won the Midget 
AA provincially. 
 
After the dinner and awards presentation, everyone present 
enjoyed guest speakers Joan McCusker, George Reed, Gerry 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1341 

 

Cheevers, and George Stephenson. 
 
Congratulations to Jennifer Coulter and the Estevan Bordertown 
Midget AA Bruins, and congratulations to everyone who 
worked so hard to make the Celebrity Sports Dinner the success 
it was. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Allegations of Impropriety at Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Liquor and Gaming minister. 
 
On Friday, Justice Wakeling confirmed that SLGA 
(Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) employees had 
accepted free vacations to the Bahamas courtesy of the Bacardi 
rum company. But before that investigation was even started, 
the NDP fired the employee who raised the issue in the first 
place. First, Joe Dosenberger, and now Bonnie Swan. 
 
Why does the minister keep firing employees who raise 
concerns about illegal activity? What is the minister covering 
up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Well, Mr. Speaker, first I 
would say that I do not fire individual employees. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s an internal personnel management matter, and I was 
informed of that personnel matter and then of SLGA 
management’s subsequent action on that matter. 
 
I would want to also state, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
does not believe that any civil servant should be fired for 
providing information to the police or for bringing other 
pertinent information forward. Mr. Speaker, all of us are subject 
to the rule of law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday the minister said an 
independent investigator had been hired to look into Bonnie 
Swan’s original harassment complaint. She made that statement 
four times in the House and several more times outside the 
House. The minister said, and I quote: 
 

The allegations were thoroughly looked into and an 
independent investigation was conducted by an 
independent investigator. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister please tell this House what was 
the name of the so-called independent investigator? Did he 
complete a final report and what did it say? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I do not have 
the name of that individual. That is handled or was handled 
through Executive Council because there are processes to 

follow when harassment charges are being made. So, Mr. 
Speaker, that would be done in an independent way. 
 
It’s a matter of looking at the Liquor and Gaming Authority, 
and we would naturally need someone outside of that 
organization and outside of the area of making recommendation 
to me to provide that information to an independent body such 
as the executive body of government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
Party has learned that the independent investigator was Tim 
Coral, a former Saskatoon police officer who does many 
investigations for the Human Rights Commission. We have also 
learned that Mr. Coral never completed a final report. He quit 
partway through that investigation due to political interference. 
The Premier’s office and the minister’s office would not allow 
him to interview witnesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why was an independent investigator never 
allowed to interview witnesses? Why was the NDP interfering 
in what was supposed to be an independent investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding 
that the individual who looked at all of the allegations of the 
harassment nature filed a report, said the harassment allegations 
were unfounded, and those issues were followed up. 
 
The next stage of course, Mr. Speaker, was to look at how we 
would handle the allegations of a nature that would deal with 
the conflict of interest guidelines and whether or not they were 
consistent with section 133. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we took responsible action on that and have hired 
Justice Wakeling, retired Justice Wakeling, to look at these 
matters. I have faith in the Justice Wakeling and a report will be 
forthcoming; actions will be taken if necessary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Specifically, Mr. Speaker, did Tim Coral 
present a report? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the harassment 
charges have a mechanism to be dealt with. Through Executive 
Council an individual was employed to look at thoroughly those 
charges under the harassment policy, and the guidelines we 
would follow to look into that. On those, yes, I believe all of 
those charges were addressed by the individual, and 
subsequently to that, the allegations that were outstanding, were 
of a serious nature. 
 
We take our responsibility seriously. SLGA has conflict of 
interest guidelines in place, would want Justice Wakeling to 
look at all of the information that had . . . presented subsequent 
to the harassment charges, and of this nature. 
 
That review is under way. I have faith that we will find that 
information from retired Justice Wakeling, and if action is 
necessary, action will be taken, Mr. Speaker. 



1342 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
four separate occasions on Friday the minister told this House 
that an independent investigator had completed an independent 
investigation and found most of Bonnie Swan’s allegations to 
be unfounded. 
 
Mr. Speaker that simply isn’t true. There was no independent 
investigation. It was short-circuited by political interference by 
the minister’s office — and the Premier’s office. 
 
Why did the minister tell us there was an independent 
investigation completed when she knows that’s not true? Why 
did the minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the member to 
rephrase his question. The statement accusing a member of the 
opposite side, or on any member in the House, as saying 
something that’s untrue is unparliamentary. I would ask you to 
withdraw that statement then rephrase your question. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll withdraw that 
statement and try to come at it from a different angle. Why did 
the minister tell us that there was an independent investigation 
completed when she doesn’t have that copy of that independent 
investigation? 
 
We haven’t seen it, and when there isn’t such a copy around, 
Mr. Speaker. Why did the minister take that tact, give us 
information that we apparently find out isn’t the way it is? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, there’s some very serious 
and responsible processes that have to occur when employees 
file harassment charges. They must be looked into. There was a 
person who was engaged to look into those. And a response was 
given to the employee on the allegations and the investigation 
of those allegations, the responses that were put forward. 
 
Further to that, Mr. Speaker, there are also allegations of 
conflict of interest, the guidelines followed by SLGA and 
whether they’re consistent with section 133 of the Act, Mr. 
Speaker. Again, taking that to heart, SLGA hired an 
independent, Chief Justice Wakeling — retired Chief Justice — 
to look at these matters. If actions are needed to be taken from 
that report, Mr. Speaker, action will be taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, after 
Tim Coral quit, who completed the investigation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, by the nature of 
harassment complaints being filed with someone that’s an 
independent body, they were being handled by Executive 
Council of government to be as independent as possible. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As independent as 
possible. Mr. Speaker, it turns out this so-called independent 
investigation was actually done by a two-member panel: the 

deputy minister to the Premier and the minister herself. Time 
after time on Friday, the minister talked about an independent 
investigation but it was the minister herself who conducted that 
investigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister tell us there was an 
independent investigation when the minister herself did that 
investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, in organizations there are 
harassment policies and there’s a process to look into those 
policies. Mr. Speaker, I would not be the one to conduct any 
such investigation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — To the minister: was she on that committee, 
that two-person committee to investigate that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker. No, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, during that so-called 
independent investigation of Bonnie Swan’s complaint, did the 
minister or the deputy minister to the Premier ever talk to 
Bonnie Swan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I would have been cc’d 
(carbon copy) copies of some information, and I wouldn’t know 
if the deputy premier to the Premier had corresponded directly 
or had talked directly with Ms. Swan. So I can only answer on 
the basis of that information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Did the minister or the deputy minister to the 
Premier ever talk to Bonnie Swan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I could answer for 
myself. But I will take notice of the other part of that question 
and I will get the information back to the member opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, this is incredible. First the 
minister shuts down the original investigation. Then she does 
this so-called investigation herself without even talking to the 
person who made the complaint, Mr. Speaker, without even 
talking to that person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister herself has become judge, jury, and 
executioner of Bonnie Swan. And what is her crime? Raising a 
legitimate concern about employee harassment and possible 
illegal activity within Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming — 
allegations that now have been confirmed by Justice Wakeling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bonnie Swan did what she was supposed to do. 
She saw wrongdoing and reported it. Why did the minister fire 
her for that activity? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1343 

 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 
saying a number of things that are totally incorrect. The first 
one is, I did not fire Ms. Swan. Internal personnel matters are 
done and handled by management at Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming. I was informed of the personnel matter, and SLGA 
management told me of the subsequent action in that manner. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would not begin to conduct or prejudge or 
try anyone outside of this Assembly or in, Mr. Speaker. And the 
answer to those would be no, no, and no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Bonnie Swan was fired because of her harassment claim. This is 
confirmed in the termination letter her lawyer received from 
SLGA’s lawyer. The letter says: 
 

Ms. Swan made serious allegations of harassment against 
the CEO of the Authority. Given the serious nature of her 
claims, it would have been impossible for your client to 
return to work and to continue an employment relationship 
with the very person she accused. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is crazy. The government is saying an 
employee who makes a harassment claim — here’s what 
they’re saying, Mr. Speaker — an employee who makes a 
harassment claim against upper management will automatically 
be fired because it is impossible to continue an employment 
relationship with a person they accused. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the NDP position: that the people who 
make harassment claims against upper management must be 
fired. That’s their position. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, you can take individual 
statements or individual items from individual personnel issues 
and construct them, and construe them any way you would want 
to do so. 
 
I don’t believe that the floor of the Assembly is a place to do a 
one-sided look at things, Mr. Speaker. I believe that 
management has to look at many, many things when they’re 
talking about personnel issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Langlois spoke to some of these over the 
weekend. I was informed by SLG management of their 
subsequent action according to a number of issues surrounding 
personnel items that are not to be discussed, number one, 
particularly because Ms. Swan says that she might want to 
pursue legal action. 
 
And number two, this is not the forum to try, as the member 
opposite has said himself, prejudge, try on bits of information 
and pieces of information out of an entire context, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, this is exactly the forum in 
which we deal with situations where ministers and cabinet 
misuse their authority, misuse their power. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — That particular letter said, Mr. Speaker — 
and there was no misconstruing that took place — given the 
serious nature of her claims, it would have been impossible for 
the client to return to work. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, is saying that if anyone brings a 
harassment claim against this government, they must be fired 
because they can’t work with that management any more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is that the NDP position — to fire people who 
make a complaint against individuals in upper management? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to speak to 
all of the ins and outs of an individual’s personnel matter or file. 
This is not appropriate before the Assembly. 
 
What I would say is the individual is now working with the 
Department of Health. We have confidence in that individual 
and the work that she does perform. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go back to telling the member 
opposite that this government does not believe that any civil 
servant should be fired for providing information to the police 
or bringing forward any pertinent information that they feel 
they have a responsibility to share, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
let’s continue to find out what that government is really all 
about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bonnie Swan’s termination letter gives another 
false reason for her dismissal. It says, and I quote: 
 

The results of the investigation found that her allegations 
were entirely without foundation. 

 
Entirely without foundation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Justice Wakeling has now confirmed the most 
serious allegations, the free trips to the Bahamas, are true. 
 
Why was Bonnie Swan fired and told her allegations were 
entirely without foundation, when a judge has now confirmed 
they are true? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, this is when it’s very 
important to get straight the processes that were in place, those 
that were followed, and not to confuse the two. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after a review of the harassment charges and the 
harassment policy, the review was completed. Those allegations 
were found to be without substantiation, Mr. Speaker. And that 
report was completed according to those charges and 
guidelines, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1344 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

Now he’s confusing that then with further allegations that I 
would say were not the harassment nature. They are now the 
nature of conflict of interest guidelines and section 133 of the 
Act. 
 
These two are different processes and different individuals who 
are looking at them. Chief Justice Wakeling is looking at the 
conflict of interest guidelines and section 133 of the Act. He 
will file an independent report and action, if necessary, will be 
taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, Bonnie Swan’s firing is a direct 
contravention of the SLGA’s own harassment policy. That 
policy states, and I quote: 
 

Retaliation is a form of harassment and will not be 
tolerated. Retaliation against a complainant will result in 
significant disciplinary action. Retaliation against any 
individual who comes forward with harassment complaints 
is an offence under the Human Rights Code. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister violate her own harassment 
policy by firing Bonnie Swan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I did not fire 
Bonnie Swan. I did not hire Bonnie Swan. Management in 
departments are responsible for human resourcing and we have 
Public Service Commission guidelines that are followed, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In the case of Bonnie Swan, SLGA management tells me no, 
this was a not a response to that. I was informed that this was a 
personnel matter. SLGA management took action and they 
reported back to me as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier on in 
question period, Mr. Speaker, the minister said she knew 
nothing about that particular panel that involved her during the 
investigation. 
 
I would like to read a little bit from a letter, a letter that is 
signed by Dan Perrins, and it deals with the makeup of that 
particular committee. And it reads as follows: 
 

As outlined in the previous correspondence to you and your 
legal counsel, in keeping with the procedural positions of 
SLGA’s harassment policy, an investigation panel 
comprised of the Chair of the board of directors and myself 
has in consultation with legal counsel reviewed the matter 
in its entirety. 
 

I would ask the minister if she would care to stand and retract 
that statement where she said she knew nothing about that 
particular thing, had no direct involvement with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, this is where I am at a 
direct disadvantage when the member is saying this committee 
and that review and there are a number under way. 
 
According to SLGA’s harassment policy I, along with a 
member of Executive Council, would be responsible to see the 
review was carried out. That would not be me carrying it out, 
Mr. Speaker. But I have a responsibility as chairman of the 
board. And he is asking if I am part of the process as chairman 
of the board. Yes, of course I would be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If I’m the person who would carry out the investigation 
personally or that Mr. Perrins would carry that out personally, 
no. It’s our responsibility to make certain an independent 
person follows through with all of those allegations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would take responsibility as chairman of the 
board, and if that is the committee he is referring to, then yes, of 
course that’s my responsibility. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Is that minister the 
Chair of the board or isn’t she? Is she in charge or isn’t she? 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Friday the minister made another serious 
allegation. She openly speculated that the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) may have been responsible for 
leaking a cabinet document to John Gormley. The minister 
appears to be questioning the very integrity of the RCMP. As 
far as we know, she has no evidence to support that allegation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister table the evidence that she has to 
support her suggestion that the RCMP were responsible for the 
leak, and if she cannot support that evidence, will the minister 
hand in her resignation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will tell 
everyone and the members opposite that there is information 
that’s been filed before the courts on Mr. Dosenberger and Mr. 
Morrissey. That, as the Justice department tells me, is before the 
courts and should not be commented upon. 
 
I will tell the member opposite, what I did comment on was that 
I found out that there had been a confidential document outside 
of the Authority by hearing that on Gormley. I would wonder 
how it could be broadcast on Gormley. 
 
That is all, Mr. Speaker, that I would speculate on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 33, 
The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1345 

 

Act be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Teachers’ Dental Plan 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 40, 
The Teachers’ Dental Plan Amendment Act, 2001 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Teachers Superannuation 
and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 41, 
The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits 
Amendment Act, 2001 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Referral of Fyke Report to Standing Committee 
on Health Care 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
have the opportunity to speak today concerning the all-party 
Committee on Health, and make a few comments on the frame 
of reference. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, there is a very narrow 
scope of the committee and it’s only going to concern the Fyke 
committee report and nothing else. 
 
(14:30) 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan 
know, the Health critic for the opposition has already submitted 
our priorities for health care reform to the Fyke Commission. 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, of the three political parties sitting in 
the House debating this issue, we were the only party to do so. 
 
We’ve expressed many of our reservations about the 
recommendations from the Fyke report related to the closure of 
as many as 50 more rural hospitals in Saskatchewan and the 
impact that’s going to have on rural Saskatchewan and the 
economy of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been nearly two years since the 1999 general 
election. And during the election, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
campaigned on promises to hire 500 new health care workers, 
reduce hospital waiting lists, and improve response times in 
hospital emergency rooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today the hospital beds are being shut down across 

this province because of serious staff shortages, hospital waiting 
lists are the longest in Canada, and the emergency room lineups 
continue to grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been nearly two years since the general 
election and nearly two years since the NDP said they were 
going to fix health care. Once again they’re talking about fixing 
health care. It’s been nearly a year since the Fyke Commission 
was established to provide some concrete action plans for the 
NDP to fulfill those election promises. But all we get, Mr. 
Speaker, is a plan to study the study. And this is very 
unacceptable to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
As we know, Mr. Speaker, the past experiences the 
Saskatchewan Party has had with all-party committees include 
participation on the all-party committee to investigate the 
Channel Lake scandal. Also we participated in the all-party 
committee on agricultural support. Also the all-party committee 
to deal with child sex trade in Saskatchewan, and also we 
participated when Mr. Fyke came to the legislature and the 
all-party legislative committee questioned him concerning his 
report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know from our past experiences concerning 
all-party committees, the NDP dominate committees, chaired by 
NDP MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly). The 
opposition will not be allowed to discuss any issues outside a 
tightly controlled mandate imposed by the NDP. And the NDP 
will use its majority on the all-party committee to ensure the 
Saskatchewan Party has absolutely nothing to say in the final 
recommendations while claiming publicly that the opposition 
was involved in the decision-making process. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the final report will be written by the NDP 
with no input from the Saskatchewan Party. The NDP will use 
the committee to avoid taking any meaningful action to fix the 
health care mess that they have created for at least another year. 
And, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly this inaction is costing . . . is 
having a serious effect on the health of Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
The final decision on what is done with the Fyke Commission 
report will be made by the NDP cabinet, not by this legislative 
committee. And the only role for the so-called all-party 
committee will be as a public relations tool to try to sell the 
NDP cabinet’s decision to the Saskatchewan voters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly the NDP’s only objective in proposing an 
all-party committee is to avoid taking any responsibility for the 
$2 million report that the commission . . . As we know, Mr. 
Speaker, the present Premier was the former associate Health 
minister responsible in 1993 for bringing in the so-called 
wellness plan. Unfortunate, that just caused over 50 hospital 
closures and really the health care of Saskatchewan people 
haven’t improved one little bit. We still have the — as I 
mentioned before — shortage of beds in hospitals, a shortage of 
nurses, longer waiting lists, and the list goes on and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we need in Saskatchewan is a plan for the 
whole economy and the people of this province to grow. And 
health care is a vitally important part of that plan for the 
Saskatchewan economy to grow and the people to have an 
improved lifestyle. 
 



1346 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

I’d just like to make some comments about what is going on in 
the Redberry Lake constituency and in a particular part of the 
constituency. The community of Hafford — Blaine Lake area 
— is part of the Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve and there’s a 
community committee for the Redberry Lake Biosphere 
Reserve set up. And they hired an environmental planner and 
they’ve held public meetings and done a lot of work on their 
own initiative to come up with plans to improve the life of the 
people in the area, improve the economy, and build rural 
Saskatchewan. And this is all done on their own initiative. 
 
And I’d like to just read the division statement from the 
Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve. And I quote: 
 

We who reside within the Redberry Lake Biosphere 
Reserve live and work together in a healthy landscape, 
under a common banner of equality, dignity, and respect. 
Democratic processes are fundamental to our community 
decision-making at every level, and community and 
economic growth are managed in an orderly and considered 
fashion that can be seen by others as an ideal for human 
community living in sustainable environmental practices. 

 
And specifically, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to refer to one of the 
objectives of the Redberry Lake committee which pertains 
specifically to health care. And I quote again: 
 

(To) create fully functional hospitals with adequate medical 
staff (which includes doctors, nurses, technicians) and 
explore options to enhance recreational opportunities to 
meet the needs of all people living in the Redberry Lake 
Biosphere Reserve. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote what Mr. Fyke said about 
rural hospitals. I quote: 
 

The day of the small hospital and sole practitioner are gone. 
That’s not effective health care. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Hafford and Blaine Lake area, 
and the Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve disagree with that. 
And I’d like to quote again, what the people of my area say is: 
 

(To) create fully functional hospitals with adequate medical 
staff. 

 
And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, as we heard on Friday, the 
member from Saskatoon Northwest, the Liberal leader, and the 
member from Saskatoon Eastview, both basically have accepted 
the recommendations of Mr. Fyke. And as we know from our 
past experiences with these committees, the final report is 
probably already written and, unfortunately, the NDP 
government and their Liberal friends are not listening to the 
people of Saskatchewan and giving the people of Saskatchewan 
what they need for health care in their areas. 
 
Another issue . . . initiative, Mr. Speaker, that I’d like to put 
into the record is concerning the Langham Senior Citizens 
Home. They submitted in December of 1999, an application for 
a personal care home licence for eight new beds in their facility. 
 
They have submitted a feasible, practical, and reasonable 
proposal for the expansion of the existing home, and have 

qualified the need for such expansion with a substantial waiting 
list and explanation of the practicality of a combined 
heavy-level long-term care, and light-level private care facility. 
 
It has also been proven a combined facility such as that 
proposed by that business can, and does, work as they’ve been 
operating the existing facility in such a manner since 1995, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It is disturbing to find that the Health department has been 
dragging its feet on this matter for the past 17 months on the 
basis that there is no specific legislation providing for a 
combined long-term care and private-care facility. Likewise 
there is no legislation disallowing such a facility. 
 
In an effort to adapt to fiscal restraints and cost-cutting 
initiatives by health districts, the Langham Senior Citizens 
Home has come up with a plan that combines two needed 
facilities into one that shares in otherwise costly features such 
as kitchen, laundry, and common areas, and allows the residents 
to remain in places as . . . in place as their needs increase. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, what is the government saying to these 
citizens in Langham and the operators of that senior centre’s 
home is to wait, wait. They’ve been waiting 17 months for an 
answer and they continue to have to wait. They’d like to begin 
construction soon, but unfortunately they cannot get the permits 
in place in order to begin the expansion — an expansion that is 
much needed in that community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know the government has been dragging its 
feet on health care for, if not months, years and it’s creating 
quite a bit of uncertainty in Saskatchewan, in both urban and 
rural Saskatchewan. As we know when they closed over 50 
hospitals last time, the promise was to direct resources into the 
city hospitals. But all we got was closed hospitals and less 
resources into the city hospitals, so we had poorer health care 
overall. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this uncertainty has had its effect just 
recently in the Parkland Health District. On Friday the CEO 
(chief executive officer) of Parkland Health District resigned 
and for many reasons, but the main reason is the uncertainty in 
the health care system, what’s going to happen to the district 
that that CEO operated for a number of years, and basically that 
person has had enough and went on to another job, which 
hopefully will give that person more security and knowledge 
concerning her future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Fyke has consulted with health care providers, 
received responses in person or . . . (inaudible) . . . from over 
35,000 people. And now the government wants to study the 
study again, put off any decisions for purely political reasons. 
And the people of Saskatchewan find this unacceptable and are 
demanding that the government begin to fix medicare and give 
hope back to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak in favour of the amendment 
and thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1347 

 

with my colleague and talk to the amendment that we have 
before us today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And to do with the Fyke report, I think there’s a grave concern 
out there — especially in rural Saskatchewan, but I believe all 
over Saskatchewan — with what Mr. Fyke has presented to this 
legislature. He’s talking about closing another 50 hospitals. 
 
I’d like to talk about that for a minute, Mr. Speaker. In 1992 
and beyond we saw — what? —53, 54 hospital closures and 
told trust us because it’s going to get better, it’s going to be 
cost-effective, and take our word for it, we’re going to improve 
health care in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well our experience tells us that that hasn’t happened, Mr. 
Speaker. Number one, our health care has deteriorated; number 
two, it’s become far more expensive. Waiting lists are probably 
the longest in the country. And yet we’re being told trust us 
once again, according to what Mr. Fyke has come forward with. 
 
I’d like to review, Mr. Speaker, what has happened in my 
constituency and in my area in the Saltcoats constituency. Mr. 
Speaker, Esterhazy St. Anthony’s Hospital, prior to 1990, had a 
30-bed facility. Today they have a 21-bed facility. There’s a 
loss of a number of beds. 
 
Kamsack, prior to 1990, had 45 beds, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
down to 20 acute care beds. Mr. Speaker, that’s over half, 50 
per cent cut in the beds that they had at that point. 
 
Then we go on to Langenburg, Mr. Speaker, and this is a very 
prime example of what we’re talking about here. Langenburg 
was in the process, when health care reform came in, of 
building a new hospital. Had the funds raised. They were ready 
to start construction. And guess what happened, Mr. Speaker? 
The old hospital was closed at Langenburg. No new hospital 
was allowed to go ahead. So there was a facility, Mr. Speaker, 
that there was 32 acute care beds in the old hospital and they 
were closed completely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I was the people of Melville, I would have a 
grave concern right now. I know they’re being promised that 
that will never happen to them, but then the people of 
Langenburg didn’t have that concern before the ’91 election 
that it would ever happen to them. And guess what? The town 
of Langenburg has a band-aid facility now and no hospital, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go further. I’d like to go to the Yorkton 
hospital which services a big area out in my area. In 1989-1990, 
the Yorkton hospital had 181 beds. That’s a combination of all 
the different beds, Mr. Speaker. 1999-2000, that 181 has 
deteriorated to 78 beds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the population has dropped very little. In fact, I 
would say the area that they cover and service out there has 
probably grown dramatically because of the cutbacks in the 
other centres, because of the closure to places like Langenburg, 
and because of more Manitoba people coming in to the Yorkton 
hospital all the time. 
 
The Yorkton hospital, Mr. Speaker, has a 20-plus million-dollar 
debt sitting there. Every year another 3 to 4 million has to be 

added to that under this NDP government, Mr. Speaker. And 
it’s hard to provide health care for the people of that district 
with things like that happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas is mentioned a number of times 
opposite by the members over there about providing accessible 
health care, publicly funded health care. And I think members 
on this side would agree with that, that it was a very good thing 
that Mr. Douglas had implemented. He cared for Saskatchewan, 
cared for rural Saskatchewan, cared for urban Saskatchewan. 
 
(14:45) 
 
But now what do we see? Mr. Fyke is suggesting we close 
another 50 hospitals. That legacy under this government, Mr. 
Speaker, would end up being, if my count is right, 104 hospital 
closures in the last 10 years. That’s quite a legacy for a 
government to leave; that loves to get up and blow their horn 
about Tommy Douglas. Tommy Douglas would be rolling in 
his grave if he could see what this government is about to do, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another thing we talked with Mr. Fyke and he suggested — I 
don’t know if I can find it in his report — but he did talk about 
long-term care homes and the need for such. And he said yes, 
there’s a need for long-term care homes. But if I understood 
him, Mr. Speaker, he was talking that these long-term care 
homes should probably be situated in the cities. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, once again that’s a scary scenario when we 
have care homes out there in small-town Saskatchewan serving 
the needs of the public, providing an adequate service, and we 
have a gentleman like this comes along and suggests that maybe 
we should be moving these long-term care homes into the cities 
with all the other health care that’s going to be provided. 
 
He also talked, Mr. Speaker, about 200 managers — 200 new 
managers will shape the system right up and make it more 
efficient. Well, Mr. Speaker, what I find is happening out there 
— especially in my area in the hospitals that we have left — is, 
Mr. Speaker, we have less beds and we have more doors. 
 
And the reason we have more doors, Mr. Speaker, is to put 
name plaques on for the bureaucrats that this government has 
put in place instead of nurses, doctors, LPNs (licensed practical 
nurse), and front-line care workers that could actually provide 
health care to the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on today, but a number of my 
colleagues would like to get up and talk on this issue. But, Mr. 
Speaker, my constituents are very concerned about what Mr. 
Fyke has presented in his report. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, I think . . . (inaudible) . . . part of this, 
I would really compare the standing committee and the 
experiences we’ve had such as Channel Lake when Brian Topp, 
I believe, wrote the final report before the committee even got 
near the end of the hearings. I would like to make a comparison 
to probably what this standing committee is going to do, 
compared somewhat to the rate review panels, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The rate review panel goes around the province again listening 
to the public. But, Mr. Speaker, have you ever heard of a person 



1348 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

come to the mike at those review panel hearings that you’ve 
been at or that I’ve been at and say ho, 40 per cent increase for 
SaskEnergy. My God, I didn’t think you guys would ever get 
here. It’s going to be good for me and my family. I want you to 
initiate that. Or 23 per cent, 27 per cent for SaskPower. God, 
my family and I were talking about that this morning. Will that 
ever improve the quality of life for me and my family. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t heard that, and I don’t think one 
person in this legislature has ever heard any comments like that 
happen. All the comments I’ve ever heard on these rate reviews 
has been no, I don’t want an increase to SaskPower, 
SaskEnergy, SaskTel, SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance). 
 
But you know what happens, Mr. Speaker, the rate review panel 
usually, normally comes back and says, we recommend an 
increase for these utilities. Then what happens? The cabinet 
rubber-stamps it. And guess what? The people of Saskatchewan 
are stuck with it. 
 
And that’s exactly what I think is going to happen in this case. 
We’re going to have a standing committee. We’re going to 
listen to the public like we always listen to the public. And you, 
what? That government’s going to do exactly what it was going 
to do before they sent Mr. Fyke out to bring a report back that 
they probably wrote before he even left the city. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to take a few minutes this afternoon to share a 
number of concerns of residents of east central Saskatchewan, 
specifically the constituencies of Canora-Pelly and Saltcoats 
and Yorkton and Melville, and all through the east side of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for well over 10 years now people have endured 
— and I’ll use that term lightly, Mr. Speaker — have endured 
health reform. They have looked at closures; they have looked 
at reduction in services; they’ve looked at longer waiting lists. 
They’ve seen problems develop in all facets of health care 
delivery. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, one of the most prominent things 
that I hear from people on that side of the province is the fact 
that the costs for delivery of health care services are now being 
borne by the individuals. There are longer travelling distances. 
People now have to take a number of days to go into a regional 
centre or a city centre to get the kind of care that they used to 
get much nearer to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the demographics of east central Saskatchewan are 
this. We have, in the area on the east side of the province, we 
basically have four hospitals right now outside of the city of 
Yorkton with acute care. They are Foam Lake, which is in the 
East Central District; and within the Assiniboine Valley Health 
District, there are three hospitals — Preeceville, Kamsack, and 
Canora. All with acute care beds. 
 
Also in that area, Mr. Speaker, are three other facilities that are 
now called health centres. They are in the communities of 
Norquay and Theodore and Invermay. These were three of the 

casualties back in the early ’90s when over 50 hospitals were 
closed. They were three of those 50. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in those areas are very concerned about 
the delivery and the services that are necessary. They believe 
that acute care is very necessary at that local level. 
 
I want to share a report on a meeting, Mr. Speaker, that 
occurred last fall. And I made some comments earlier on in the 
session about a public meeting that was called in the 
community of Foam Lake. 
 
As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure everybody in the 
province of Saskatchewan is aware, that there is no East Central 
District Health Board. The Minister of Health dissolved that 
board and replaced that board with an appointed commissioner; 
that person being Dr. Klippert. 
 
Dr. Klippert was sent out to East Central District to obviously 
look at health delivery. And when a public meeting was called 
to discuss the future of Foam Lake on October 25, 2000, over 
700 people turned out at that public meeting, Mr. Speaker. And 
I was there. 
 
And you know one of the first things that I think surprised so 
many people when they listened to Dr. Klippert was that he 
stood before the people and he said: I am here on a financial 
mandate, not a medical mandate. This is the person who has just 
replaced the health district board and he’s telling the people of 
the area — the 700 gathered at that public meeting and 
everyone else in the area — that he was there strictly for a 
financial mandate, not a medical mandate. And I think people 
were horrified at that response, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A number of excellent presentations were made, made by 
people in the community, by the Nurses’ Association — the 
Registered Nurses’ Association — and the people that . . . the 
residents and families of residents that live at the Jubilee Home, 
expressing their concern that there was a need for the acute care 
beds to remain in Foam Lake. 
 
One of the proposals, Mr. Speaker, which I think people found 
very interesting is that the Nurses’ Association wanted to see an 
expanded delivery of acute services in Foam Lake. The fact that 
they had not delivered any babies in the last eight years was a 
concern since there were two doctors there and they said that 
that could be done. 
 
Well, you know I guess those people had a premonition, Mr. 
Speaker, because about a month ago, for the first time in eight 
years, a young newborn was delivered in the Foam Lake 
hospital. There was a problem. The mother arrived early, 5 a.m. 
in the morning, and within three-quarters of an hour, because of 
complications, the doctor felt that the baby would not survive in 
transportation to Yorkton and the baby was delivered in Foam 
Lake. Mother is healthy, child is healthy, everybody’s doing 
well only because there was an acute care facility in Foam 
Lake. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when that meeting was held, one of the people 
who attended that meeting was Velma Johnson. And I want to 
quote a letter that she sent to Dr. Klippert on October 30, about 
five days after the meeting. And she says this: 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1349 

 

Dear Dr. Klippert: 
 
I was one of the nearly 700 people attending the meeting in 
Foam Lake on Wednesday, October 25 to discuss the future 
of the Foam Lake Health Care Centre. I was very proud of 
the residents of this area for their attendance and for their 
excellent briefs presented. I was very disappointed in your 
responses to the questions asked as really you said nothing 
except that you had heard these briefs and that they are 
very good but you will still be recommending to the 
Minister of Health that the Foam Lake Health Centre be 
converted into an ambulatory care centre which would be 
open from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 
 
How anyone could listen to these briefs and not see what a 
vital part of our community our health centre is, I fail to 
understand. It is very obvious that you, along with the 
Minister of Health, are only interested in the almighty 
dollar, not human life. 

 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, people were very concerned about a 
committee; about in this case a committee of one, Dr. Klippert, 
hearing responses from the public — excellent responses as Dr. 
Klippert said in his press release — and then making a decision. 
Everybody was anxious to see what Dr. Klippert would do. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in February of this year, 2001, a plan from 
the East Central District came out. It was called A Plan for 
Achieving Financial and Operational Stability and one of the 
recommendations dealt with Foam Lake and the health centre. 
And I’m quoting from that report, Mr. Speaker, and it says this: 
 

The Foam Lake Health Centre incorporates four acute care 
beds and eleven long-term care beds. All beds are fully 
utilized, although the acute care beds support . . . adult 
medicine, convalescent and palliative care services. 

 
And now, Mr. Speaker, he says this: 
 

It is recommended that: 
 

The Foam Lake Health Centre be converted to an 
ambulatory care facility, at some point in the future, and; 
 
Planning for the implementation of the closure of 
inpatient beds, and for the development of sustainable 
ambulatory care programs for the Centre be undertaken 
in consultation with Foam Lake physicians, staff and 
community. 

 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, it’s little wonder that people in the 
province are very skeptical, very skeptical about the reviews 
that this government will do, the report that has been presented 
by Ken Fyke. People have said: you know I made a 
presentation, I sent in material, nowhere do I see that Mr. Fyke 
is even recognizing the concerns that we have raised. And he 
has put forward the closure of 50 more hospitals. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the concern that was raised in Foam Lake in 
the East Central District I think has echoed across the entire east 
central side of the province of Saskatchewan. I want to share a 
couple of responses, Mr. Speaker, of people who attended the 
Assiniboine Valley District’s public meeting. To their credit the 

district board has decided to go across the province — or across 
their district, I’m sorry — and consult with staffs and consult 
with public. 
 
And on May 22 of this month, of course it’s still May, they held 
a meeting in Stenen. And there were a lot of people there 
expressing concern — is the best way that that can be described 
— they were expressing concern as one individual said, and I 
quote: 
 

That the die has already been cast. 
 
In other words, it’s very similar to the Foam Lake response. 
We’re going to consult, we’re going to go out to the public, 
we’re going to listen to the public, but the resolution at the end 
of the day is it’s the closure of the Foam Lake hospital. These 
people fear that the recommendation and the resolution at the 
end of the day will be the closure of acute care beds in 
Preeceville, in Canora, in Kamsack, and in Foam Lake, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And they’re very concerned about that. Because they recognize 
that if you’re moving acute care to a regional setting as Dr. 
Fyke has suggested, that the regional hospital in probably 
Yorkton — but of course we don’t know where those 14 
regional hospitals will be — he’s suggesting that that delivery 
of acute care will occur in that facility. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when Mr. Fyke sat right over there, I asked 
that very question. I said to him, can you explain to the people 
of Saskatchewan what the difference is in delivery of acute care 
services and the costs related to those services. Is it cheaper in 
one centre or is it more expensive in another centre? 
 
And I recall Mr. Fyke’s words, and he said it was definitely 
more expensive to deliver acute care services at each of the 
levels that you move up. In other words, if you look at the 
current . . . I’ll call them regular hospitals that occur outside of 
the cities that are not so-called regional facilities, that is the 
lowest cost to deliver those service. That’s where you’ll find the 
lowest costs. 
 
You move to the regional facilities, and they’re more expensive. 
You move to the tertiary care centres that we will have in 
Regina and Saskatoon and Prince Albert if this plan is 
implemented — they will be even more extensive. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the people in the province of Saskatchewan 
are saying, if you’re closing our facilities, can you guarantee 
that there is a cost saving? And I think Mr. Fyke said no, there 
is no cost saving because we’re going to move into a more 
extensive plan as we close all of the acute care beds in those 
some 50 hospitals. 
 
So now what we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, is that the people of 
Saskatchewan are saying, we saw what happened 10 years ago. 
We have the example. We did not save money. We have fewer 
services. We have longer waiting lists. We have a problem in 
the health care system. What is Mr. Fyke recommending? A 
continuation of that plan. 
 
One of the other things, Mr. Speaker, that I hope Mr. Fyke 
would have listened more carefully to, to doctors in this 



1350 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

province, and we have some excellent doctors in this province 
from South Africa. Many of the doctors who have come 
through the South African model know exactly what Mr. Fyke 
is recommending, and they do not support it. And I’ll tell you 
why, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:00) 
 
In the early ’90s — ’91, ’92 — in South Africa, the decision 
was made, very similar to Fyke’s report, that there would be a 
gradual flow of people to the tertiary care centres, and the 
regional components would be made larger to ensure that the 
services were provided. 
 
They didn’t actually close rural hospitals, Mr. Speaker. They 
didn’t state specifically that they were closing them, but the end 
result was that the physicians, the professionals delivering 
health care services, moved from those facilities. They moved 
to the regional and then finally into the tertiary care centres. 
And as they moved, so did the people. 
 
Short story, to make it short, Mr. Speaker, the end result was 
that the tertiary centres were completely ingested with numbers 
of people. They could not handle the flow of people that came 
into those tertiary centres. 
 
The government of the day had to backtrack. And do you know 
what they did? They had to close the tertiary centres for a while 
to force people back out in rural South Africa — to reopen 
those hospitals, to have services provided back in those 
facilities that had originally been left as hospitals but had, 
because of the lack of professionals, had eliminated some of 
their services. 
 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, when Mr. Fyke proposes a model, the 
question that I asked of him was, have you consulted with 
South Africa? Have you consulted with a model that you are 
proposing to see where it’s working? Is it working the way you 
envisioned? And the model that the doctors from South Africa 
are talking about that was tried in their country was a failure. 
 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, I think that Mr. Fyke’s response is just 
a continuation of the very fact of health reform that has been put 
forward since the early ’90s. It’s a matter of eliminating the 
services at the lower . . . at that rural level. It’s moving people 
away. 
 
Because you know, Mr. Speaker, one of the statistics that has 
been put forward in one of the HSURC’s (Health Services 
Utilization and Research Commission) reports is indeed, as a 
hospital facility is closed in a community, people with needs, 
people with health needs, they’re not going to remain in that 
facility, because they’re not going to drive every day 30 and 40 
and 50 miles to the next hospital. They move. They move out of 
those facilities. 
 
And one of the . . . you know, you can do anything you like 
with statistics, but one of the statistics said, well in the centres 
where hospitals were closed, there was a lower death rate. Well 
guess why, Mr. Speaker? People with serious illnesses, with a 
need to address those illnesses, moved out of the town. They 
moved to the other community. 
 

And that’s exactly what we’re going to see happen here. We 
need to deliver acute care services. We will not see hospitals 
seven miles apart, Mr. Speaker. There’s no question of that. But 
now we’re looking at facilities already that are miles away. We 
look at the community of Foam Lake that is struggling, because 
they are almost an hour from Yorkton, to receive the kind of 
acute care that they deem necessary. 
 
I don’t think people in Regina would be too happy living here 
in Regina if they had to travel to the other side of Moose Jaw to 
receive acute care services. 
 
So when we start to look at the whole delivery of acute care, I 
think it’s more important to look at the kinds of problems that 
have confronted the people of Saskatchewan over the last 
decade. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, the opposition has 
proposed that amendment — that we deal with more than just 
the Fyke report; that we deal with a number of issues that are 
facing the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Why are the waiting lists growing? Why do we see that hip and 
knee replacements for the province of Saskatchewan have the 
longest waiting list, almost double the next province? Those are 
real concerns that the people of this province want addressed. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be speaking in favour of the 
amendment and against the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to stand today also to speak to the motion on 
the Standing Committee on Health, and in particular to stand 
behind and support the proposed amendment by the 
Saskatchewan Party opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there seems to be much question around whether 
or not this Standing Committee on Health Care is in fact 
necessary; is in fact going to achieve anything for the people of 
the province; is in fact going to be reflective of what these 
people in our province are saying about their health needs and 
health services. 
 
Mr. Chair, it is very clear that we have already had a 
commissionaire in the person of Mr. Fyke, that has gone 
throughout the province and supposedly was talking with a 
number of stakeholders in our province — stakeholders such as 
health care professionals, community organizations, health 
districts, a number of people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When Mr. Fyke was in the Assembly and the members of the 
Assembly had an opportunity to speak to him and to question 
him on his report, I did ask him whether he felt that his 
consultations were thorough and whether they were adequate. 
His reply to me was yes, he felt they were. 
 
Common sense would tell us then, Mr. Chair, that if those 
consultations were adequate and they were thorough — and Mr. 
Fyke gave us his word on that — then there would be no further 
need for further consultations. 
 
If in fact the people of our province — rural doctors as well as 
urban doctors; rural health care providers in the person of 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1351 

 

nurses, lab technicians, patients out there; any clients that use 
our health services — did come forward, and there was ample 
opportunity for them to do that, then why would we need yet 
again, once more, to spend many, many more thousands of 
taxpayers’ dollars to go and hear from the people of the 
province one more time? 
 
Now I am certainly in agreement with public policy being 
shaped by the people of this province. But I think it is in fact 
disgraceful and shameful to delude the public, which I believe 
this government is doing, by making people believe that they’re 
going out there yet one more time to listen to people of the 
province when in fact they already have their minds made up. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, some of the members on this side of the House 
just recently have heard of implementation committees being 
set up around the province; implementation committees that are 
to be implementing Fyke’s recommendations. 
 
Now just what the mandate of those committees is and how far 
those mandates go is anyone’s guess right now. But when you 
look at some of the recommendations of the Fyke report, we get 
a pretty good idea of what might be coming up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if in fact the government was listening to what the 
people of this province are saying about their health care needs, 
they would have paid attention to the many, many petitions that 
have been presented by official opposition members regarding 
the concerns of people in our province, especially people in the 
rural areas about consolidating ambulance services. The 
suggestion to consolidate ambulance services in this province 
has been met with a great deal of concern by people in the rural 
areas. People have spoken. There have been numbers of 
signators on petitions to this Assembly asking that the 
government does not consolidate ambulance services. 
 
Mr. Chair, this is not about the people having a chance to be 
heard. The people have been heard. This is about whether the 
NDP government will in fact act on what they hear from the 
people. And it is becoming very clear to members from this side 
of the House and to people throughout the province that the 
government is not all that concerned about health reform or 
health services as put forward from the people of the province, 
but it is much more about political motivation by the NDP and 
damage control. 
 
Now we have had in this House, Mr. Chair, comments from the 
member from Prince Albert Northcote, the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest, and from Saskatoon Eastview; comments 
that have made it very plain that in the government’s mind this 
report and its recommendations have virtually been accepted 
already and approved. 
 
And I think all they need to do is go back to Hansard from the 
previous day of this sitting, or from the previous day, Mr. Chair, 
and to look at what those members have said. And certainly you 
can see quite clearly that they are indicating that this report that 
Mr. Fyke has put forward is in fact on its way to being 
approved by this government. 
 
Now just how the report will be implemented and any other 
ramifications from that is of little consequence to the 
government opposite here. So, Mr. Chair, this latest committee 

seems to be just another smokescreen, a cover for the real 
motivation of the NDP government. It seems that no matter how 
much chaos or conflict or confusion there may be surrounding 
an issue, the members opposite turn a blind eye to it and are 
determined to push things through. 
 
Mr. Chair, I am in concurrence with the amendment put 
forward by the official opposition. Mr. Chair, I believe it is 
necessary certainly to look at good health care delivery in this 
province but sometimes common sense is what needs to be 
acted on. 
 
Mr. Chair, this side of the House, the Saskatchewan Party 
opposition, will never condone anything that pushes 
centralization of services and that excludes and discludes rural 
Saskatchewan from any of the services they deserve and they 
need. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like to 
take this opportunity to address some health concerns in my 
constituency — my constituency being a rural constituency 
which only has a handful of existing health facilities. 
 
And there certainly is some genuine concern in my constituency 
amongst the constituents that if this Fyke report is adopted, we 
may lose those existing facilities. At the moment we have two 
hospitals in the constituency that offer acute care service, one 
being in the community of Wynyard and the other in Lestock. 
 
And I’d like to just mention a few things about the services that 
are being offered and the importance of those services to the 
residents of the area. Wynyard, a community, as you’ve often 
heard me say, of about 2,000 people which boasts to be the 
home of the only poultry eviscerating plant in Saskatchewan is 
very concerned about the possible downgrading of hospital 
services in that community. 
 
The Lilydale plant has a workforce of some 500 people who do 
assembly line work, working with eviscerating poultry, which 
as you can well imagine, would mean use of knives and those 
sorts of things. And although they have quite an enviable safety 
record, occasional injuries do happen and medical services need 
to be available within a very close proximity of that facility. 
And so therefore any loss of emergency and acute facilities in 
that town would have a detrimental effect to economic 
development. 
 
That plant is looking at expanding and growing, and health 
services is certainly an important component of the services 
being offered in the community and which will determine future 
growth of that facility. 
 
Big Quill Resources is another industrial type of facility that’s 
situated on the edge of Big Quill Lake, that has a workforce of 
some 50 people. Again a number of . . . certainly there’s 
industrial equipment in the plant and so on. And again, although 
the workforce is very careful and the safety record is good, 
there’s always that chance that there could be . . . there’s the 
potential for a very severe accident or serious accident, and it’s 
always comforting to those workers to know that they have an 
acute care facility within minutes, not hours, of their workplace. 



1352 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

And as you can well imagine, it goes without saying, there’s 
also a number of retired and semi-retired folks that live in the 
community and surrounding communities that the Wynyard 
Hospital serves. And oftentimes these people have chosen to 
retire in these small communities knowing that they have health 
services available to them — that they don’t have to travel great 
distances. 
 
Quite often many of the retired folks or at least some of them, 
don’t have their own vehicles and that sort of thing. And they 
feel quite secure in living in, whether it be in Wynyard or Elfros 
or Mozart of Wishart or some of those communities, knowing 
that they’re within 15, 20 minutes of hospital services and they 
can call on a neighbour to take them to the hospital for the 
appropriate care that they require. 
 
The second community that has an acute care facility in my 
constituency is Lestock. Now admittedly it’s a small hospital, 
but it certainly serves a very important need and fills an 
important function in that particular area. There are four First 
Nations communities within the very close proximity of 
Lestock. 
 
(15:15) 
 
As we all know the . . . we know the demographics of the First 
Nations populations; there is certainly a lot of young people 
living in these communities, children 
 
There’s certainly a lot of young people living in these 
communities. Those of us who are parents, we know about the 
childhood ailments and those sorts of things which may require 
hospital care. And it would be a real hardship to a lot of those 
people in those First Nations communities to have to take their 
children to Regina or Saskatoon for hospital care when they 
have that service right next door to them. 
 
And again, there’s a number of retired people living in the 
village of Lestock and the other communities nearby — 
Punnichy, Leross, Kelliher, and so on — and they certainly 
would feel the loss if that hospital was turned into what the 
recommendations that Mr. Fyke has suggested — turning them 
into primary health service centres. 
 
When I looked at the Fyke report, it seemed to me that in some 
areas Mr. Fyke perhaps didn’t do his homework as well as he 
should have. He talks about primary health service teams which 
is going to be the focus of our everyday health services. Well 
that sounds fine. You take all the health professionals. You 
group them into a team and you end up with a much better 
service. 
 
The research . . . he talks about synergies, when you get a group 
of people together and say there’s new ideas and better services 
and so on. And it seems to me Mr. Fyke is envisioning that. 
And that may very well be true, that when you have a group of 
people together, you may end up with better health care 
services. 
 

But one of the things that Mr. Fyke failed to address in his 
report is where are you going to get these people? We all know 
about the lack of health care professionals that we presently 

have in this province. The institutions, whether it be SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) or 
the universities that are training our health care professionals, 
they don’t have the capacity to train more people for a number 
of reasons, one of them being the underfunding to these 
institutions. 
 
So it seems to me, it’s great to recommend some pie in the sky 
. . . or come forth with some pie-in-the-sky recommendations 
but you have to be practical. You have to recommend or at least 
suggest where you are going to get these people from before the 
citizens will have any confidence in these type of 
recommendations. 
 
It seems to me we heard these type of recommendations back in 
’93 where we’re going to close your hospital but you’re going 
to end up with better services in your community. Well we can 
name 50-some communities who will attest that that in fact isn’t 
true, that in fact the level of services in their community has 
deteriorated. 
 
Mr. Fyke talks about, well we’re going to have an excellent 
ambulance service and it’s going to be a 24-hour/7-day 
ambulance service. Well in most cases we already have that. He 
accepted the EMS report that was released earlier this year, 
which talked about the centralization of ambulance services, 
and a lot of the communities affected by this centralization just 
aren’t buying into it. They see in practical terms that it’s not 
going to work. 
 
In my constituency, one of the recommendations was to pull the 
ambulance services out of communities such as Wynyard, 
Wadena, Foam Lake, and centralize them in the community of 
Elfros. Well even the people that live in Elfros realize that’s a 
foolish recommendation. In fact I presented a petition today and 
the residents of Elfros signed that petition asking that the 
government not implement this centralization of ambulance 
services. 
 
We have good ambulance services in those communities and to 
take them and centralize them in the community of Elfros that 
doesn’t have any existing health facilities just doesn’t make 
sense. It would add cost and of course we don’t see any 
improvement in services since we already have good ambulance 
services. 
 
Then Mr. Fyke goes on to talk about the primary health 
network. Well it seems to me that’s just another name for the 
wellness model, where we’re going to make all this information 
available to people so that they don’t get sick. We’re going to 
have the sharing of information between health providers and 
all that sort of thing. We’ve heard this before and we were told 
about this in 1993 and it just, it didn’t work then and I don’t see 
any evidence why it would work now. And Mr. Fyke certainly 
didn’t provide any evidence in his report. 
 
As I said, the main concern that many residents in my 
constituency have is converting the small hospitals into primary 
health centres, and of course as I indicated we had heard this 
before. And those of us that live in the community, my home 
community of Cupar, certainly know all about this. In the early 
’90s when the first round of rural hospital closures came about, 
our hospital was one that was closed. And we were told, yes we 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1353 

 

were going to have all these additional services and it will be 
better, not worse. Well you can ask anyone in our community 
and surrounding communities, that certainly is not the case. 
 
Now when the government talks . . . the members opposite talk 
about well we better consult with the people to get feedback on 
some of these recommendations, then why don’t they do that? 
Why don’t they take . . . if you want to consult, go out and talk 
to the communities that are going to be directly affected? Don’t 
house yourselves here in this building and select the people that 
. . . be selective as far as the people that are going to present 
reports and discussions to the committee. 
 
Go out in the country and to the communities that are going to 
be directly affected by this report, and talk to the people and see 
what they think about some of these recommendations. 
 
It seems to me that this whole process is simply just a stalling 
tactic, and I certainly don’t agree with it. There are many things 
that need to be addressed. There’s a number of them that are of 
an urgent matter. We all know about the waiting lists and the 
growing waiting lists. Just late last week we were told that 
Saskatchewan has the longest waiting list in the country for hip 
replacements and those sorts of things. 
 
We’ve all heard about the urgency and the needs that need to be 
addressed at the College of Medicine. A month or two ago an 
award-winning researcher, Dr. Roger Pierson, said that if 
something isn’t done, we’ve only got a matter of months to fix 
the problems up there, not years. And it seems to me that this 
whole committee is just a delaying tactic, which could have 
some serious consequences. 
 
I understand that the College of Medicine will be undergoing its 
review with regards to its accreditation, and I have some very 
serious concerns in that matter when I hear of the problems that 
continually come out of that college. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 
amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to stand today 
to discuss the motion regarding the Fyke report on behalf of the 
people from Kelvington-Wadena constituencies. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Fairview and the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest have spoken on this issue and, Mr. 
Speaker, their statements have sent a shiver down the spine of 
the people from Kelvington-Wadena. Not because exactly the 
words they’re saying, but because in their opinion, the minister 
has . . . or the members have already bought into this report, and 
they’re just deciding how to implement it. 
 
In fact in many cases we’ve been hearing that there’s an 
implementation team in place, or getting put in place so that 
they can be looking at this report. And it’s something that is 
scaring the residents not just of rural Saskatchewan, but right 
over the province. 
 
I know the report has many aspects, but the two that bother my 
constituents the most are the closing, of course, of 50 more rural 
hospitals, and the implementation of the EMS report. 
 

Kelvington-Wadena constituency lost three hospitals in the first 
round of health care reforms — Spalding, Watson, and Rose 
Valley hospitals. The effect that it had on that rural area, Mr. 
Speaker, is devastating. 
 
I know that from my own personal life, my parents left their 
home that they had lived in for 56 years because they had . . . 
there wasn’t access to health care. They moved to Calgary 
because there they did have their needs met instantly; they 
didn’t have to get on the bus and travel for two hours to get to a 
hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there’s very many . . . there isn’t the 
numbers available to tell us how many people have left the 
province because of the health care situation, but we do know 
that the numbers are large and increasing. 
 
Right now if you imagine a small town in Saskatchewan and the 
draw that normally came, the reason why people would retire 
from their farm and move into a place like Wadena or 
Kelvington, because they know the community, because of their 
family, because their life has revolved around that part of the 
province. Now they have to decide: should I retire there, and if I 
do, is there going to be health care services? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s fair to say that anybody who is 
looking at spending $100,000 to build a retirement home is not 
going to build it in an area where they don’t think they could 
have health care services. 
 
The Fyke report would actually . . . could probably mean that I 
wouldn’t have a hospital left in the constituency of 
Kelvington-Wadena. Porcupine, Wadena, and Kelvington 
hospitals of course are not large centres, but they are centres 
that look after a lot of people and that people are basing their 
health needs around. 
 
The town council in Kelvington wrote a letter, an e-mail to me 
after the Fyke report came out, and they said they discussed 
their concerns and all of the concerns raised by the council were 
generated by the fear of losing our present level of health care 
services, the fear of having to travel great distances for 
emergency care, and the fear of the proposed changes and 
imposing migration of our residents to cities so they can be 
closer to the hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they ask, do you believe these fears will be 
addressed and can you assure us that our present level of health 
care will not be diminished or compromised, but rather 
enhanced by the implementation of the Fyke report? 
 
From the Kelvington hospital, the nurses contacted my office 
and had a number of questions as well. They were concerned 
that the improvements and modifications be put in place before 
the current structure is disassembled. 
 
They knew what happened last time. We had a wellness centre 
. . . system brought forward and supposedly it was supposed to 
make everything better, but they closed the hospitals before 
people had any kind of a concept of what wellness was 
supposed to mean. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that all of us as MLAs have . . . a lot of the 



1354 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

calls we get into our office are regarding health care. I had one 
last week from a 75-year-old man who’s a bachelor. He fell and 
cracked a rib, and when they did the X-ray they found a spot on 
his lung. And now he’s made three trips into Regina at a cost 
him about $200 a trip to see when they can look at him further, 
when they can do the biopsy. Last week, he was already 
prepped and on his way into the operating room when they said 
no, sorry, we can’t do it; there’s been another emergency, just 
go home again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that cost a lot of money and that’s a lot of 
concern, and it’s very, very hard on the wellness of people. 
Supposedly this whole system that we’re working on, this kind 
of agony and pressure is not what people, older people or 
anybody, needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the town of Porcupine wrote a letter to the 
Minister of Health, and I’m sure that he has shared some of this 
information with you, but maybe he missed parts of it. And I 
wanted to remind you that the town of Porcupine would have to 
travel over 62 miles or over one hour to access acute and 
emergency services if the Fyke report is implemented. 
 
Between August the 19 and 23, 1999, the Porcupine hospital, 
there was three different patients who had myocardial 
infractions while a fourth person was admitted for observation 
with chest pain. During the same period, the hospital had 26 
outpatients, as well as a full complement of eight patient beds. 
This same facility administered streptomycin, streptocycin three 
times. We know that the administration within the first hour 
after a myocardial infraction is crucial. How many of these 
individuals that received the medication would have survived if 
treatment would not have been available? 
 
We had a letter sent to our critic for Health just today, Mr. 
Speaker, from the College of Family Physicians of Canada and 
they had some interesting information or thoughts on the report 
as well. Regarding hospital closures, I’d like to quote what they 
said in their letter: 
 

Rural hospitals are the basic foundation to the infrastructure 
of primary health care. Rural Saskatchewan residents have 
the same right of access to basic and new expensive 
technology, as do urban residents. All Saskatchewan 
residents deserve timely access to health care. 
 
In response to the suggested massive hospital closures in 
rural Saskatchewan, we find this portion of the commission 
extremely unfavourable and one we can not support. The 
people of Saskatchewan are not ready for another round of 
hospital closures. 
 
Before hospital closures, the government should take a hard 
look at each individual hospital, access what services the 
hospital offers, and what alternatives are available. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people from my constituency are not just 
concerned about the health part of it, but they’re also concerned 
about the economic development and the reason why we have 
the number of people leaving rural areas. 
 
(15:30) 
 

One business person has told me that the Fyke report calls for a 
further dismantling of health care in rural Saskatchewan with 
the elimination or redefining of another 50 rural hospitals. 
 
On the surface, the commission’s recommendations seem to 
make sense given the context of publicly funded health care 
system. However with an economy that is not growing, where 
young, productive people are leaving the province because of 
the lack of opportunity and the average age of the population is 
increasing, what else can come but the outcome being scaling 
back. 
 
The commission report only confirms that the existing system 
will have to be scaled back dramatically in order to stay afloat. 
If we stay on the present course, it will have to be scaled back 
dramatically again in another five or six years, and then again 
and again. 
 
Business people know that the money for health care over the 
next few years will be a concern. And I think the government 
acknowledges that too because they have admitted there is 
going to be 30,000 students leaving the province over the next 
eight years and that probably means 50,000 parents — young, 
working taxpayers in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need a government that recognizes that we can’t fix the 
health problems without fixing the rest of the problems in this 
province. We need a government with a vision that will allow 
the province to grow, instead of sitting for months and months 
in another round of meetings to decide how much or what of the 
Fyke report should be implemented. We need a government that 
should be figuring out how to let the real people of this 
province take hold of the economy and let the province grow. 
 
Changes will be made in the health care area, but they can be 
made in conjunction with a prospering province. The changes 
can be made and will be accepted by the same kind of people 
who built the health care system less than a hundred years ago. 
 
The new Crown corporation for the celebration of our 
centennial caused concern for seniors in the Rose Valley area. 
They called me to a meeting and asked me, what do we really 
have to celebrate? A hundred years ago we didn’t have roads, 
we didn’t have hospitals, we didn’t have schools. So how is that 
different from today in rural Saskatchewan? We don’t have 
roads, we don’t have schools, and we don’t have hospitals. 
 
The Fyke report is not going to address all the problems. But we 
also know that this Fyke report is not going to be the answer to 
so many of the problems we have. So, Mr. Speaker, I am not 
going to be supporting the motion, and I will be supporting the 
amendment. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
enter into the debate this afternoon. I’ve listened with interest as 
the members of the opposition have read their tightly scripted 
speeches to the Assembly. And I find it passing strange, the 
lack of consistency and coherence in the approach that they’ve 
taken. 
 
The member for Saltcoats this afternoon says that we have not 
consulted enough; that we should go out and listen to the people 
more. The member for Humboldt says exactly the opposite — 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1355 

 

exactly the opposite. 
 
We look, as we go from member to member across there, that 
there is absolutely no understanding of what they want to do 
with medicare. None whatsoever. There’s no consistency there, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that concerns me, but it also tells me why we 
should embark on this review of the Fyke report. It says to me 
that there is a great deal more work that needs to be done before 
we decide what should be implemented and what should not . . . 
out of the report. And I will tell you that as one of the members 
of that standing committee, that I go into this with a completely 
open mind as to what we should or should not be doing. 
 
It is the members opposite who are presupposing what this 
committee will determine. It is them who are prejudging what 
the approach will be. If we simply wanted to implement Fyke, 
why would we not simply move forward and do it today? Why 
would we subject it to further scrutiny? If we did not believe 
that there was some inherent good though, why wouldn’t we 
simply shelve it? 
 
Well I think the answer’s obvious. The answer is that something 
needs to be done with our medicare system. We are at a 
crossroads; we need to take a look at it and we need to make 
sure that all voices are heard. This is not a case of us simply 
accepting the political bias of one party or another. We’re going 
to have to go forward and see what people say is good and not 
good. 
 
The member for Last Mountain-Touchwood today in his 
speech, which I found very interesting, highlighted some very 
positive things in the Fyke report in terms of the move towards 
primary care. As I listen to people in my riding and across the 
city of Regina, I listen to them say that yes, this is something 
we should be looking at here, as well, is a greater role for 
primary care. 
 
When I take a look at the approach that’s being advocated by 
the members opposite, the member for Humboldt says that they 
would never support the consolidation of anything in the health 
care system. And yet I know that the Health care critic, in their 
submission to Fyke, suggested exactly that, with his integrated 
health facility in Saskatoon — a facility that inevitably would 
shut down the nursing program here in Regina. 
 
So on the one hand they say that they won’t support 
consolidation, but they advocate consolidation. On the one hand 
they say that they don’t support anything in the Fyke report; on 
the other hand they’re saying, you know, this primary care is 
not a bad idea. They say don’t proceed with the ambulance 
reforms, but that’s integral to the primary care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the members opposite need to set 
aside the scripts that their staffers have written for them in the 
caucus offices and send their representatives . . . send their 
representatives to the committee with an open mind, and let’s 
see what there is of merit in the report. 
 
I have to tell you that I have some questions and some concerns 
about what was in the report as well. I am looking forward to 
sitting down with Mr. Fyke and asking him very specifically 

how this is going to work, how are we going to move forward 
in this? There are some things that I think health care 
professionals agree are a very good idea, I think . . . legislators 
across party lines would agree with. The idea of a quality 
council has great merit if we can make it work. We need to hear 
more from Mr. Fyke on how that’s going to fit together. We 
need to hear from Mr. Fyke what the proposal was in terms of 
what steps go first. 
 
The members opposite said clearly — and I think it is a fair 
comment from the members opposite and it’s one shared by 
many of us on this side — that we need to see some proof that 
the system’s going to be better off first. But for them to simply 
say that this model won’t work, when we know in fact that it’s 
working in communities like Beechy today, I think flies in the 
face of what they claim to represent. 
 
They claim to represent rural Saskatchewan; they claim to want 
better services for rural Saskatchewan. But where you have 
working models of primary health care, they ignore it, they 
don’t believe it, they won’t speak to the merits of this. Instead 
they simply believe that we should move forward with a very 
narrow proposal that they’ve put forward, which has in some 
ways some merit. But we have got to take a look at this in a 
broader perspective, Mr. Speaker, and that is what this standing 
committee on medicare will do. 
 
Now the members opposite have proposed an amendment 
which would have us take a look at all health care reform since 
1993. I think the fact of what we should be doing is focusing in 
very specifically on that next set of steps. How do we rebuild 
confidence in the system? How do we make sure that we’ve got 
a system in place which can deal with worldly population, that 
can deal with a greater need for technology in the system that 
deals with staff shortages, which deals with a competition for 
those staffing resources? How do we deal with that? That’s 
what this committee has to turn its mind to. And we should do 
it, and we should do it in a non-partisan fashion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the member for Wood River says, what was Fyke for? 
Fyke took a look at it. Now the question is: do they want us to 
implement Fyke or do they want us to shelve Fyke? Or do we 
cherry-pick Fyke? The approach that has to be taken now is to 
go through Fyke and decide what can be implemented, what has 
public acceptance to be implemented, and what should not be 
implemented. That’s what we need to do through the standing 
committee, and that’s what we should turn our attention to. 
 
But the members opposite seem to only have in their mind . . . 
some of them say move forward and some say don’t do 
anything — move forward or don’t do anything. So they want it 
stalled but they want us to hurry up and do it because their job 
— as I hear on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
radio, one of them says — is simply to criticize. 
 
We’ve got to move past that, Mr. Speaker. If we all believe in 
medicare, with the emphasis on the word “if”, I’m prepared to 
accept that from the members opposite that they support 
medicare. But I want to see them ante up and belly up to the 
table of that committee with some ideas that will protect 
publicly funded medicare and not simply continue to deride it, 
to continue to play on the problems, and to drive us to a system 
of privatization. 



1356 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

If we all 58 of us believe in medicare, then all members will 
come to that committee, all of us will go to that committee with 
an open mind and with an approach to work together to decide 
what, out of Fyke, should be implemented and how we should 
proceed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a member of that committee I’m prepared to do 
just that. I would ask the members opposite to set aside their 
ideological views. I would ask them to set aside their scripts 
that have been written for them by their staffers. And I say to 
them, come to the table and let’s have a frank discussion and 
see what we agree on and what we can move forward with. 
 
I’m prepared to look at their ideas. I trust they’re prepared to 
look at our ideas. And I think we should all take a look at Mr. 
Fyke’s ideas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why we should return to a tighter mandate, 
why we should defeat the amendment, proceed with the referral, 
and let’s get on with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise on behalf of the constituents of Carrot River Valley and 
enter into debate on the motion and the amendment being 
debated this afternoon. 
 
The observation that I would make, Mr. Speaker, is that after 
having listened for the last couple of days, that what we have 
here is basically something that boils down to an issue of trust. 
And it certainly appears that the member from Regina South 
doesn’t understand that. 
 
The government, they’re asking us as the official opposition, 
trust us. Be a part of this all-party committee. Trust us. We will 
respect your input. We will respect your views. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as has been very eloquently detailed by a 
number of our members, that government has admitted that 
they’ve used, abused, and manipulated the all-party process. 
But even after having admitted that, now they’re sitting back 
and saying once again, but this time it’s okay; this time please, 
please trust us. 
 
They’re saying the very same thing to the communities of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. They’re saying to the communities, 
we’ve virtually devastated you folks out there. We have 
removed so many of those essential services from your 
communities, and particularly with health care reform, the 53 
hospitals that are constantly referred to. 
 
But in the case of one particular community, Mr. Speaker, I 
look at Carrot River, right in the heart of Carrot River Valley. 
And I look at what this government has done to that 
community. Over the course of the last 10 years, Mr. Speaker, 
they have removed from that community the SaskPower office, 
the SaskTel office, the Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management office, the Crop Insurance office, the 
Highway’s yard depot, the rural service centre, and, Mr. 
Speaker, March 3, 2000, they removed their hospital. 
 
And now they turn around to the people of Carrot River and 

they say, trust us, trust us. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that the 
level of trust that people can have in this government has 
evaporated. It no longer exists. 
 
We’ve seen all sorts of situations, Mr. Speaker, and once again, 
I will refer to Carrot River, to the town of Carrot River, a 
community that had a long and proud history of delivering 
quality health care services in their own community. Going 
back to July 3 . . . July 30 — excuse me — of 1935 when they 
opened the Mitchell Memorial Hospital. It was a hospital 
operated by the United Church of Canada. It was named in 
honour of the Mitchell sisters of Ontario, who left a sum of 
money to the church for hospital development anywhere in 
Canada. That was their first facility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1950, the Carrot River Union Hospital was constructed — a 
12-bed hospital, and nurses’ residence. In 1960, it was 
renovated and expanded to 20 beds. 
 
And all the while that this community was building and 
developing, Mr. Speaker, a neighbouring community, 
Arborfield, was doing exactly the same thing. They were 
building their health care services through volunteerism, local 
contributions, the hard work, the very hard work on a lot of 
occasions of local individuals. 
 
But with health care reform, Mr. Speaker, this government went 
to the community of Arborfield and they said, we would like 
you to think about closing your hospital. We would like you to 
think about that. They were saying that they couldn’t continue 
to operate the hospital . . . to contribute towards the operation of 
the hospital in Arborfield. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Well the people of Arborfield, Mr. Speaker, looked at the 
situation. They understood that they had Carrot River, the 
community that had built a tremendous infrastructure of 
services in their community, fairly close by. And they thought 
about the responsibilities that they had to the province. And, 
Mr. Speaker, they agreed — they agreed — to their hospital 
being closed. 
 
And when they agreed with this government to close their 
hospital, they only asked one thing, only one thing. Would the 
hospital in Carrot River remain for them and the people of their 
area? This government said yes, Mr. Speaker. They said yes, it 
would. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we now know better. We know that it isn’t 
there any more, that it was closed. And you would then in turn 
ask the people of Arborfield to trust this government? I don’t 
think so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also look at the Carrot River hospital that was just recently 
closed, when it was originally built. It was opened in 1991, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ll all remember that the Blakeney government 
was in power at the time. And when the community was 
negotiating with the government for funding . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . ’81, 1981 the Blakeney government was in 
power, Mr. Speaker. And the community was negotiating with 
the government on the funding and what it might take in order 
to maintain the hospital. 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1357 

 

The community and the community leaders, Mr. Speaker, at 
that time said, perhaps what we should be doing is looking into 
the future. Perhaps if we’re going to build a new hospital, we 
should build it near the nursing home. Perhaps we should have 
the two facilities relatively close together; there might be some 
benefit to that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Blakeney bureaucrats said no, you can’t 
do that — impossible; silliest notion we ever heard of; 
absolutely silly, can’t be done. They ended up, Mr. Speaker, 
getting the people of Carrot River to build that hospital literally 
on the other side of town. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even after communities have attempted to think 
into the future, to think ahead, to make significant 
contributions, after they have willingly agreed — in the case of 
Arborfield — to the closure of their own hospital, they still are, 
Mr. Speaker, being left in a situation where health care in the 
communities is no longer dependable. We’ve seen many, many 
examples of that. 
 
Last August in my constituency, we had a young man with 
appendicitis, a 17-year-old man, Mr. Speaker, who described 
his experience as a horrifying brush with the NDP health care 
system in this province. 
 
This was a result of this young man having appendicitis, being 
rushed to the hospital in Nipawin, Mr. Speaker, but on a 
weekend, on a weekend in August, when every single operating 
room in northeast Saskatchewan was closed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for all of the sacrifices that these communities 
have made, for their willingness to contribute to the well-being 
of health care in general, what have been . . . what has 
happened? What have they been shown? They have been shown 
total disregard by this government. They have been . . . But yet 
here they are again; they’re being asked to trust them once 
again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it very, very frustrating, and I think most 
communities do, that we have embarked on the Fyke 
Commission, a tremendous amount of money was spent, and 
now here we are again, as other members have indicated, 
embarking on a study upon a study, a commission on the 
commission. 
 
I don’t think one has to go too far, Mr. Speaker, in order to be 
able to understand how people feel and how they think about 
health care in this province and what they feel they want and 
they need. 
 
Just the other day, Mr. Speaker, I got a letter from Joy and 
Edgar Aspen of Tisdale. And, Mr. Speaker, if I could, I would 
like to read a little bit of this letter because it talks pretty 
eloquently about some of the sacrifices that communities made 
in terms of developing health care in this province. 
 
It talks about where people, in the case of Mr. and Mrs. Aspen, 
feel that they’re at today. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a couple 
from Tisdale. They sat down, they wrote a letter, and, Mr. 
Speaker, not only are they able to detail their needs and provide 
some perspective on it, but they are also able to provide some 
suggestions, Mr. Speaker, as to how health care might be 

improved in this province. 
 
So if I could, Mr. Speaker, I would start by reading: 
 

I am writing with regard to the Ken Fyke report on health 
care in Saskatchewan, with special emphasis as it pertains 
to the Pasquia Health District. 
 
My husband and I moved from Porcupine Plain to Tisdale 
nearly three years ago, based largely on the availability of 
medical care and the proximity to a hospital. If the 
recommendations of this commission are followed, we may 
be without local doctor care and also much reduced 
hospital care. 
 
Many of the hospitals which may be closed were not totally 
government-funded. The plaques on the walls of these 
buildings bear testimony to only some of the local funding 
and volunteer work. 
 
In the 1920s and ’30s my parents farmed in the area 
north-east of Porcupine Plain and some 14 miles from the 
nearest town. If we required medical care we had to board 
the once-a-week Friday train to get to Tisdale. 
 
When the Porcupine/Carragana union hospital was built 
and staffed, great advancements were made. And we then 
had the care of two capable doctors and a dedicated nursing 
staff. If that hospital had not been functioning, our eldest 
son would not have survived. He had allergies and very bad 
asthma — no time for an 80-kilometre-plus drive. Many 
weeks during the winter months we kept two vehicles 
plugged in just to be certain that one would start should we 
need to drive him to emergency care. 
 
In the early 1960s, a 14-year-old nephew was shot in the 
abdomen in a hunting accident. He was rushed to the 
Porcupine Hospital where doctors removed his spleen. The 
doctors had decided correctly that he would never stand the 
trip to a larger hospital, and during the operation it was 
discovered that peritonitis had already set in. He recovered 
well. 
 
I too would probably not be alive had it not been for the 
knowledgeable care of one of these doctors when I 
developed cancer. You may say but some other doctor 
would surely have diagnosed it, but I know that had I 
waited longer to go to Saskatoon on my own the cancer 
would most certainly have progressed too far. 
 
Mr. Fyke’s report would close these options to 
Saskatchewan citizens. We all realize costs are rising, but 
costs could be cut. To name a few ways, number one, use 
your computer systems to check persons who are 
double-doctoring and getting prescriptions. 
 
Number two, doctors could reduce office visits by using 
their phones to inform patients of results of such things as 
regular blood tests, et cetera. 
 
Number three, reduce the number of persons in 
administration, especially on health district boards. 
Consider more representation by the professionals on these 



1358 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

boards. After all, they are the persons most familiar with 
the faults and the needs within the system. 
 
Make more not less use of facilities and operating rooms in 
hospitals in smaller centres by bringing in specialists as is 
all ready being done in Tisdale. 

 
A report in our local paper quoted one of these specialists 
saying: 

 
The operating room here was comparable to those in city 
hospitals. Why not make more use of this and other 
facilities, and perhaps, open up some of the unused rooms 
in this hospital? 
 
City hospitals are already bogged down with the long lines 
of patients waiting for care. And often patients who are 
transferred from other centres have to wait for treatment. 
Trips via ambulance for any ill person are torture. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this was just a short excerpt from the letter of Joy 
and Edgar Aspen. But I think it very, very well explains how 
the people of rural Saskatchewan feel when it comes to health 
care in this province. They’ve made some tremendous sacrifices 
over the years to build this system, Mr. Speaker, and they 
continue to make those sacrifices. But this government hasn’t 
respected any of that and they continue — continue — to let 
these people down. 
 
Another community, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency that has 
some very serious concerns about the Fyke Commission report 
is the community of Hudson Bay. And recently I received a 
letter from Sharon Wood, RN (registered nurse), community 
health manager for the Hudson Bay health care facility. And I’d 
like to read a part of that as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 

I am writing this letter with my concerns re: Mr. Ken 
Fyke’s Commission on Medicare released April 2001. 
Although I do agree there are several of the 
recommendations that could improve the quality of our 
health care system, I have some grave concerns for rural 
Saskatchewan and in particular, my community, Hudson 
Bay. 
 
As a member of the Pasquia Health District, we have been 
providing quality care to our residents without running a 
deficit and feel we have been penalized for it. We are a 
community of 2,400 located in the northeast corner of the 
province. 
 
Forestry, farming, and the tourism industry all play major 
roles in our community. We are situated 116 kilometres 
from Tisdale, 156 kilometres from Melfort, and 330 
kilometres from Saskatoon. This can mean 75 minutes to 3 
hours and 30 minutes driving time. 

 
In the letter, Mr. Speaker, Sharon Wood goes on to describe the 
kinds of services that are provided and asks many, many 
questions about how those services would continue to be 
provided and the consequences of them not being provided in a 
community, particularly a community like Hudson Bay that is 
slightly remote and that is the centre of a very high risk 
industry, Mr. Speaker. 

As you are well aware, the forestry industry in Hudson Bay has 
been the largest part of the economy there now for the better 
part of the last 50 years. And in Hudson Bay, Mr. Speaker, they 
at one point have had three operating plants. And they need 
some reassurance that they are going to have access to 
immediate, quality health care in Hudson Bay if those industries 
are going to continue to operate in that community and continue 
to create the economic development that we so badly need in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think what we are trying to illustrate is 
that given the comments of the government over the course of 
the last couple of days, it appears that none of this input, 
whether it be from the official opposition, Mr. Speaker, or 
whether it be from individuals like Sharon Wood or Joy and 
Edgar Aspen, is going to matter at the end of the day at all. 
 
This government appears to have a plan. They appear to have an 
idea of how they want this to look and they are going to go 
ahead with that regardless of the input that they get. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting in favour of the amendment 
and against the motion. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to get up 
to address this motion and the amendment. 
 
There’s one amendment that I would really like to address on it 
and that is: 

 
. . . the committee (to) be obligated to conduct hearings in 
any community where conversion or closure of health care 
facilities is recommended; 

 
And I strongly believe in that. The member from Regina South 
said if we’re to get out . . . and he wants us to listen to people. 
 
Well they should get out in the communities where these 
hospitals are going to be closed. He could have came with me to 
Outlook on May 22, where there was a room, a hall full of 
people there that were looking at talking about the 
recommendations of Fyke. And, Mr. Speaker, none of them 
were very happy with it. 
 
On that meeting there, I looked around and there were people in 
wheelchairs, older people that probably wouldn’t be able to 
come here to address this legislature, but yet have great 
concerns as with all members do and the members opposite. 
 
Health care is a very big issue to the people out here in 
Saskatchewan. It’s probably one of the biggest issues out here. 
And when we’re discussing it, it should be out in the city and in 
the rural, equally, both ways. 
 
(16:00) 
 
When I talk to some of my constituents up there, Fyke never 
came through. They never got a chance to meet with him. Yes, 
they could have sent him a letter. They don’t know if he read it 
or not. There was no chance to meet with him. Now they’re 
setting up this committee, same thing, Mr. Speaker — no 
chance to meet with him. 
 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1359 

 

Another comment the member from Regina South had made 
about scripted responses back from our . . . I think he called 
them researchers. Well I’ll be reading from some stuff, but this 
is from the constituents that were at that meeting, Mr. Speaker, 
because I want to get it right. I want to . . . I know that knowing 
this government, they’re probably going to defeat this 
amendment so this may be the only chance that they get to raise 
their concerns. 
 
In that hall there was well over 200 people, Mr. Speaker, at that 
time that have very great concerns with that report. The agenda 
that was chosen that day by the health board officials was 21 
major . . . the 21 recommendations were viewed that evening. 
And basically, few of them were received with any possible . . . 
or any of them were received with any . . . basically a lack of 
response. Most people were very unhappy with them all. 
 
One of the foremost concerns that the recommendation on the 
number of hospitals in Saskatchewan be severely cut and 
services reduced, person after person — from nurses and 
doctors to the average health care user — expressed their worry 
that they would lose their facility completely or at the very least 
have their services cut to a level which they would consider a 
band-aid station. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I get into the questions that arose from this 
meeting, I want to talk for a moment about the majority . . . 
about what the majority of the people at this meeting had to say 
about the current Standing Committee on Health Care. They 
regarded it as another study, as repetitive and unnecessary. And 
persons that got up to the mike basically said that time after 
time after time. 
 
Further they indicated that a committee, like I talked before, 
based in Regina will do little to address the concerns of rural 
residents who are most affected by the proposals of Mr. Fyke’s 
report. Residents in communities such as Craik, Davidson, 
Outlook, Rosetown, Imperial — they’re greatly concerned 
about these recommendations because they are the ones that are 
going to be most affected by them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to try and outline to the members here 
today some of the questions that were asked and the nature of 
the answers. Or I should say the lack of answers that were 
provided to them because basically even the board officials, 
when asked about a lot of the questions, were saying, I don’t 
know, we’re unsure of that, or we’re not sure what that means. 
 
People were disgusted basically with the complexity of the 
terms that seemed to be found out throughout this report, that 
were very vague and misleading to them. Primary health service 
teams were suggested in the report. People wanted to know 
what is the definition of teams? How are these teams to be put 
together in relation to the shortage of health care professionals 
in this province? And basically the answer was, from the board, 
we’re unsure. 
 
Integrating teams into a primary health network was also 
discussed. It was met with the comment that central dispatching 
is completely inadequate and that the ambulance service 
provided to rural residents could be very costly for people to 
use even emergency situations. 
 

And it was also brought up about no cell coverage in a lot of my 
areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when residents ask questions about converting 
small existing hospitals into primary health centres, there was 
understandable concern and anger that this is the beginning of 
the end for their community hospital. As most of the residents 
were from Outlook and Rosetown, of course, they were 
concerned about their hospitals. 
 
They asked questions about what would happen to their 
hospitals in the district and what would be the cost involved in 
building a new facility if it was designated a primary health 
centre? 
 
They also wondered that if hospitals are going to be cut, how 
are people going to access health care without going miles and 
miles away to get that immediate health care? 
 
And they wondered that if accessibility is going to be an issue, 
then the health care industry must look at communication, 
especially in regards to poor service of cellular phones, which 
in my constituency pretty well covers it all except the only 
place I have coverage, I tell the members opposite, is up and 
down No. 11 Highway. You go off in any direction off No. 11 
Highway in my constituency and there is very spotty cell 
coverage on that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the residents also at this meeting are rightly 
worried that if health care facilities are cut and they have to 
travel further to receive medical attention and emergency 
service, what guarantees do they have they will receive the 
necessary medical attention? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s easy for health officials to say that the health 
care system in our province can be adjusted this way or that 
way and still ensure comprehensive service 24 hours a day. The 
reality is that distances, circumstances, weather, and all the 
variables involved in each case make this a far more complex 
issue than applying a new title to our hospitals and then cutting 
the services provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, person after person came to that microphone 
saying bluntly that three main hospitals in Saskatoon, Regina, 
and Prince Albert will not serve the people in rural 
Saskatchewan adequately. They won’t even be able to serve the 
people in the cities adequately. The waiting lists will just grow. 
 
And then they talked about the lack of health care professionals, 
experiencing the long waiting lists for surgery and testing that 
already exists in our major centres. If that’s not addressed and 
you close these hospitals, that’s just going to keep expanding 
here in the urban centres. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, over and over as this meeting 
progressed, the answers provided by the board members were 
regarded as unclear and inadequate. And I’m not blaming the 
board members on it because they were trying to read from the 
report and tried to determine what direction Fyke was going in 
certain things. And like you said, it was very vague. So when I 
make a statement like that, I’m not running down the board 
members. They were just being truthful. They, themselves — 
and they’re part of the health care system — could not answer 



1360 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

the majority of the questions in that report. 
 
The board members insisted that they could not stay within 
their budget if people wanted all services to remain in their 
communities. Response to the board was they would represent 
the views of the people and to ensure that services remain 
viable. But the board would only indicate that a fairer 
distribution of health care dollars is needed. 
 
And another thing that . . . everybody that came up to the mike, 
same thing, administration, are greatly concerned about that. It 
seems like Fyke is even going to expand that a little more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people were also dismayed when the report 
indicated that contracting with specialists would be the 
direction that is needed. Residents stated that with the present 
nursing shortages and doctors’ shortages that this is the main 
focus that we should be taking, that recruitment is urgent, and 
education of our young people in the health sciences area is 
imperative. 
 
Further, residents indicated that there must be in place a better 
way to retain our health care graduates rather than lose them to 
better paying jobs in other provinces and to the United States. 
Residents continued by saying that recruitment is presently very 
difficult with the health care system in the . . . the way it is right 
now, Mr. Speaker. They said that the health care workers in 
Saskatchewan are under terrible stress and these difficult 
conditions do not make it attractive to any of the new 
perspective applicants to our health care system. 
 
And many of them comments were made from the nurses and 
doctors in the hospitals. In fact every nurse that got up from the 
Outlook/Rosetown area and Davidson basically made that same 
statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I have been trying to illustrate to the 
members today is that the feeling of rural residents to the Fyke 
Commission report is not favourable. These public town hall 
meetings are where you will get the most sincere response from 
people who are generally concerned about our health care 
system — whether it be in the rural area or in the urban area — 
because I don’t think you’ll get a lot of city people even coming 
here to talk if you had them out even in your city halls. 
 
People are disappointed in the answers they’re getting from the 
government and their health board members, and they wish to 
be heard. That was the biggest concern, listening to the people 
out there was, they feel this government isn’t listening to their 
concerns out there. And having the meetings just here in Regina 
just seems to reinforce that to them. 
 
And I have to agree with them. I can’t defend this government 
saying if you’re going to close a hospital in Outlook or 
Rosetown, why wouldn’t you at least have a meeting there to 
talk to the residents and discuss it there rather than up here in 
Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They expressed very strong opinions time after time at the mike 
that the current government is proceeding on course to further 
dismantle small-town Saskatchewan by reducing their health 
care facilities down to what they call band-aid stations. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these people want to be heard. They want to be 
made . . . they want to be heard by the people who make the 
direct decisions on the future of their health care system. And 
that’s you people over there — the government side. Because 
when it comes right down to it, we all know that when you 
decide something, it’s you that’s going to . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Would the member 
please phrase all comments to the Chair and through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker. I will do that from now on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that the standing committee 
conduct hearings throughout rural Saskatchewan, right 
throughout the summer, and that their findings be submitted as 
soon as possible so that change, positive change, can happen 
very soon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people over all of Saskatchewan want clearer 
answers and not vague statements by the Fyke report or by 
board members which many people at that small — I shouldn’t 
say small because it was a huge meeting and Outlook’s a fair 
size — at that town hall meeting stated, we’re simply an arm of 
the government and not a truly representative board that would 
listen to them. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will not support the motion but I 
will support the amendment brought forth by our members over 
here. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 
this debate this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to speak to the issue of 
the terms of reference that have been given to the standing 
committee. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we’ve heard from a number of the 
speakers here who tried to reflect from their own critic areas, 
but perhaps, most importantly, from their own constituencies, 
their concern for the reference as it has been laid out in the 
original motion. 
 
I think there is some skepticism on this side of the House, some 
skepticism about the government’s intention for this committee. 
And I think some of that skepticism was borne out on Friday 
last with the speeches from two future members of that standing 
committee — one, the Minister of Education, and the other, the 
future Chair of the committee I believe, the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that you could characterize or summarize 
the comments that both of them made this way. That the 
government seems to have concluded that the Fyke report is the 
way to go and that they intend on moving in that direction 
notwithstanding some commitment they’ve made to this hearing 
process that they wish to have. And I think that’s cause for 
some concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the reason why you’re 
hearing it on this side of the House. 
 
But I would like to address a few other reasons for the 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1361 

 

skepticism that I would personally have, and I’d like to address 
those concerns specifically as it relates to the experience of the 
constituency of Swift Current with this government on matters 
of health care. And I think you will see why my constituents, 
the people back home and myself, would share that skepticism 
about the government’s intention and would be skeptical that 
indeed the government has come to its own conclusions, and so 
that this committee is nothing more than a political exercise 
they wish to go to, to study the study and then wind up 
implementing it. 
 
We also hear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Saskatchewan Health in 
fact already has implementation committees set up related to 
Fyke. Now where I come from, that sounds like there are 
committees being set up to implement the Fyke report prior to 
the hearings that this government says it wishes to have through 
the Standing Committee on Health Care. 
 
Maybe that’s not the exact technical term, maybe that’s not the 
exact technical term, but I understand that these implementation 
committees either have been struck or are being struck to 
implement the Fyke report. And that further causes us some 
grave concern about the genuineness of this process that we’re 
about to undertake with the Standing Committee on Health 
Care. 
 
And there are some specific Swift Current issues I’d like to 
address that also give us cause to be skeptical of the 
government’s intentions in this regard. And they stem from the 
experience that we’ve had with this government with two 
different ministers, the two most recent Health ministers, the 
current one and his predecessor, as regards health care. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, earlier this year I wrote to both ministers, 
to the former minister of Health, and then a subsequent letter to 
the current Minister of Health, to express grave concern with 
the situation in Swift Current, with the health care situation at 
the Swift Current Regional Hospital where bed closures were 
causing severe difficulties for health care professionals to 
deliver the kind of service that they want to deliver to the 
residents of Swift Current and, indeed, all of southwest 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so they raised concerns with me, did these health care 
professionals, as did many people in the constituency who had 
experienced the lack of quality health care from the hospital for 
some time. And I in turn raised them with the ministers of 
Health. 
 
The most recent effort took place in early March, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when I raised the concerns with the Minister of 
Health, the current Minister of Health, about the closure of beds 
and the impact that that was having in Swift Current. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the minister’s 
response was that I was fearmongering. That what was causing 
the difficulty at the Swift Current hospital was a weekend 
outbreak of bronchitis. 
 
Here was his quote, Mr. Speaker. This is what the then Minister 
of Health had to say about the legitimate concerns raised in 

Swift Current on the closure of beds. He said — this is the 
Minister of Health — he said: 
 

“Unfortunately this weekend they had a few extra bouts of 
elderly people with bronchitis and had to use the beds 
designated for day surgeries on an emergency basis, which 
led to the cancellation of elective surgeries. Now those 
cancellations caused a concern (Mr. Deputy Speaker),” said 
Nilson. 

 
And that’s a quote from The Southwest Booster, our paper in 
Swift Current and area, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
That’s what the minister said. We raised sincere concerns on 
behalf of patients, on behalf of health care professionals. He 
said, well it was just an outbreak of bronchitis. This despite the 
fact that we let the media and the government know that one 
gentleman in particular this winter reported to the emergency 
unit of the Swift Current hospital, from the constituency of my 
colleague, the member for Cypress Hills — this gentleman lives 
in Gull Lake — and he went to the emergency room. And the 
attending physician looked at him and he had a temperature that 
was at a dangerously high level. 
 
And the doctor basically admitted that this man should be in the 
hospital. But there were no beds, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so would 
he go check in to a local motel — this is the request they made 
of him — would he go and check in to a local motel and come 
in for intermittent treatment for his fever. That is the minor 
inconvenience that this outbreak of bronchitis caused, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
What did the doctors of Swift Current say when they heard the 
Minister of Health incredibly make this statement? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the doctors today will be skeptical of this 
government’s motion on Fyke, because here’s what they had to 
say about the Minister of Health’s writing all of this episode off 
to an outbreak of bronchitis. 
 
And this is also quoting from The Southwest Booster, March 3, 
2001, in an article with the headline called “Critical bed 
shortage at regional hospital compromising patient care, says 
doctors.” I’m quoting now, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

The local association of family physicians says that 
shortage of acute care beds at the Swift Current Regional 
Hospital is critical and compromising patient care including 
that of expectant mothers and babies. 
 

That’s what the association of family physicians had to say. 
And they responded to the minister’s assertion, Mr. Speaker, 
that this was just a problem generated by a few extra cases of 
bronchitis in February. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s what Dr. Rajmohamed, the chief of family 
medicine at Swift Current Regional Hospital had to say about 
the Minister of Health’s assertion, quote: 
 

I was extremely surprised to hear that. 
 

Reference the minister’s comment on bronchitis. And I’ll 
continue the quote: 
 



1362 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

“Certainly no discussion had come out in the hospital 
regarding an epidemic of bronchitis,” said Dr. 
Rajmohamed, chief of family medicine at the Swift Current 
Regional Hospital. 

 
That is why people in Swift Current are skeptical of this 
government when it comes to health care. That is why they’re 
certainly skeptical about the motion that is before us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, I can tell you that, 
notwithstanding the minister’s assurances that this problem 
would eventually go away because after all it was just caused 
by a bronchitis outbreak which our local doctors and nurses and 
patients knew not to be true, despite that fact, the problem exists 
today. 
 
There is a still a shortage of beds, Mr. Speaker. There is still a 
problem. We still have long-term care patients taking up acute 
care patients. We still have acute care patients being transferred 
up to maternity. We still have new mothers . . . or new babies 
and mothers being sent home prematurely because they need to 
make way in the maternity ward for acute care beds. That’s the 
situation today at the Swift Current Regional Hospital, and that 
is why people are skeptical when it comes to this government’s 
commitment to health care. 
 
The other reason that they’re skeptical is the reason that I 
reference every single day so far of this session when you 
afford us the opportunity to present petitions, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
stood in my place and presented petitions that when I’m 
finished will total over 6,000 signators calling on this 
government to carefully consider — it doesn’t sound like an 
extreme request to me — to carefully consider Swift Current’s 
request for a new regional hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our hospital was built in 1948. It hasn’t had a 
meaningful capital improvement since 1971 when I was six 
years old. And in order to, in part, help accommodate some of 
the concerns that are being raised by our physician associations 
and our local chapter of SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses), 
we are calling on this government to give what is due Swift 
Current, and that is careful consideration of its request for a 
new hospital. 
 
And that seems to be falling on deaf years in two successive 
budgets. Rather, beds are being closed, Mr. Speaker. Beds are 
being closed. Another reason for people to be skeptical about 
this government’s intentions. 
 
And I just want to also highlight very, very quickly another 
reason why we might be a little bit leery about this 
government’s commitment and the terms of reference that they 
would like to give to the Standing Committee on Health Care 
we’re debating here today. 
 
And it relates to the Committee of the Whole proceedings we 
had when Mr. Fyke appeared before the bar and was here to 
answer questions. And my understanding was the same as all of 
the members on this side of the House — that we would all be 
afforded the opportunity to question Mr. Fyke. 
 
And almost all of the members here I believe, Mr. Speaker, on 
this side had gone back to their constituencies, had called back 

home and talked to their local health care professionals, people 
that had an interest in health care, and said, if you had 10 
minutes alone with Mr. Fyke, what would you ask him, because 
we would like to do that for you. 
 
I certainly did. I know many members opposite did. And we 
waited patiently for our chance to put those questions — not 
political questions, not contrived questions on our part — 
questions from nurses and from doctors, Mr. Speaker . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member for Regina 
Elphinstone yells from his seat that I should check Hansard 
about the questions that were asked. And here’s a bit of a news 
flash for him. I didn’t get to ask any questions, Mr. Speaker, 
because the House Leader cut off the proceedings that night. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — I didn’t ask one single question that the nurses in 
Swift Current and the doctors had carefully offered for our 
consideration. 
 
And I just want to review them, some of them, very quickly, not 
all of them. Here’s some notes from the local SUN president in 
Swift Current. These are just comments I’ll just briefly read into 
the record if I may, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Looking at the map of Southwest, Swift Current should be 
the regional hospital. 

 
There’s a bit of a pause and they say they’re very concerned 
about Swift Current being situated in a district with Moose Jaw. 
That was just a concern they had; they wanted Mr. Fyke to 
comment because his configuration of regions in both cases had 
us with Moose Jaw. 
 

What about diagnostic equipment such as the CAT scan in 
Swift Current? If we’re in a district with Moose Jaw, would 
this equipment all go to Moose Jaw? 

 
That’s a fair question from the local chapter. Here’s another 
one: 
 

As they close the smaller hospitals, how is this going to 
reduce the waiting list; i.e. patients would receive treatment 
in Regina, but would they have to stay in Regina for five 
weeks for rehab or would the patient be sent home or what? 

 
These are all from SUN. And finally they ask: 
 

Nurses are also really concerned in Swift Current with 
long-term care in particular, and what about mental health? 
The feeling is that psychiatric and mental health services 
are being left out. 
 

That was another question they had for Mr. Fyke. 
 
And the association of physicians in Swift Current, led by Dr. 
Rajmohamed, also made a point of sending me very many 
questions, some of them very similar. Some of them concerned 
about our co-location with Moose Jaw in the same region. Some 
speaking to the dire need for a new facility in Swift Current, 
and what were Fyke’s implications on the new facility for Swift 
Current. Some concerned about this whole process of 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1363 

 

diagnosing patients and primary medical teams. 
 
The doctors . . . the physicians’ association, as given voice by 
their president — by the president, Dr. Rajmohamed — had 
very good questions to ask. And I intended to ask those 
questions on their behalf to Mr. Fyke, but the evening’s 
proceedings were cut off, Mr. Speaker, by the government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 
House Leader yells from his seat it was cut off after six and a 
half hours. I would tell you on behalf of the nurses of the local 
chapter of SUN and also on behalf of our physician association, 
that if it took all night we should have stayed and asked those 
questions on their behalf, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we all get 
paid in this place in the first place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s why we get paid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude with these remarks. I want to 
conclude, Mr. Speaker, that we have grave, grave concerns 
about the real purpose behind these terms of reference. We have 
grave concerns about the real intent of this government, that it’s 
just a political exercise, this committee and these hearings. And 
we have a right to have that concern, Mr. Speaker, based on 
their past action, based on their record. 
 
And the people of Swift Current, those who need health care 
and those who deliver it, the nurses and the doctors and other 
health care professionals, Mr. Speaker, they have a right to be 
skeptical. 
 
And I am glad to give voice to that skepticism today by telling 
you, Mr. Speaker, that I will be voting against the motion and in 
favour of the amendment. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to stand here before the House today to speak 
to the particular motion, and the amendment that has been 
presented by the opposition to the motion of the government 
concerning the referral of the Fyke committee report to the 
Standing Committee on Health Care. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the reason I’m so pleased to stand here today 
is because I did not get a chance to stand and speak and ask 
questions of Mr. Fyke when he was here for a special 
presentation some weeks ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must say that the way the members of the 
government side heckle and speak and defend that situation, 
suggests to me loud and clear, that they’ve already got their 
minds made up. They have decided to support Mr. Fyke no 
matter what happens, and the recommendations from his report. 
I have to take that assumption from the performance that they 
provided so far in the House today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Swift Current said earlier that 
the people of his community of the city of Swift Current are 

maybe skeptical and leery about the recommendations of Mr. 
Fyke. I’d have to say, Mr. Speaker, that as you go west, the 
response of the people is even more onerous. 
 
I would say that, as opposed to being purely skeptical, there is a 
cynicism in the area of Cypress Hills about the 
recommendations that have been brought forward by Mr. Fyke. 
In fact, it might even go beyond cynicism. If those 
recommendations are implemented, it will strike fear into the 
hearts of the people of Cypress Hills. And I’ll explain why. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the state of Missouri is known as the 
show-me state. The people down there are very, very conscious 
of having been misled. They want evidence. They want proof 
that what you tell them is right. 
 
The people of Cypress Hills have become the show-me people 
of Saskatchewan, because they’ve heard this song and dance 
before. We went through it in 1993. We saw the wellness model 
introduced and were told many times that this would produce a 
much more effective health care system, that service delivery 
would be enhanced, that the benefits to the people would be 
tremendous compared to what we experienced previous to that. 
 
We were told that ad nauseam, Mr. Speaker. We heard it so 
often it made us gag. The reality is . . . The reality, Mr. Speaker, 
is that health care has not improved in the Southwest. What we 
did get out of that frankly was the loss of three hospitals. We 
had three communities that went from hospitals to community 
care centres or what is known as health care centres under the 
current regime. Hospitals were lost in Eastend, in Cabri, and in 
Gull Lake. 
 
There are two remaining hospitals in my constituency, in the 
community of Leader and the community of Maple Creek, but 
they’re hospitals in name only. They don’t do much in those 
hospitals. They don’t have very many active beds; they don’t 
have very many services. They don’t have a lot that they can 
offer as a “hospital”. So really what they are is just glorified 
band-aid stations as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I read through the Fyke Commission report and I 
heard a lot of lofty goals being espoused. I heard of wonderful 
sentiments being expressed. I saw all kinds of extrapolation for 
benefits for the province as a whole being indicated by that 
report. But you know I never saw any evidence. I didn’t see 
evidence. I saw lots of ideas and concepts and the promises of 
all sorts of improvements, but not a single shred of evidence. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Cypress Hills, having gone 
through this kind of exercise in 1993, having lost hospitals and 
the threat of more hospitals to come, they want evidence. 
 
If Mr. Fyke could have provided at least one concrete way in 
which we would get better health care, improved delivery, 
effective service provided throughout that vast region, there 
may have been some mitigating response that the people of 
Cypress Hills could have offered. But they look at this report 
and they said, we’ve been there, we’ve done that. We’re not 
buying any platitudes; we’re not buying any pie in the sky 
again. We’ve been burned by it once before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened to the Minister of Education, the 
member from Saskatoon Northwest and the former associate 



1364 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

minister of Health and I believe to be the future Chair of this 
committee. I listened to them make their presentations on behalf 
of the motion presented by the government. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And I would have to say that any clear indication of variance 
from support, full support for the Fyke report, was not 
represented in their speeches. It was as clear as could be that 
they believe that the Fyke Commission offers a blueprint for 
radical change, for necessary change in their view, but radical 
change to the health care system that we know of in this 
province. 
 
And if that’s the case — if that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, I can 
understand why the people of Cypress Hills and the people on 
the opposition benches are so concerned about whether or not 
the commission that is going to be struck to review Fyke, the 
Standing Committee on Health Care, has any chance of 
impartiality or coming up with a fair and equitable solution. 
 
Are we going to invite people to attend this committee, to make 
presentations, only to be sent home without a fair hearing? Are 
we going to get a balanced result as a matter of fact? Are we 
going to have these individuals come and make their 
presentations and have them especially expound on the 
recommendations as they affect their sectors of the health care 
providers for this province and leave frustrated? 
 
Is there any chance of an impartial, balanced report coming out 
of this exercise? Mr. Speaker, I think not. And for that reason I 
would not be able to support the government’s motion. 
 
I would like to take a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, to refer to the 
questions that came from health care providers in my 
constituency which they wished me to ask Mr. Fyke about, and 
the opportunity, of course, which was not made available to me. 
These questions, I think, are direct, I think they’re explicit, and 
they should not be denigrated in any way because they come 
from actual health care providers, people in administration, and 
at the street level of health care provision. 
 
This first question actually came from one of the CEOs of one 
of the health districts that are represented in my constituency. 
And the CEO goes on to say, after some other introductory 
remarks, primary health teams have been identified as the first 
line of services that would provide, among other things, 
diagnosis and treatment of common illnesses or injury. 
 
The recommendations suggest a network of primary health 
teams supported by primary health centres and community care 
centres. This would suggest that emergency services would be 
available at these sites. The question is, if so, what will they be? 
The greater issue may be the number and location of 
community care centres for respite, convalescent, and palliative 
care. 
 
Now if we consider an area west of the No. 4 Highway which 
runs north and south of Swift Current, south of the South 
Saskatchewan River, one could suggest that community care 
centres should be located in the communities of Cabri, Leader, 
Maple Creek, Shaunavon, and perhaps the community of 
Eastend — that’s a total of five. There would be approximately 

11 such areas in the province of similar size, just looking at the 
overall geographic dimensions of the region. 
 
If this density of facilities is appropriate to provide adequate 
access as close to home as possible, then one could conceivably 
need 55 such locations to cover the southern part of the 
province. When we talk about the southern part of the province 
we’re excluding the areas of the far North which would be 
Athabasca and Cumberland constituencies. 
 
Mr. Fyke is suggesting a top number of 30 such locations. So if 
you add to this the number of regional hospitals that he 
proposed at a maximum of 14, that still leaves us considerably 
short of facilities to service adequately the entire geographical 
area in this province. 
 
In keeping with the suggestions in the report, we — and he’s 
speaking of the area of Cypress Hills — should only have three 
in the communities of Cabri, Eastend, and Shaunavon. Now 
those three communities are already serviced by what they call 
integrated facilities. According to Mr. Fyke, we should also 
have one regional hospital. But having listened to the member 
from Swift Current just previous, it doesn’t sound to me like the 
hospital in Swift Current is exactly up to the standards required 
to call it an adequate regional hospital. So this would leave 
huge areas without access to services in the region of Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at the recommendations in the Fyke 
Commission, I am convinced that if they were followed exactly 
as he is proposing, there will not be a single hospital in the 
entire constituency of Cypress Hills — not a single hospital. 
There may be primary health centres, there may be community 
care centres, but there will not be a single hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the level of service required . . . to be provided by 
a hospital for the entire constituency of Cypress Hills will be 
Medicine Hat, Alberta. That constituency is the largest one in 
the entire province, outside of Cumberland and Athabasca in 
the far North, you know, 10,900 square miles. And we won’t 
have a single hospital in our constituency. For some people the 
closest hospital would be Swift Current, but for the vast 
majority of people it will be Medicine Hat, Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that there’s something, some element of 
shame that ought to be attributed to that particular fact. I know 
you can’t have a hospital in every small community; there isn’t 
anybody who believes that any more. But to have an area that 
large without adequate hospital services is just unacceptable, 
quite frankly, and it’s very worrisome for the people of Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things, one of the situations, one of the 
facts overlooked in all of this discussion, frankly, is one that 
caught my attention just recently. I understand that about 80 per 
cent — it might be a number slightly smaller than that — but 
about 80 per cent of the senior citizens in this province live in 
communities outside the major urban areas. When the 
Government of Canada sends their old age pension cheques to 
Saskatchewan, about 80 per cent of them go to communities 
outside of Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
It is a fact that senior citizens are more concerned about the 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1365 

 

adequacy and the availability of health care services. It’s also a 
fact that as we concentrate the major health provisions in the 
urban centres, we put the health and the concerns of the senior 
citizens at a lower level of consideration than they deserve. 
Those people, for peace of mind, need to know that they can get 
to a hospital, they can get to one quickly if it’s necessary, and 
that they will be served adequately. With no hospitals in those 
communities of service to these elderly people, their concern 
level goes up. 
 
So what do we do? Do we ignore their concerns or do we say 
well, if you’re going to want decent health care service, you’re 
going to have to relocate from the town in which you’ve lived 
all of your life and move to the closest urban centre. I don’t 
think that’s fair. I don’t think that’s even an appropriate 
response to those . . . that group of people at that point in their 
life. I think that we would be asking them to forsake a house 
and a home and a community that they’ve been part of for all of 
their lives, in many instances, to move so they can get 
appropriate and necessary health services. I think that in this 
day and age that is an unacceptable solution. 
 
And I think that we put not just the health of senior citizens at 
risk by these suggestions contained in the Fyke Commission 
report, but we also put their peace of mind at risk, and I think 
that that’s a travesty, frankly, for these elderly people. 
 
I’d like to read just a couple of more questions from the people 
of Cypress Hills involved with health delivery, health care 
delivery, and submit them as part of my presentation this 
afternoon because I think they represent the most visceral issues 
that people delivering health care at kind of the ground level are 
thinking about. And the ramifications of this report have caused 
a lot, have provoked a lot of thought on behalf of these people. 
 
This particular question from a gentleman who’s been a 
certified EMT (emergency medical technician) for up to 24 
years now. I think he’s been a voluntary EMT provider and 
might collect the odd remuneration, but generally he gives his 
time voluntarily. He carries a pager with him all the time. He 
gets up at any time of the day and night. He’ll leave his 
business. He’ll ask somebody to stand in for him. He’s ready to 
go at a moment’s notice. 
 
And his question is: in our service, in our community we have 
one EMT with 24 years service. We operate with one 
ambulance. Due to our low-call volume, it has not been possible 
or practical to staff any more EMTs on a voluntary basis. 
Therefore we have been maintaining our service by utilizing 
EMRs (emergency medical responder) and RNs that are 
currently working in our health centre. 
 
These people have been very involved in the continuing 
education programs required to maintain service in our EMS 
system. This arrangement has given us an acceptable level of 
care and service in the past, as well as providing our community 
residents with a sense of comfort and security. In your opinion 
— and he’s asking this of Mr. Fyke — should or will there be 
consideration given to making exceptions in the Fyke report to 
these types of special circumstances? 
 
Here’s another question from a program coordinator of a health 
facility in the Cypress Hills constituency. 

If we accept the conversion of our existing health centre to your 
version of a community care centre, we understand that acute 
care services would be completely eliminated. As caregivers in 
the community we may be able to live with and work within 
these boundaries, however as a community we feel very 
strongly that basic lab and X-ray facilities must be maintained 
for two reasons. 
 
And the two reasons are as follows: (1) to ensure the viability of 
our new existing medical clinic; and (2) also as a means of 
attracting new doctors to our community in the future. 
 
The question to Mr. Fyke is: are you prepared to suggest to the 
various decision-making bodies that these services be 
maintained so as to enable us to retain a minimal standard of 
care in our communities? 
 
And finally the question I want to present now was written by a 
gentleman who I would classify as a senior citizen — a very 
intelligent, well-read, well-spoken senior citizen. Somebody 
who takes these issues very seriously and who is concerned 
with the implications of this report for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And just coincidentally, he happens to be a former NDP 
candidate in one of the previous elections. So this is not a 
partisan question. It’s coming from somebody who has no axe 
to grind politically. He has some serious questions about the 
validity and the implications of the report for rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The question is as follows: some of your proposals on quality 
care seem to make the standards so rigid as to make it 
impossible for smaller institutions with smaller staff to meet 
those standards. This would seem to imply the closing of some 
rural facilities and/or the further centralization of services with 
some reduction of service to rural areas. How would you 
reconcile the new quality standards with the criterion of 
timeliness and convenience of service in areas as vast as 
southwest Saskatchewan? 
 
I think that’s a legitimate question. I think it’s a question that is 
on the minds of every senior citizen in the Cypress Hills 
constituency. And indeed, it is the kind of question that is on 
the minds of anybody who has used or expects to have to use 
health care facilities in the Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said earlier that if the Fyke report is 
implemented, there will not be a hospital anywhere in the 
constituency of Cypress Hills, the largest constituency in the 
province outside of Cumberland and Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Fyke himself said we shouldn’t sacrifice quality for 
proximity. I beg to differ in this instance because I think 
proximity is absolutely vital to the very lives of the people of 
Cypress Hills. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to conclude my remarks by 
having made those points, and saying that I will in fact be 
supporting the amendment put forward by the official 
opposition, and will not support the original put forward by the 
government. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



1366 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m very pleased to enter into the debate on the Standing 
Committee on Health Care. I also, Mr. Speaker, was one of the 
members from this side of the House that did not get to ask 
questions of Mr. Fyke. And we’ve heard it from our members 
the reason why we didn’t get to hear . . . or didn’t get to 
question Mr. Fyke; we were abruptly cut off by the House 
Leader, and ended debate. And I also had a number of questions 
from my constituents with regard to health care. 
 
But first I’d like to touch on, which my colleagues have already 
touched on, is our feelings about an experience with all-party 
committees with this NDP government. And the results of the 
all-party committees is not very, very good. In fact, to quote 
one of our colleagues on this side in question period the other 
day, it has a stench to it. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I’d really like to discuss more than anything 
today is Mr. Fyke . . . and we hear members opposite talk about 
listening to the people. And I’m all in favour of that listening to 
the people. Unfortunately, when we look across the way, who 
are they listening to? And I am convinced that they are not 
listening to the people. When we look at what’s transpired in 
the past, who are they listening to? A rhetorical question. Who 
did Mr. Fyke listen to? Did he listen to the people of the 
province? 
 
And I’m going to talk on behalf of the people of Wood River. 
Did Mr. Fyke talk to anybody in Wood River? It may be a 
rhetorical question, but I believe that he did not talk to one 
single person in the constituency of Wood River, with possibly 
one exception, Mr. Speaker. The current deputy minister to 
Executive Council, I believe, was the CEO of the Health 
District South Country who got ungraciously run out of town to 
be back in Regina, and Mr. Fyke may have spoke to him but, if 
he did, that’s nepotism at the best. 
 
So did he listen to the people? No. I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, he 
did not. 
 
Now I’d like to talk a little bit about why I’m convinced they 
did not listen to the people. I would like to talk about the Plains 
Health Centre in Assiniboia. Now how long have we discussed 
the Plains Health Centre? It’s been a while. 
 
Has the government listened to the people? Did Mr. Fyke listen 
to the people? The answer is no. And I want to talk specifically 
to some of the questions about the Pioneer Lodge. The Pioneer 
Lodge . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The floor belongs to the 
member from Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia had 60 beds. They cut down to 
30. Who listened to the people about that? There was nobody 
on the other side that listened to the people when they were 
crying to retain those beds. 
 

Mr. Speaker, now there’s 30 beds and it’s decreasing. Is 
anybody listening from the other side? Absolutely not. 
 
And I brought up in the House one day, Mr. Speaker, a meeting 
that was held in Assiniboia. Three hundred and fifty people 
attended the meeting to express their concerns, reference the 
Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia. How many people from the 
government side or Mr. Fyke or any of the staff came to listen 
to the concerns of the people of Assiniboia? None. 
 
So now the government says to us, we want to listen to the 
people. Well, Mr. Speaker, they have not listened to the people 
of Assiniboia with reference to health care. They have not 
listened to anybody in Wood River with respect to health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I talk about the Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia 
we will hear some rhetoric about there’s nobody on the waiting 
list. Why are we holding the beds if there’s nobody on the 
waiting list? Well, Mr. Speaker, if somebody wants to go on a 
waiting list and the health district says, I’m sorry there’s no 
beds, how can you go on a waiting list? And this is the 
methodology where they’re using to cut down the size of the 
beds. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I read a letter in the House the other day 
where there was 143 people identified as wanting to go into the 
hospital, maybe not today because there’s no beds, but they are 
in line to go in and yet the government can say there’s no 
waiting list. I find that extremely hard to believe and I find 
that’s the methodology by which they are not listening to the 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk also about another hospital in 
my constituency called Climax, and we may have remembered 
this from last year. Now the palliative care in Climax was being 
closed on weekends. Now the then associate minister of Health 
suggested that, well nobody’s using it so why not close it. 
 
And I suggest to members, Mr. Speaker, that the rhetoric went 
out that we’re going to close the palliative care on weekends so 
would anybody wish to put one of their loved ones in a 
palliative care unit and have to move them out on Friday, travel 
some 40 miles for the weekend with their palliative care loved 
one to put into another facility, and then Monday morning bring 
him back? Well, and then the associate minister says well 
there’s nobody there. Well obviously there’s nobody there if 
that’s your strategy to make a policy that is so ridiculous that 
nobody will go into the facility, and then stand up and say that 
nobody is using it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the part of that one that was extremely, 
extremely ironic is we discussed the highways in association 
with that particular closing of the weekend palliative care at 
Climax, and I would suggest that no members from the other 
side ever drove that highway. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the 
displeasure of driving that highway on numerous occasions and 
I can see why they wouldn’t want to drive it. Now put the two 
together and say if you had to carry your palliative care patient 
over that road would you want to, would anybody want to? And 
the answer is no. 
 
So I go back again. Is this government listening to the people? I 
would say no they’re not. 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1367 

 

I’d like to touch base in that corner of my constituency again 
about how this government listens to the people. And I think I 
could mention the Plains hospital. Now I was at a meeting and 
the Leader of the Liberal Party was at a meeting in Shaunavon. 
The hall was full . . . closing the Plains hospital. 
 
And I don’t have to go into the same stuff people have talked 
about — chaining oneself to the doors of the Plains so it doesn’t 
close. But at this meeting, Mr. Speaker, it was unanimous — 
well, save for one or two people that were NDP plants in the 
place — that nobody wanted to see the Plains hospital close. 
And throughout southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, people 
were saying don’t close the Plains. 
 
Did this government listen to the people? No. Did the Leader of 
the Liberal Party listen to the people? Obviously not. So I 
would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the current Liberal leader is 
. . . he’s not part of the solution, he’s now a part of the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to talk a little about the EMS report. 
Now, Mr. Fyke has already stated that he supports the EMS 
report in its entirety, although he hasn’t read it. But he supports 
it. 
 
Now I do want to talk about the EMS report as it relates to my 
constituency. I’ve got several letters and have been in several 
meetings with people from my constituency reference this 
report; it is absolutely ridiculous in some areas. There might be 
some good stuff within the report but there is an awful lot that is 
absolutely ludicrous. 
 
And I’m going to just give you one example of one that I find 
that is extremely distasteful. The Val Marie ambulance, bought 
for by the people, run by the people, operated by the people of 
the area, and they want to take it away. 
 
Now who can support something like that? I would suggest 
there’s the odd member opposite that might agree with me that 
why would you be taking that away from the people of that 
area. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that this ambulance was 
bought by the people is they were outside of the one-hour 
purview right now, before they had the ambulance. So they 
decided that on their own hook they would buy an ambulance 
and man it. 
 
The only money that they received from any department right 
now is a little bit in communications. And I don’t want to go 
into cell coverage down there, because I think that’s a topic for 
a different time, and I’ll sure debate that with anybody. But they 
get some money; they get some money from the health district 
to help them with communications. But if you can imagine, if 
you can imagine the audacity of wanting to take . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Once again, members of the Assembly, once 
again, members of the Assembly, I ask, I ask that the member 
from Wood River be allowed to speak his mind. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As one can 
probably see, as the member from Regina South . . . I lost my 

place on my scripted message here. Where was I? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Start over. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Start over? Mr. Speaker, the Val Marie 
ambulance is on the chopping block as far as the Fyke . . . or the 
EMS report goes. Now I find this, I find this absolutely terrible 
that somebody would come in and say, you have put money 
into something, you have built something, you’re running it 
smoothly, but we’re going to take it away from you. 
 
The one-hour rule . . . And we hear about the one-hour rule in 
the EMS report; we hear about the one-hour rule in health care 
in this province. And now they want to take something away 
that is providing some resemblance to one hour in that one little 
area of my constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the one hour, where I live we don’t even have 
one-hour service. So by taking away that particular ambulance, 
is going to be drawing from the other ambulances that — if any 
of them get to stay — that are in the area. So we will definitely 
not be within the one-hour time frame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to also comment, as my colleague 
from Cypress Hills commented. It doesn’t really take much to 
look at the Fyke Commission and realize that in the 
constituency of Wood River, what hospital will stay. And the 
member from Cypress Hills explained that in Cypress Hills if 
you read, if you read the Fyke Commission and look at the 
population and where facilities are, Cypress Hills will not have 
a hospital. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe I’m in the fourth largest 
constituency, and if you look at the Fyke Commission, I don’t 
believe we will have a hospital in it either. Now if you look at it 
that . . . the size of the constituency and from where the start of 
my constituency, on the east boundary being Assiniboia, from 
there through to the Alberta border without a hospital is totally 
unconceivable. And yet if we want to, if we want to listen to the 
Fyke commission and listen to members . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. I’m sure the 
members will soon want to eat, settle down, but in the 
meantime . . . the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was 
saying before being so rudely interrupted, we would not have a 
hospital all across the southwest part of the province. Totally, 
totally inconceivable. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again I go back to what I was saying: who is 
listening to the people? Is the government listening to the 
people? Absolutely not. Did Mr. Fyke listen to the people? Not 
from down in our area he did not. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had quite a bit of experience in our area 
with the wellness model. Trust us with the wellness model. It’ll 
cure all the ailments in health care. We heard that in ’93, did we 
not? And now, guess what we hear again? Trust us again. The 
wellness model two. It’s the same old medicine with no cure. I 
believe the current wellness model is like the old one — it’s get 
well, stay well, or farewell. 
 



1368 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it now being past 
5 o’clock this House stands adjourned until 7 p.m. tonight . . . 
pardon me, recessed until 7 p.m. tonight. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 
 


