















































Hansard: May 17, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1185 
 May 17, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of the constituents in the 
Bruno area who would like to see the Bruno telephone 
exchange become part of the Humboldt telephone exchange. 
And their prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to allow 
Bruno to be part of the Humboldt telephone exchange. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, all 53 of them, are 
from the community of Bruno. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition about the provincial government’s report, the 
Saskatchewan EMS Development Project, which calls for 
provincially run and centrally operated ambulance services. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the concerned petitioners come from the 
communities of Lucky Lake, Demaine, and Beechy. 
 
And I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today regarding the EMS (emergency medical 
services) report: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are all from Rose 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to present a petition today on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who have expressed interest in 
maintaining and upgrading the Saskatchewan road network. 
And the prayer is as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ask the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue with its foresight and vision of 
increasing the funding to $900 million over the next three 
years to maintain and upgrade our thoroughfares of 
commerce. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Foam Lake. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition signed 
by citizens concerned with the condition of Highway No. 339. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

 
The petition is signed by individuals from the communities of 
Spring Valley, Briercrest, and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people in the southwest corner of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the state of the hospital and have signed this 
petition, the prayer of which reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed today by residents of 
the city of Swift Current, in addition to the community of 
Waldeck. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are concerned about their ambulance service. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Radville, Gladmar, 
and Lake Alma. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I too present petitions on 



1186 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2001 

 

behalf of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan regarding the 
EMS service. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance service. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people in the 
Storthoaks, Carievale, and Redvers areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about poor cellular 
service in their area. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of Rabbit 
Lake, Hafford, Blaine Lake, Leask, Radisson, Borden, 
Perdue, Maymont, Mistawasis, and Muskeg Lake. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Saskatoon, Hafford, and 
Radisson. Also by citizens from the former community of the 
Municipal Affairs minister, Krydor, and also a former 
community of Mr. Speaker, Richard community. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
presenting a petition opposed to possible reduction of health 
services in Kamsack. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary steps to ensure that health care services in the 
Kamsack Hospital be maintained at its current level of 
service, at minimum with 24-hour acute, emergency, and 
doctoral services available. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are all from the community of 
Kamsack. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens greatly concerned about the proposed energy rates 
from SaskPower and SaskEnergy: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Hanley, Loreburn, Elbow, 
Melville, Delisle, Dalmeny, and Strongfield. 
 
I so present. 
 

Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have citizens 
concerned with the ambulance service. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
confirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again I rise with a petition; reference the cuts at the Assiniboia 
Pioneer Lodge: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that, at the very least, 
current levels of services and care are maintained at 
Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Assiniboia, Limerick, and Melville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
from the citizens of North Battleford. The prayer of relief reads 
as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to call on the 
provincial and federal governments to provide immediate 
and financial assistance to the city of North Battleford in 
order to facilitate necessary improvements to the North 
Battleford water treatment plant. 
 

I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

They are petitions of citizens regarding the provision of 
immediate financial assistance to North Battleford with 
respect to the water treatment plant. 
 

And other petitions that are addendums to previously presented 
petitions as sessional paper no. 3, no. 4, no. 10, no. 58, no. 121, 
and no. 155. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
year chaperones Mrs. Nissen, Mrs. Chan, and Mrs. Seib are 
going to prove that the sound of 51 grade 7 Lakeview 
Elementary School students from Saskatoon, that the sound that 



May 17, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1187 

 

they make, is truly a joyful noise. And their teachers Madame 
Block and Mrs. Widenmaier are here to let their pupils know 
that the sounds that all the MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) make is also a joyful noise. 
 
We have, as well as welcoming these very special students from 
this very special school in Saskatoon, I would like all members 
to know that two of the students have grandparents who were 
very special people. 
 
All of us will remember the contributions that MLA John 
Skoberg made to this House and that MLA Evelyn Edwards 
made to this House. And their grandchildren are here with us as 
well today. 
 
So I would ask all members of this Assembly to welcome those 
two special students and the other 49 equally special students 
from Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
fine community of Rosetown is certainly making its mark on 
Regina this week. And again here in the legislature I’m very 
pleased to introduce to all members 41 more grade 8 students 
from Rosetown Central High School. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
sitting in the east gallery and they are accompanied by teachers 
Norm Cline, Miles Bennett, Leanne Engen, Paula Berezowski; 
and the chaperones are Don Sparks and Karen Brown. 
 
I had a fine meeting with the first 41 students from grade 8 
yesterday. And I’m equally looking forward to meeting the 41 
excellent grade 8 students that are with us today. And would all 
members welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well first of all 
— I have students from my constituency — but first of all I 
wanted to say that I too welcome the people from Rosetown 
because my cousin, Norm Cline, is the principal of Rosetown 
School and is here with his son, Avery. And I know that when 
the Leader of the Opposition meets with the students from 
Rosetown therefore, he’ll have only good things to say about 
the Minister of Finance. 
 
But my main task today, Mr. Speaker, is to welcome 25 grade 5 
students from Pleasant Hill School in Saskatoon which is in my 
constituency and where I attended myself when I was in grade 8 
— for my industrial arts training which equipped me for my 
duties here at the Legislative Assembly. 
 
With the 25 grade 5 students are their teachers, Barbara Wright 
and Virginia Tapaquon, and also chaperones, Theresa Fiddler 
and Sylvia Woodward. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, what a 
fine job the teachers and parents and chaperones do at Pleasant 
Hill School which is a community school. I, on occasion, along 
with Sylvia, actually have showed up to cook breakfast at 
Pleasant Hill School once in awhile but they don’t invite me to 
do that all that often, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say I’m going to be meeting with the students from 
Pleasant Hill. We’re going to get our picture taken; we’re going 

to have a meeting; they’re going to ask me questions; they’re 
going to have a tour of the legislature. And I’d like all members 
of the Assembly to welcome the students from Pleasant Hill 
School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to join with the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast in recognizing one individual that is seated in the 
west gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Brenda Nissen, one of the adults along, is the 
daughter of Evelyn Edwards and I know that the member 
recognized Evelyn’s grandson. I do also want to inform the 
House the fact — we’ll just say a long time ago — Brenda and I 
were colleagues; we were students at the University of 
Saskatchewan in the College of Education. I had the 
opportunity of working with Brenda on a lot of projects and 
that’s one of the reasons why I was successful in getting my 
Bachelor of Education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you know one of the other things is I’d like to recognize, 
even though Brenda and I are both 39, she looks a lot younger 
that I do. 
 
And I’d ask all members to join in welcoming Brenda Nissen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join with 
the members in regards to saying a word of welcome to the 
students from Saskatoon and Rosetown. And with due respect 
to all the cultures and traditions of our great province, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to teach them one Cree word as they leave 
this building, and the word is Ta wow, which means you’re 
welcome. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, after they leave they will say, wow, I 
learned a new Cree word. Ta wow — you’re welcome. 
 
Now I would also like to say to a special guest at the Speaker’s 
gallery too, there’s Cathy McNab, a sister to Gail McNab, a 
person who has been working in my office for quite a few years 
from Gordon First Nations. So I would like all members to 
please welcome them and say, Ta wow. Egosi. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. SERM’s 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) 
mentoring program includes 20 proteges working to complete 
career development plans with their assigned mentors during 
2001. Barb . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Does the member have an 
introduction? I’m sorry. The member will continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Barb 
Chartier, who is in your gallery, is a protege of Dave Phillips 
and they’ve been working together on Barb’s work plan for the 



1188 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2001 

 

past three months as part of SERM’s mentoring program. Barb 
has worked for SERM for 16 years, first at the Buffalo Narrows 
fire centre and for the past three years at the provincial fire 
centre in Prince Albert. 
 
Barb has expressed her desire to learn and succeed in her career 
with SERM. Barb’s special strength lies in her will to see any 
task through to the best of her ability. During her year in the 
mentoring program Barb intends to increase her understanding 
of SERM’s organization, learn about our working relationship 
with the Aboriginal people and organization, and visit the 
Legislative Assembly to observe our government’s processes. 
 
I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to please 
welcome Barb here today, and to offer my and our 
encouragement to her during her experience in SERM’s 
mentoring program. Thank you very much. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

British Columbia Election 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
great influence that Liberals have had on good public policy in 
Saskatchewan through our coalition government has obviously 
reached British Columbia. Mr. Speaker, the voters of British 
Columbia were so impressed with how Liberals can help govern 
that they not only elected a lot of them, they decided maybe 
they’d give them a chance to govern all on their own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the dust cleared — to use a phrase from my 
colleague, the Minister of Finance — no where was there to be 
found a single MLA from a Stockwell Day-inspired, snake oil, 
voodoo economic party like the Socreds, Reform or Tories. I 
know that comes as a great disappointment to the members 
opposite who are already reeling from the hard crash of their 
wetsuited, jet-skiing hero, but those are the facts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in their wisdom the voters of BC (British 
Columbia) decided to cast almost all their ballots for pragmatic 
parties like the Liberals, the NDP (New Democratic party) and 
the Greens. I know the members opposite are green with envy, 
but with a great big case of Alberta envy they are already 
carrying, I’m not sure how many more types of envy they can 
handle. 
 
But in all seriousness, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate Mr. 
Campbell on his election win. And I’m sure all Saskatchewan 
people will give him a real warm welcome when he comes to 
visit during the premiers’ conference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Skydiving Exhilarating Experience 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to tell all members of the legislature of the thrilling experience 
that the member from Carrot River Valley and myself had last 
Saturday. 
 
Though both that member and I are known for usually keeping 
our feet planted firmly on the ground, he and I threw caution to 
the wind on the weekend and decided we simply must try 

skydiving. We headed out to Moose Jaw for the big jump after 
several hours of lessons. The instructor, Curt Hamilton, was a 
wonderful teacher and he scared us just a little when we read 
the back of his T-shirt that said, shut up and jump. 
 
Of course the member from Carrot River Valley and I both kept 
looking to see who would chicken out first. And I’m glad to 
say, Mr. Speaker, neither one of us did and we both made the 
leap of our lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the experience can only be described as a few 
seconds of absolute exhilaration, followed by an indescribable, 
peaceful feeling as you float gracefully back to the earth. And, 
Mr. Speaker, you do have time to think as you come down. 
 
For instance, I couldn’t help but compare myself to the 
members opposite, because like their political cousins in BC 
last night who were obliterated, those members and their party 
have been in free-fall for years. But unlike myself and the 
member from Carrot River Valley on Saturday, those members 
didn’t have a parachute to stop their plummet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Norwegian Constitution Signing Celebration 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, today is Syttende Mai, the 
17th of May, the day when Norwegians around the world 
celebrate the signing of the Norwegian constitution in 1814. 
People everywhere are singing these words: 
 

Ja, vi elsker dette landet, 
som det stiger frem, 
furet, værbitt over vannet, 
med de tusen hjem. 

 
That’s the Norwegian national anthem. 
 
The King and Queen of Norway send greetings around the 
world and the greetings that come to Saskatchewan are to bring 
very best wishes to all of those in Saskatchewan who have 
settled here, along with all those friends of Norway. 
 
It’s a great pleasure to celebrate here in the legislature with all 
of the people across the province. 
 
And I do this on behalf of myself as the member of Lakeview, 
but also for the member from Regina Coronation Park, the 
member from Saskatoon Southeast, the member from Regina 
Sherwood, the member from Rosetown-Biggar, the member 
from Saltcoats, the member from Saskatchewan Rivers, the 
member from Lloydminster, and the spouses of the members 
from Moosomin and Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
And so for everybody, ha er god dag. Have a very good day as 
we all celebrate the Norwegian Constitution Day. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liberals Win British Columbia Election 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when I woke this morning and looked at the headline in the 



May 17, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1189 

 

newspaper, I thought to myself, more good news for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I went on to read, “NDP decimated.” That’s 
what the headline said, Mr. Speaker. But unfortunately for 
Saskatchewan and fortunately for BC (British Columbia), the 
headline actually referred to last night’s British Columbia 
election which saw the West Coast socialists go from 
government to a rump of three seats — I repeat, three seats, Mr. 
Speaker. Not even enough to form an official opposition party 
in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, contrary to the member for Melville, the BC NDP 
were routed by a party that is basically a coming together of 
common sense individuals from different political backgrounds 
in that province . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — . . . devoted to the concept of free 
enterprise economy and less intrusive government. 
 
And just a note for the beleaguered leader of the Saskatchewan 
Liberal Party who may be trying to delude himself into taking 
comfort from the BC election results. That member should 
know that many people think that up until yesterday the BC 
Liberal Party has been under a curse for 60 years when the 
Liberals signed away their identity and joined a coalition 
government. It took them 60 years to get out from underneath 
that curse and I believe it will take them twice that long in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t wait for the day that the headline in our 
newspaper reads, Saskatchewan NDP decimated. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s coming and not a day too soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Business News in Sask Business Magazine 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I bring to you some real good 
news for the province of Saskatchewan. This time it comes 
from Sask Business. Sask Business is the business magazine in 
Saskatchewan, which means that each month it publishes a 
great deal of good news — news we are always happy to bring 
to this Assembly. 
 
And if our tidings of good news is what it takes to get the 
members opposite to admit that not everything in this province 
is doom and gloom, if that’s what it takes to get the rest of the 
story, then we’ll keep telling these stories. 
 
But back to this month’s edition of Sask Business. On page 33 
there’s a quick list of business items of interest from around the 
province such as, for one example, the fact that the Estevan 
newspaper has just purchased a new printing press which will 
help it expand its business and hire five additional staff. 
 
Or this item from Nipawin. It seems, Mr. Speaker, that because 
of the recent Team Canada trip to China, led by the Prime 
Minister, and former Premier Romanow, that Newfield Seeds of 

Nipawin formally signed two contracts worth $10 million. The 
contracts will see Newfield buy, process, and ship alfalfa seed 
to China. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these contracts will help pay the salaries of 
Newfield’s . . . Newfield Seed’s 75 to 100 employees, nearly all 
in the Nipawin area. This is export business for a Saskatchewan 
company; these are jobs for a rural community. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, as my friend from Dewdney is often wont 
to say, that’s good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Woodcarver Aurele Gareau 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to recognize a well-renowned woodcarver from my 
constituency, Mr. Aurele Gareau. He’s from the community of 
Bellevue. Mr. Gareau attended a woodcarving workshop in 
1982 and he’s been carving ever since. 
 
So for the past 25 years Mr. Gareau has carved many items 
from basswood, such as footwear, animals, and many 
commissioned items. He’s done a life-sized figure of Ms. 
Dorval, the first teacher in Saskatchewan, a project that took 
him up to 200 hours to complete. And one of his most treasured 
pieces is a baseball glove in which you can actually place your 
hand. 
 
Mr. Gareau was recently named the artist-in-residence at the 
cultural centre in Bellevue. As an artist-in-residence, he’s 
expected to spend one-half of his time improving and 
developing himself, and the other half of his time instructing 
people in the community. He’s served the region which is 
comprised of the communities of St. Louis, Domremy, Duck 
Lake, and Bellevue. 
 
Now besides doing woodcarving, Mr. Gareau does scrolling 
and wood-burning. This is usually done on bolted birchwood. 
Mr. Gareau has taught woodcarving in many communities 
across this province of ours. He has taught his own father, six 
brothers, and some cousins how to wood carve. As well, this 
great talent has been passed on to his son and daughter. 
 
I have seen some of Mr. Gareau’s carvings which are displayed 
at the Bellevue Cultural Centre, and they are indeed an 
incredibly great work of art. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ides and Odes of May 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the English poet, Shelley, said, 
and I quote: 
 

Poetry is the record of the best and happiest moments of the 
happiest and best minds. 
 

As far as I know, he offered no opinion on the words of 
politicians. 



1190 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2001 

 

Regardless, all of us have the opportunity tonight to consider 
the accuracy of Shelley’s judgment at an event being sponsored 
by the Saskatchewan Writers Guild and the League of Canadian 
Poets. And, Mr. Speaker, this event gives me an opportunity to 
promote one of the premier tourist events of the Saskatchewan 
summer held in Moose Jaw. 
 
Tonight 10 Saskatchewan poets will be sharing the stage at the 
Exchange on 8th Avenue here in Regina. The event is called 
“The Ides (and Odes) of May - a festivity of poetry”. The poets 
are: Ven Begamudre, Steven Berzenski, Anne Campbell, Judith 
Krause, Brenda Niskala, Bruce Rice, Paul Wilson, and our 
newly appointed provincial poet laureate, Glen Sorestad. 
 
Mr. Speaker — and here comes the hometown connection — 
also reading tonight will be two poets from Moose Jaw, Bob 
Currie and Gary Hyland — worth the price of admission, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Gary is one of the main organizers of the Moose Jaw Festival of 
Words, being held the third week in July, an event now in its 
third year which attracts readers and writers from across 
Canada. 
 
So tonight in Regina for an evening of enjoyable, stimulating 
reading, and in July in Moose Jaw for four days of the same at 
our Festival of Words. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Proposed SaskEnergy Rate Hike 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know, SaskEnergy is looking for a 
massive 42 per cent rate hike. A few weeks ago the Minister of 
Finance said he would like to give SaskEnergy customers a 
break by paying down the gas cost variance account which 
would allow SaskEnergy to keep its rate from going up. 
 
But now the minister seems to be backing away from that idea. 
Mr. Speaker, why the flip-flop? Why is the minister backing 
away from his own proposal for providing relief to SaskEnergy 
customers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what the 
member is referring to when he says that we have backed away 
from any statement we’ve made on this side of the House. 
We’ve been entirely consistent, Mr. Speaker, and our message 
to the people of the province is this. 
 
First of all, SaskEnergy has done a good job protecting 
consumers from price increases, increases that have doubled in 
Alberta and gone up 23 per cent in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s not a bad record. 
 

(14:00) 
 
But what we have said to the people of the province is that we 
know SaskEnergy’s view is — that they should have a 42 per 
cent increase. We are waiting to see what the view of the rate 
review panel, an independent panel, is. Once we get that rate 
review panel report, the government will look at that report; the 
government will then be responding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in the meantime, we will not interfere with the workings of 
the independent panel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, in SaskEnergy’s rate increase 
application, they say the price of natural gas next year will be 
about $7 a gigajoule. 
 
But if you look at page 44 of the Finance minister’s budget, 
he’s forecasting the price of natural gas next year to be about 
$3.39 a gigajoule. That’s a huge difference. They can’t both be 
right. Which one are we supposed to believe? Are we supposed 
to believe the Minister of Finance, or are we supposed to 
believe SaskEnergy? 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: which estimate are we supposed to 
believe and why is the NDP keeping two sets of books? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if there’s one thing that 
the people of Saskatchewan know, when it comes to believing 
people who are talking about numbers, there’s one group of 
people that should never be believed, and that is the 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I’m going to say, Mr. Speaker, that, 
you know, I want to say that our . . . the members opposite are 
always talking about the Government of Alberta — the 
Government of Alberta this, the Government of Alberta that. 
 
Well our projection in the budget with respect to natural gas 
prices is consistent with what the Government of Alberta is 
saying. So the members opposite should be very happy about it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say also to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 
that I find it strange that for several years they called for the 
creation, the creation of an independent rate review panel so 
that the people of the province could be told what would be fair 
in terms of rate review. 
 
Now what they say, Mr. Speaker, and as the member from 
Swift Current has said and it’s on the record, we should scrap 
the independent review panel. We say no, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to have the rate review panel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well you know, Mr. 
Speaker, it seems the minister is a little touchy about this issue. 



May 17, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1191 

 

And no wonder, because, you know, the last time that an NDP 
government kept two sets of books, that was in BC, Mr. 
Speaker, and we know what happened to the NDP in British 
Columbia. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy is using a high gas 
price forecast to justify raising energy rates. The Minister of 
Finance is using a low gas price forecast to not justify helping 
consumers. 
 
If, Mr. Speaker, the $7 forecast is right, then the government 
will have millions of dollars in extra revenue to give 
SaskEnergy customers a break. If the $3.39 forecast is right, 
then SaskEnergy doesn’t need such a huge rate hike. Either 
way, the government could be doing more, much more, to help 
SaskEnergy customers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question: will the minister make a 
commitment today to give SaskEnergy customers a break on 
this massive rate hike? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what is currently going 
on in the province is that there is an independent rate review 
panel that is looking at the request by SaskEnergy for a rate 
increase. And we are not going to do what Grant Devine, the 
friend of the members opposite, did in the 1980s, which was to 
get rid of the rate review panel. 
 
We’re not going to do that, Mr. Speaker, even though the 
member from Swift Current advocated that in this House 
several days ago, that we circumvent the work of that panel. 
No, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If the member has a valid point, that SaskEnergy doesn’t need 
the increase they’re asking for, then that information should be 
made available to the rate review panel. The rate review panel is 
independent. It should make a decision. 
 
When that decision is made, Mr. Speaker, and when a 
recommendation is made to this government, this government 
will consider the recommendation and do what is right and what 
is fair for the consumers of the province and for the stability of 
the corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is caught in his 
own little game. And I want to read a quote from the president 
of SaskEnergy. You know, Mr. Speaker, on April 19, 2001 the 
president says: 
 

We don’t think it’s going to be that low (reference to 
$3.39). I mean I’m not going to sit here and show you a 
graph that we think gas is going to be about $7.50 and go to 
the regulator and ask for that and have you tell me that the 
gas is $4, because I don’t believe it. If you’ve got $4 gas, 
I’d love to buy it. 

 
That’s the quote from the SaskEnergy. You know, Mr. Speaker, 

the minister has gotten caught in his own game. His numbers 
don’t add up. 
 
My question to the minister: which one is it? Is the minister’s 
forecast right, or is SaskEnergy’s forecast right? Either way, 
why don’t you give SaskEnergy customers a break on their 
energy bills? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve been trying to 
explain to the member opposite, my opinion on what the price 
of natural gas will be doesn’t matter. His opinion doesn’t 
matter. What matters, Mr. Speaker, is the opinion of the 
independent rate review panel. That’s why there is a panel, Mr. 
Speaker, and it is the job . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, there is an independent 
review panel. The purpose of that panel is to say this: that it 
isn’t the right of me to say what the natural gas rate should be, it 
isn’t the Premier’s right, it isn’t that member’s right; it’s the 
right of the independent review panel to make a 
recommendation to government. That’s why we have the panel, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if, as the member says that we have said something from 
the Department of Finance about the price, if we’re incorrect, 
the review panel will look at that, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
purpose of the review panel. 
 
But I want to remind the member again, our projections are 
very similar to his beloved Government of Alberta’s 
projections, Mr. Speaker, so he should be very happy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investments 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the minister responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Yesterday we asked SaskTel why they spent $8 million to buy 
Ag Dealer, an Ontario company, which would be completely in 
direct competition with the Saskatchewan company called 
IRON Solutions. 
 
Apparently since the minister wasn’t interested in due diligence, 
he never realized that Ag Dealer competes directly with IRON 
Solutions. Now the government is promising not to compete 
with IRON Solutions on agriculture sales business. 
 
The minister says Ag Dealer will focus only on print-based 
equipment advertising. Well, Mr. Speaker, Ag Dealer’s printed 
machinery advertising competes directly with another 
well-known Saskatchewan business. It’s called The Western 
Producer. 
 
So once again, Mr. Speaker, we ask the minister: why is the 
NDP buying an out-of-province business to compete directly 
with a Saskatchewan business, in this case The Western 
Producer? 



1192 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, our Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker, will be . . . are in a position, Mr. Speaker, where they 
will have to diversify in an environment that is largely 
deregulated, Mr. Speaker. It is our attempt to not, wherever 
possible, compete especially in Saskatchewan with the private 
sector — wherever possible. But in a deregulated environment 
it is inevitable that there will be competition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our intent however is to try and generate revenues 
from outside of the province. That is why, Mr. Speaker, we are 
investing in companies outside of Saskatchewan to bring 
revenues back into our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we all know, 
the NDP has been on a real buying binge lately — an insurance 
company in Prince Edward Island, a home security company in 
Winnipeg, a streaming video company from Nashville. Just 
how big is the NDP shopping cart? 
 
Well we have a bizarre twist in that just this morning SaskTel 
President Don Ching confirmed that SaskTel actually 
considered buying The Western Producer. Thankfully SaskTel 
decided not to get into the newspaper business. 
 
Instead though, the NDP decided to buy Ag Dealer in Ontario 
and then compete directly against The Western Producer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP spending millions to buy 
out-of-province companies to compete directly with companies 
here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, based on 
the amount of debt that that party created in the 1980s and 
based on the interest that we pay each and every day, Mr. 
Speaker, we could buy a dot-com company every single day of 
the year, Mr. Speaker, based on what they’ve wasted in this 
province. 
 
I want to say to the public of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
however, to be absolutely clear to them, that there is no 
proposal as it pertains to The Western Producer, Mr. Speaker. 
Absolutely none whatsoever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s go into the 
facts. The NDP is spending millions of taxpayers’ dollars to buy 
out-of-province businesses that compete directly with 
businesses in the private sector right here in Saskatchewan. In 
fact things are getting so desperate that the NDP actually 
considered buying The Western Producer. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, perhaps that’s the only way they think they 
can get a decent headline today, is to start buying newspapers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP should not be in the 
newspaper business, and they should not be competing with the 

newspapers for classified advertising. Ag Dealer is in the 
business of advertising farm equipment for sale, and so is The 
Western Producer and other Saskatchewan-based businesses. 
The minister may not understand that, but that constitutes direct 
competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP using taxpayers’ money to 
directly compete with existing Saskatchewan companies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there has been no 
proposal brought forward to the CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) board or to cabinet as it pertains 
to The Western Producer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Ching, the president of SaskTel tells me 
— informs me — as a result of the questions they asked this 
morning appropriately at the Crown Corps committee meeting, 
that no proposal is being proposed — absolutely none. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Future of SaskTel 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister responsible for SaskTel, has this 
NDP government considered the sale, the privatization, of some 
of or all of SaskTel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this morning the president of 
SaskTel, Don Ching, told the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations that he and his officials were working with private 
sector consultants to do some corporate valuations establishing 
a market value for SaskTel, and he went on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — He went on to say that they were considering 
options for the possible sale of some of or all of SaskTel 
through an IPO, an initial public offering. If the minister and the 
NDP cabinet is not aware of or supportive of any effort to 
privatize any of SaskTel, why is the president of SaskTel hiring 
consultants to value the company and then at least considering 
privatization of some or all of the company? Why is your 
Crown president doing that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I just want to remind the member to complete 
his question through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to the people of 
Saskatchewan there is one party that wants to sell SaskTel, Mr. 
Speaker, and that party is on that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 



May 17, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1193 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, to the people of 
Saskatchewan I would say why would we want to sell a 
company that has earned for us last year alone $157 million 
outside of the province for the people of Saskatchewan so that 
they can deliver services in most of their constituencies in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Why would we want to sell a 
company like that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Wall: — On the two sides of the House, only one party in 
this House, Mr. Speaker, has actually hired consultants to 
evaluate . . . to determine the market value of SaskTel and 
consider privatization. It’s not this side of the House; it’s that 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker. We found that out this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. The president of 
SaskTel clearly stated this morning in front of the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations that he and his staff are at 
least considering the option of privatizing some or all of 
SaskTel. Your minister has said . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I would like to be able to 
hear the minister’s question in its entirety and I don’t want 
people to start hollering the minute I sit down. So would the 
members please stay in order. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — The minister, the minister has said categorically 
that this government is not interested in any privatization in 
some or in whole of SaskTel. Yet we know that the president of 
SaskTel has said he is at least considering that option — 
considering the sale of some or all of SaskTel. 
 
So to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier is 
this: why are SaskTel officials considering even the option of 
privatization without apparently telling you . . . telling the 
Premier and his cabinet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — For clarification of the member and the 
public of Saskatchewan, I am informed that the meeting 
occurred as a request of the company in Toronto, Mr. Speaker; 
not at the request of SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I would ask that member the following 
question: is he not interested in due diligence? Does he not want 
to know the value of the company? I suggest probably not. In 
the years that they were in government in the ’80s, in the 1980s, 
they had no interest in knowing the value of anything. They 
spent like drunken sailors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I have another question for the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. The president of 
SaskTel confirmed this morning — again I’ll repeat that — he 
is at least considering the privatization of some or all of 
SaskTel. But the Premier is saying and the government has said 
that this is not the plan of the NDP government. 
 

If the NDP government has truly ruled out privatization, then 
why is the Premier allowing SaskTel officials to openly defy his 
government? Why is the Premier going to stop . . . When is the 
Premier going to stop these Crown corporations from bullying 
him? When will the Premier stand up to these Crown 
corporations and stop them from kicking sand in his face? He 
needs . . . These Crown corporations need to be reined in, Mr. 
Speaker. Will the Premier stand up today and commit to do that 
in this Legislative Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I always enjoy, I 
always enjoy answering questions from the man who would be 
leader over there. Mr. Speaker, let me speak on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan here to say very clearly . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this government has no 
intention nor plan to privatize Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications. Let’s understand that. What discussions 
occurred this morning in the Crown Corporations Committee 
with the president I’m not privy to. I haven’t seen the Hansard 
or the record. But, Mr. Speaker, I would ask you and all 
members not to be sure of what was said by the quotes brought 
here from the member from Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We all know the record of privatization when that group of men 
and women were in government around here, selling off 
everything in sight. Selling off everything in sight and at the 
very same time losing services and head office jobs for the 
people of Saskatchewan; at the very same time running up the 
debt of this province to astronomical heights. We’ve got no 
interest in that kind of an agenda, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Management of Water Supply 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, water, not energy, will be the 
issue of the 21st century. I want to pay tribute to my 
constituents for the responsible and level-headed manner with 
which they have dealt with a difficult situation and at times 
inflammatory publicity. 
 
But now that the immediate problems are behind us, it’s time to 
look for long-term solutions. We have ample evidence now that 
the quality and management of Canada’s water supply is in 
some cases on a par with Third World countries. We cannot 
continue with a patchwork of water quality standards. We need 
consistent national standards for water management and quality. 
 
There’s also the issue of bulk water exports. Newfoundland 
says that it is interested in bulk water exports. We need a 
national debate. My question of the Premier is: will he call on 
the Prime Minister to convene a national conference on water 
safety and water exports? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to announce to 
the House today that as a result of the debate and the motion 
that was passed in this House earlier, I intend to have this issue 
raised into discussion at the western premiers’ and the territorial 



1194 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2001 

 

leaders’ conference in about two to three weeks here in the 
province. This will be an agenda item. We will have a 
discussion and from that discussion there may well be a 
consensus developed to advance to the national government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to hear this. But the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program which was 
announced last fall, reannounced in the Throne Speech, and 
then re-reannounced last week has left some people in North 
Battleford concerned that this is the special aid to North 
Battleford that the Premier promised us. 
 
To date, North Battleford has been promised $255,000 to deal 
with a $14 million problem. This is the same amount of money 
that as I say was promised last fall in infrastructure program and 
then re-reannounced a number of times since then. 
 
In view of the Premier’s commitment for special help for North 
Battleford, my question of the Premier: will he stand today and 
set our fears at rest? Some of the statements last week suggested 
that that $255,000, our share of the infrastructure program, was 
the special help that was promised. Will he now stand in his 
place and confirm that that is merely a down payment on the 
special help that has been promised and this is not simply a 
recycled announcement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just for the 
edification, once again, of the member opposite, there have 
been efforts made to help all communities with respect to our 
water quality problems. 
 
North Battleford is certainly at issue. The people of North 
Battleford were given assurance that this side, this government, 
this coalition government would do everything possible to try 
and assist them. 
 
And I just want to remind folks — because they seem to forget 
and pick out only the bad things, not the good things — so far 
this program has committed over $74 million to 86 
infrastructure projects, Mr. Speaker. The federal/provincial 
share will be twenty-one and a half million dollars. Some of 
those projects are still in the approval process. 
 
Twenty-one communities identified by SERM as lacking 
minimum treatment facilities were approved out of this 
program. The remaining 17 communities under SERM’s list of 
communities that are under precautionary drinking water 
advisories did not apply. Nine more communities identified by 
SERM having moderate drinking water risk have also applied. 
 
Mr. Speaker, communities recognize their needs, they apply 
under these programs, and we’ll offer them all assistance we 
possibly can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s reply I’m sure will 
only make the people of North Battleford more nervous. 
 
I don’t need to be reminded. I announced the infrastructure 
program last fall when I signed it. His reannouncement last 

week and his statement in the House today suggests and leaves 
us wondering if our share of the infrastructure program is the 
special help that was promised. 
 
The judicial inquiry is good. But inevitably, it will focus on 
assigning blame as opposed to finding solutions. The 
infrastructure program for two new water wells in North 
Battleford is also good but it’s an old announcement from six 
months ago. 
 
We have spent two weeks in the national eye. Are we now to be 
forgotten? And is the government’s promise of special help to 
be fobbed off by the minister saying oh, but there’s this 
infrastructure program, we will simply re-reannounce the 
infrastructure program and that’s the special help. Will he 
commit that is not the special help, there will be more help to 
deal with North Battleford’s problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure what that 
member contributed to this community and to this province 
while he had an opportunity to make a contribution. But I can 
assure the people in my home community of North Battleford, I 
can assure them, that we are working on additional help to help 
them meet their problems and ensure quality safety and safe 
drinking water in those communities and throughout the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would just like the Assembly 
to come to order before we commence with the ministerial 
statements. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Allan Blair Cancer Centre 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be able to rise 
today in this Assembly and announce that a very significant 
new project will be undertaken at the Allan Blair Cancer Clinic 
in Regina. I was honoured to have attended an opening 
ceremony at the site of the clinic this morning to announce that 
this project will see the addition of a new linear accelerator, a 
computerized treatment planning system, and a CT 
(computerized axial tomography) simulator at the Allan Blair 
Cancer Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that this government has been 
able to provide funding of $1.23 million for the construction of 
the bunker at the Allan Blair Cancer Centre and $3 million for 
the purchase of the new linear accelerator, the CT simulator, 
and computerized treatment planning system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, construction is already underway on the bunker, 
which will house the new linear accelerator. Mr. Speaker, for 
those of you unfamiliar with this type of radiation treatment, 
linear accelerators are the primary piece of medical equipment 
that is used to deliver radiation therapy to cancer patients. It is 
an essential piece of equipment, given that approximately half 
of all patients diagnosed with cancer are treated with some form 
of radiation. 
 
Currently, Mr. Speaker, there are three linear accelerators in use 



May 17, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1195 

 

at the centre and with the most recent acquisition, that number 
will soon be four. 
 
The new system, Mr. Speaker, will include a CT simulator and 
a treatment computer program, which will allow cancer 
specialists to simulate the patient’s treatment plan before any 
therapy begins. 
 
This new treatment planning system ensures that the most 
appropriate and effective doses of radiation are delivered, 
minimizing the side effects of radiation treatment for those 
needing care. In short, it is new technology that has the 
potential to improve patient access to services, reduce 
unpleasant side effects for cancer patients, and enhance their 
quality of life. 
 
We are very pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that this new 
equipment will ensure that cancer patients have the best and 
most effective treatment available. It will also allow the cancer 
specialists of our agency to continue to offer high-quality, 
accessible treatment for cancer patients. 
 
It is an important accomplishment to note, Mr. Speaker, that 
Saskatchewan continues to provide timely access to radiation 
therapy for cancer patients. That is because we continue to meet 
national guidelines for waiting times for radiation treatment of 
cancer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that many other provinces have not been 
able to maintain access to this type of treatment in their own 
provinces. They have had to send patients out of country for 
radiation treatments. This has not been the case in 
Saskatchewan and we are very thankful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, strengthening cancer care for patients in this 
province is part of our government’s commitment to an 
accessible, quality, health care system. In this year’s health 
budget, Mr. Speaker, we provided the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency with $6.5 million in new funding. This brings the 
agency’s overall budget to approximately $41 million, an 
increase of more than 19 per cent over last year’s budget. 
 
This is a significant investment that will help the agency on a 
number of fronts including the rising cost of cancer drugs, the 
retention and recruitment of skilled staff, and the cost of 
operating new equipment such as the linear accelerator. 
 
While new and better equipment is always welcome, Mr. 
Speaker, it means very little if we do not have the dedicated 
cancer treatment specialists to operate it. I want to emphasize 
that the health care system in this province would not have been 
able to offer top quality cancer treatment to its patients without 
the calibre of professional staff working at the Allan Blair 
Cancer Clinic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that retaining and recruiting health care 
providers is one of our health system’s greatest challenges. 
There’s a national and international shortage of radiation 
therapists and radiation oncologists right now. These 
professionals are essential members of the cancer treatment 
team and are in high demand at cancer agencies and centres 
right across North America. 
 

(14:30) 
 
In this highly competitive environment, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency has continued to make extensive 
efforts to keep and attract these very important health providers. 
I want to commend the agency for its work to enhance staffing 
at the cancer centres in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is well-known among other 
provinces and countries for our accomplishments and leadership 
in health care. We have led the way in many areas of health care 
in this country, and we will continue to work together to find 
solutions to problems facing the health care system today. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency 
has a proud tradition of innovative and effective programs and 
services, and that tradition is certain to continue well into the 
future. And this investment by the Government of 
Saskatchewan will allow them to continue this valuable service. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for this opportunity to rise today on 
this important announcement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
that I respond to the minister’s statement and the announcement 
of new equipment for the Allan Blair Cancer Centre here in 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are few people in this province that at one 
time or another haven’t been close to someone who has been 
touched by the dreaded disease of cancer. Many of us have had 
family and friends that go through the very, very trying reality 
of being diagnosed with this dreaded disease and of having to 
watch them as they go and struggle through the various 
therapies that are required in order to try to cope with the 
outcomes of this disease. And many times these individuals lose 
the battle. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as the Health critic for the opposition, we 
certainly are very pleased to see improvements in the treatment 
of cancer in this province. And certainly the Allan Blair clinic 
in Regina has an outstanding reputation not only in 
Saskatchewan but across Canada, for the work that they do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well I’m glad to hear in the minister’s statement 
that he acknowledges the fact and the reality that equipment by 
itself is not the only answer. And that unless we have trained 
personnel — radiologists, oncologists, and all the people that 
are involved in providing this treatment — that all the fancy 
equipment in the world will just sit there unusable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a bit alarming yesterday at the Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses’ Association meeting, the minister was 
unaware of the shortage of training positions that there are in 
this province for nurses and other medical professions. 
 
And I hope that this government opposite will take some 
concrete steps to make sure that there are significant increases 
in the training seats of this province, and make a long-term 
commitment to the integrated Health Sciences facility at the 
University of Saskatchewan that would provide the basis for 



1196 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2001 

 

this kind of increased training. Because, Mr. Speaker, as the 
minister said in his statement, all the equipment in the world 
without trained people is absolutely not going to provide 
anything useful for the people of this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we certainly want to join in congratulating the 
Allan Blair Cancer Treatment Centre for their expansion. We 
wish them well in recruiting their required professionals that 
they need in order to deliver and man this expanded equipment 
facility. And we certainly wish them well in providing much 
needed care and support to people that are struggling with the 
dreaded disease of cancer. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Saskatchewan Natural Resources 
Transfer Agreement (Treaty Land Entitlement) 

Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 34, The 
Saskatchewan Natural Resources Transfer Agreement (Treaty 
Land Entitlement) Amendment Act, 2001 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 35, 
The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 2001 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to stand and respond on behalf of the government to questions 
187, 188, and 189. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 187, 188, and 189 are 
hereby tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to outline the key provisions of the 
proposed amendment to The Student Assistance and Student 
Aid Fund Act of 1985. 
 

Mr. Speaker, on July 31 of this year marks the end of the 
current lender financial agreement with the Royal Bank for 
Saskatchewan student loans. The Saskatchewan government 
will again become the lender on August 1. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is negotiating with the 
federal government to integrate the Canada and Saskatchewan 
student loan programs and jointly deliver the program using the 
National Student Loans Service Centre. Successful negotiation 
will result in improved benefit for borrowers and a more 
convenient process including the characteristic of one student, 
one loan. Many Saskatchewan students have told me that this 
would be welcome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current legislation was designed for the private 
lender agreement that is about to expire. It allows payments 
from the Student Aid Fund to be made to banks only. It does 
not, for example, allow payments to be made from the fund to 
service providers and to other governments. 
 
The amendment provides the administrative authority to pay all 
or any contractual expenses from the Student Aid Fund or from 
the General Revenue Fund at the minister’s discretion. This will 
allow the department to meet its obligations to Canada and to 
the National Student Loans Service Centre as set out in the 
Canada-Saskatchewan integrated loan agreement. 
 
The minister is still subject to order in council approval of 
contractual agreements under The Government Organization 
Act. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the amendment to The Student Assistance 
and Student Aid Fund Act will permit what is essentially an 
administrative decision to be made in a timely fashion and 
ensure that Saskatchewan student access to student loans is 
uninterrupted. It will allow the minister flexibility in paying 
contractual expenses out of either the Student Aid Fund or the 
department’s appropriation. 
 
With that explanation, Mr. Speaker, of the intent of the Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 29, The Student 
Assistance and Student Aid Fund Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege to 
respond to the minister’s Bill No. 29, an Act to amend The 
Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it brings a number of items to mind concerning 
this Bill. The number one item I think, in my mind, that I’d like 
to speak to a bit here is concerning the Royal Bank’s decision 
not to continue with the program at the federal level. And it 
brings up a couple of matters. One is, what was the Royal 
Bank’s criteria for eligibility and has that been incorporated into 
this Bill? Will it be improved upon as far as the Royal Bank’s 
eligibility criteria? And hopefully, some changes have been 
made to improve the eligibility to Saskatchewan students. 
 
Also, the other item that comes to mind is two-income families, 
when there’s a husband and wife that are working, in many 
cases that disallows their child or student from being able to 
apply and be accepted for the loans. 
 
And also I would like to question if there’s some changes can 



May 17, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1197 

 

be made. It’s a matter of families having to work for two 
incomes and not having the money to finance their children’s 
post-secondary education. 
 
And really, I’d also like to make a comment on the overall 
tuition increases at the post-secondary level. The government’s 
. . . unfortunately, it’s not supporting the universities to the level 
that is required and this is off-loaded onto the students and their 
families as far as the cost of tuition and the cost of going to 
post-secondary education. 
 
And all these areas need to be discussed because we are 
currently having a shortage of skilled workers in the province; 
and a number of our young people, after leaving university, are 
leaving the province to other areas where there are better jobs 
and better . . . more well-paying jobs. 
 
And so I need to take this back to the stakeholders and discuss it 
with my caucus colleagues. And I’d like to adjourn at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2001 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to second the 
reading of The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2001. Mr. 
Speaker, as you will recall, last year this Assembly passed a 
landmark Bill that was intended to replace the existing Land 
Titles Act with a new Act that would implement necessary law 
reform and facilitate the re-engineering and computerization of 
the land titles system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation, over 550 sections in length, will 
come into force later this spring. Indeed, I am pleased to advise 
this Assembly that the land registry district of Moose Jaw will 
be the first district in the province of Saskatchewan to proceed 
with implementation of the revised land system, in June of this 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conjunction with this implementation process, 
it’s now necessary to provide for additional consequential 
amendments to the Bill that was passed last year into other 
pieces of legislation to further facilitate the implementation of 
this extensive project. 
 
These changes include amendments to The Land Titles Act, 
2000 to remove the requirement for certification of mineral 
commodities, to permit registration of prescribed interests 
against an uncertified mineral title, to clarify that implied 
interests are only applied in titles where they were otherwise 
applied by law, and finally, to provide discretion to the registrar 
to set the hours of the registry. 
 
In addition to these rather technical amendments to The Land 
Titles Act, 2000, consequential amendments are also being 
made to The Heritage Property Act; The Homesteads Act, 
Personal Property Security Act, 1993; The Planning and 
Development Act; The Highways and Transportation Act, 
1997; and The Tax Enforcement Act. 
 
These changes deal mostly with terminological amendments to 
pick up the new language in the original Act, and to catch other 
minor problems that are now to be corrected to avoid 

complications in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is intended to allow the land project to be 
implemented without undue difficulty. And as you know, many 
user groups including realtors, surveyors, and the legal 
community are awaiting the implementation of the new system, 
and these proposed amendments will assist in that 
implementation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Land Titles Act, 2000, and to make consequential amendments 
to certain Acts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure this 
afternoon to rise and speak on Bill No. 19, an Act to amend 
land titles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly we’re just getting to get a good look at 
this Bill for the first time, and we need an opportunity to 
certainly be able to talk to several stakeholders about this Bill as 
we look at it. And as the minister has said, they were talking 
there’s some changes in here to tax enforcement. 
 
We’re kind of curious as to why we’re having to take a look at 
tax enforcement at this time. Certainly it’s one of the great 
problems that’s taking place in this province, Mr. Speaker, is 
tax payments. 
 
We see where in the RM of Rudy where the Saskatchewan 
Valley Potato Corporation, or whatever their new name happens 
to be today, receives a tax notice. They simply draw a line 
through it and submit whatever amount of monies that they so 
desire. 
 
Now is this the type of tax enforcement then that the RMs (rural 
municipality) are going to be able to use now that the Crown 
corporations are going to be able to pay taxes the same as every 
other individual in this province? Or is this going to strengthen 
the position of Crown corporations not to pay taxes? 
 
These are things that need to be looked at, Mr. Speaker, and we 
simply don’t know. The minister certainly wasn’t clear enough 
on the issue as he spoke about it. And so we want to take some 
time and take a look at this type of an issue. 
 
He also spoke about, to a small degree, maintenance orders. 
Certainly that’s always been a very big problem in this province 
and in any jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker. And so then how 
maintenance orders are going to apply because of the land . . . 
this change, this amendment to The Land Titles Act, 2000, Mr. 
Speaker. We need to be able to look at further. We need to be 
able to take this amendment to stakeholders out there. How is it 
going to affect the people of Saskatchewan and will it be 
positive or negative? 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke about changes in 
this Act that are going to affect the registration of minerals. 
And, Mr. Speaker, of course it’s a big part of the economy of 
Saskatchewan, mineral development, whether it’s in the North 
or in the South. And certainly we’ll need an opportunity to be 
able to speak to the stakeholders about what kind of effect this 



1198 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2001 

 

is going to have upon them. 
 
And so I think at this time it would be best, rather than move it 
along too quickly, that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to move second reading of The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 
2001. Mr. Speaker, in conjunction with The Land Titles Act, 
2000, this Assembly passed The Land Surveys Act, 2000 in the 
last session of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Land Surveys Act, 2000 represented a significant 
modernization of the survey system in the province of 
Saskatchewan and coordinated this system with the revised and 
computerized Land Titles system. Mr. Speaker, as with The 
Land Titles Act, 2000, The Land Surveys Act, 2000 is intended 
to be proclaimed in force this spring and rolled out on an 
ongoing basis over the next two years. 
 
Since the passage of The Land Surveys Act, 2000, consultations 
with the land surveys groups and the legal community have 
identified certain changes, which it’s, felt would improve the 
clarity and operation of this legislation. 
 
For example, this Bill provides that amendments be made to 
The Land Surveys Act, 2000 to clarify the extent to which 
survey records in the land surveys registry may be searched and 
to replace the existing sections regarding primary and 
secondary monuments with one section applying to all 
monuments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those of us who are not surveyors, a 
monument is a device or object which marks, witnesses, or 
references a boundary of a parcel of land, such as an iron post at 
the corner of a quarter section. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes are not changes to the original 
intent of the Act but rather improvements in language to better 
reflect procedures in the survey community, or to make the Act 
easier to apply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Land Surveys Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with great pleasure I stand 
today to speak to Bill No. 20, The Land Surveys Amendment 
Act. There is no doubt that land survey is an important issue in 
the province of Saskatchewan, and any Bill that pertains to land 
survey should be taken seriously. 
 
But I have first hand in rural Saskatchewan been a witness to 
boundary feuds, and subsequently I know how serious in nature 
they can become. 
 
At first glance this Bill appears to address some of the issues 
surrounding controversies over boundaries and defines them a 
little more clearly. And the Minister of Justice just said in his 

previous address that it would help to coordinate the land 
surveys and the land titles to electronic media. 
 
But I know some members of this side of the House will need a 
few more days to examine this Bill a little closer and to discuss 
the implications with the different groups of citizens that it’s 
going to affect. So therefore at this time I wish to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 22 — The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2001 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise again today to enter in the debate on Bill No. 22, The 
Assessment Management Agency Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve carefully read over the Bill itself and I’ve also 
read over the Hansard transcript from May 14 when the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs gave a brief explanation of the 
implications of this Bill. 
 
SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) in 
the past has been a very controversial agency, and there is no 
doubt that this controversy has accelerated a great deal with the 
latest reassessment that they have announced in our province. 
 
The minister told the House that an accurate assessment of 
property values for taxation purposes is critical to the ongoing 
operations of every municipality and school board in this 
province, and the members of this side of the House couldn’t 
agree with that statement more. 
 
The problems seem to come in, however, that the assessment 
values that SAMA has evaluated don’t always seem to be 
accurate or just, and this is happening in more and more cases. 
There have been numerous complaints by property owners that 
in many incidences there are sizable disparities in the evaluation 
of similar properties. 
 
There also appears to be, in many cases, little or no logic to the 
amount of the assessment value that SAMA has given to 
different parcels of property. Although there are many reported 
protests to the latest reassessment, the most obviously hit 
industry seems to be that of the hoteliers. 
 
The member from Saltcoats has brought to the attention of the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs the plight of the hotels at Val 
Marie and Leader, but there are many others, Mr. Speaker, who 
find themselves in the same type of situation. Many of the 
hotels in this province are seeing their taxes doubled or more 
thanks to the new reassessment, and they simply cannot afford 
this higher tax bill. 
 



May 17, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1199 

 

Another startling example of the repercussions of the 
reassessment is the reports from the city of Swift Current whose 
small businesses are facing property tax increases of 80,000 up 
to $100,000. I’m sure the city of Swift Current is not alone in 
having this happen, Mr. Speaker. They are simply the first ones 
to voice their concerns and the implications to this province 
could be very, very devastating. 
 
Many of the small businesses in this province do not have a 
large enough profit margin to absorb this type of tax increase all 
by itself, let alone in conjunction with the enormous utility rate 
increases that they have had to recently face and those that are 
predicted to be coming in the near future. 
 
The options that they’re talking about is anything but good 
news for Saskatchewan. Some of these businesses are saying 
that the tax increase will mean that they will have to lay off 
some of their employees. Sadly at a time when we are now the 
province that is the leader in job losses, we on this side of the 
House find that it’s very alarming that the new reassessment is 
going to perhaps drive even more jobs out of our province. 
 
And even more sadly is that, in some cases, job loss may be the 
best case scenario that the business can offer because some 
businesses, Mr. Speaker, are saying that this will mean that they 
will simply close to the doors to their business permanently and 
they will leave our province. 
 
The minister mentioned that SAMA has to build a relationship 
of trust, confidence, and accountability with the stakeholders, 
including government municipalities and the public. And I 
would like to add that it should be, in particular, the 
municipalities and the public that meet this accountability since 
this is just one of the expenses that the NDP government has 
downloaded more and more onto the municipalities, so they’re 
now paying the lion’s share of SAMA’s bills. 
 
The Bill seems to state that SAMA must ensure that its books, 
records, and accounts are kept in such a way that it can be 
verified that the money granted to SAMA has been expended 
on the purpose that it was intended for. 
 
I find it extremely surprising, Mr. Speaker, that this has never 
been in place before. I can’t imagine why we’ve allowed a 
publicly funded agency to conduct business for as many years 
as SAMA has without having some mechanism of 
accountability of how the money is being spent, in place before 
now. 
 
SAMA’s levies have kept increasing over the years but up until 
this point, they have had to give little explanation as to why 
they need the increase. It looks like we’ve allowed this agency 
to have the same free rein as we seem to be allowing all our 
Crown corporations. 
 
This Bill also, if I’m understanding it correctly when I read it 
over, will require SAMA to have their books audited by an 
outside auditor and that report will have to be provided to the 
minister, to SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association), SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities), and to SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association). And I view this as a very positive step, Mr. 
Speaker, because SAMA has enjoyed the power of being a 

monopoly service for far too long. 
 
There has been obvious, serious flaws in the accountability and 
transparency of SAMA, and no doubt this has created a great 
deal of anger and a lack of confidence for the stakeholders 
using this agency. 
 
SAMA has simply gotten away with not being accountable 
because the stakeholders have had few or no other options to 
turn to. This discontent has been best demonstrated with more 
and more municipalities talking about no longer using SAMA’s 
services, and in particular the most recent case is the city of 
Swift Current. 
 
I think this accountability and transparency should be expanded 
to making the information available in an open and 
comprehensive manner as to how SAMA arrives at their 
assessment values. Often something as simple as mere 
understanding can disperse a great deal of discontent and 
mistrust. 
 
On far too many occasions, SAMA has been very hesitant in 
giving the people the information on how the assessment to 
their property has been arrived at, or they explain it in such a 
complex manner that the property owner is no better off to 
understanding than before he asked the question. 
 
We tend to say that they use a market adjustment factor as the 
mechanism to determine the assessment value, but they are not 
always open as to what that factor is, Mr. Speaker, nor how the 
factor was arrived at. 
 
SAMA has also not appeared open to examining suggestions 
put forward by the very people who are paying their bills as to 
other options on how the assessment should be calculated in a 
more equitable manner. 
 
I have heard suggestions of perhaps looking at an income-based 
form of assessment, or a dollar value for rent based on what a 
building should bring in if it was rented. And I have no idea if 
either of these ideas could be implemented, Mr. Speaker. But 
there seems to be a great deal of frustration out there that 
SAMA isn’t in the least bit inclined to even look at any other 
options, and yet the present system of calculating assessment 
value seems to be seriously flawed. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we would like to look at this Bill a 
little bit longer and discuss it with different interest groups. At 
this point, I wish to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 24 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 24 — The Urban 
Municipality Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to enter into debate on Bill No. 24, The Urban Municipality Act 
amendment. And this is quite a significant amendment, Mr. 
Speaker, in the sense that this Bill speaks to something that 



1200 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2001 

 

certainly was very controversial last year, and that was the 
effort of the government to forcibly amalgamate municipalities 
in this province. 
 
And I guess it’s nice to see that there is an understanding that 
local municipal government should be respected, Mr. Speaker, 
and that perhaps their input should be valued. Because going 
the route of allowing for voluntary amalgamation is something 
that we on this side of the House suggested all along. That if 
municipalities were interested in joining forces for social, 
economic reasons, that that should be their decision, and they 
should be responsible for determining how the new 
municipality, how a larger municipality comprised of a number 
of municipalities interested in amalgamating should look. In 
other words, Mr. Speaker, they should be the masters of their 
own destinies. 
 
(15:00) 
 
I think this Bill goes a certain way towards allowing that to 
occur. We do take away the requirement for ministerial 
approval on many of the routine operations in municipalities so 
we give them a little latitude in areas that they previously 
haven’t had. And perhaps now with the legislation and with the 
ability to amalgamate voluntarily with a greater degree of 
autonomy, they can make decisions at a level that they weren’t 
allowed to before. 
 
A couple of the items that are specifically referenced in the 
amendment, Mr. Speaker, include making it possible for a 
village of less than 100 people to be dissolved by ministerial 
order rather than by order in council. So something I think that 
should make it a little simpler to allow municipalities to 
amalgamate if they so desire, and would allow for that process 
to happen quicker as well. 
 
We also look at the definition of a restructuring agreement in 
this Act, Mr. Speaker, in this amendment that would put the 
provisions for that amalgamations in . . . for that amalgamation 
into place. 
 
And in looking at the definition of the restructuring agreement, 
I think that it is . . . it probably contains the majority of the 
points that would need to be addressed when any municipalities 
agree to amalgamate or to merge. 
 
The one question I might have of the minister, Mr. Speaker, is: 
beyond the definition included in this amendment, do they have 
a draft copy of a restructuring agreement? Do they have an idea 
of what the actual agreement itself might look like and what it 
might involve? And if they did, Mr. Speaker, I would 
respectfully ask that that be shared with us and we would like to 
be able to take a look at that as well, if they do have an idea of 
what a restructuring agreement might look like in its final 
format and version. 
 
There’s some discussion in the amendment as well, Mr. 
Speaker, about giving municipalities the ability to be able to 
divide into wards, determine more of the process for electoral 
purposes within the municipality. Certainly I think that’s a step 
in the right direction in that any kind of autonomy, Mr. Speaker, 
certainly involves municipalities, any self-administering body, 
to be able to make the decisions around how their elected 

officials serve them, and in what capacity, and what the format 
of their boundaries for wards, constituencies, those kinds of 
things are. 
 
At this point, Mr. Speaker, there is one concern that I’ve had 
expressed to me on a number of occasions by different 
communities around the province. And I think it’s one thing 
that perhaps the minister could have looked at in this Act, in 
this amendment or maybe could look at in the future. 
 
And I understand that in both the rural and the urban 
amendments we’re talking about, particularly in the rural . . . 
I’m sorry, in the rural amendment we’re talking about, only 
allowing people to vote in the rural municipality that they live 
in and not voting in any other municipalities regardless of 
whether they own property there or not. And in the past, of 
course, if they did own property they were allowed to vote in 
other municipalities. 
 
Certainly I think we have some concern with that. If someone 
does own property in another municipality and they reside in 
another municipality, they probably do have the right to be able 
to vote where they do qualify as electors through the ownership 
of property, and that kind of thing. 
 
But the one concern that I’ve had expressed to me is the ability 
of people to sit on a number of different councils, both rural and 
urban. We’ve had a couple of examples of that in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, where individuals sitting on a small 
town council, for example, becoming councillors, in some cases 
being the mayor, then decide they have an interest on a rural 
council as well, and because they do own property and they do 
have that right to vote, they also then in turn have the right to be 
able to seek elected office. 
 
Consequently we do have situations around the province where 
there are individuals who do sit on two or three different 
councils, urban and rural. And I’ve had some people express a 
great deal of concern to me around that issue, Mr. Speaker, in 
the sense that while they probably can accept the person voting 
in a municipality that they don’t live in but they do qualify as an 
elector in, they would like to see some limitation, if you will, on 
the number of elected bodies that a person can be elected to. 
 
And I’ve actually had people indicate that as a concern even 
with respect to this Assembly, in that we have a lot of 
individuals who have served and are currently serving in 
capacities on rural and urban councils and then become 
Members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I think that is a whole issue that could be looked at, Mr. 
Speaker, whether it be between rural and urban municipalities, 
of course. And urban municipalities, it’s not allowed at this 
point, but you can only sit on the council of a single urban 
municipality; you can’t sit on the council of another 
municipality, urban municipality. But I think maybe that is 
something that in the future the minister and the government 
could look at because it does seem to be an area of concern for 
people out there. 
 
Another area that this amendment addresses, Mr. Speaker, is the 
whole area of business licences. And in certain cases it will 
allow a limitation on the number of like-businesses within a 



May 17, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1201 

 

municipality. And I think we . . . now we certainly understand 
why that is in there, and I think it is well-intentioned enough 
and that it comes from the city of Saskatoon, a request of theirs 
as a result of some of their experiences a couple of years ago. 
 
And as I said, Mr. Speaker, while we feel it is well-intentioned 
enough, there certainly could be some very negative effects if 
we don’t institute the mechanism to do that properly. 
 
There may very well be situations where we do want to control 
the number of certain types of like-businesses in a particular 
area, but I certainly don’t think we want to get into a situation 
where we’re controlling, for example, the number of 
accountants in a municipality. We don’t want to get into a 
situation where we’re controlling the number of barbers or the 
number of grocery stores — those kinds of things. 
 
So I think that whole area has to be revisited in this amendment 
very, very seriously. As I say, Mr. Speaker, I think we 
understand the intent, but if we don’t approach this with the 
proper mechanism, I think it could have a very, very adverse 
effect on private businesses within our municipalities. 
 
We’re looking at municipalities getting the authority for setting 
fees charged to direct sellers for business licences. This was 
previously set out in The Direct Sellers Act and was on 
occasion a bit of a problem for municipalities in that it was an 
area they had absolutely no control in. But I think given the 
situation here and the fact that they can now set their own fees, 
that that is something that we can certainly agree with, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We took a look at the sale of land issues that are addressed in 
the amendment, and it removes the need for ministerial 
approval if the municipality wishes to sell, lease, or otherwise 
dispose of land at a price less than market value, once again 
giving communities a little more latitude in terms of their 
ability to be able to make decisions that would be in the best 
interests of their communities, and something that I think most 
municipalities will receive fairly well. 
 
There are a couple of other amendments in here that give 
municipalities some of the very basic rights that I think a lot of 
people would be surprised that they didn’t have in the first 
place. Things like deciding where traffic signs are going to go, 
those kinds of things. 
 
I think municipalities for a long time now have been asking for 
and wanted the ability to be able to make those kinds of routine 
operating decisions at the local level without having to go to the 
minister for ministerial approval. And I think certainly they will 
appreciate that little bit of movement there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We look at the dispute resolution mechanism contained in the 
Act to settle inter-municipal disputes, and I think we’ve got a 
. . . once again, a good step forward here in the sense that it isn’t 
government coming in and deciding what’s going to happen 
between two municipalities; what the relationship between 
those two municipalities is going to look like. They have the 
ability through a dispute resolution mechanism to be able to 
determine that for themselves. 
 
There are other issues around debt approval, investment, 

railway land assessment. There’s some changes to the board of 
revision. 
 
One of the other items here that caught our eye, Mr. Speaker, 
was the special purpose taxation. If we do get municipalities 
that are going to be amalgamating voluntarily, then they will be 
needing a little bit of latitude, a little bit of room to move, in 
order to be able to bring what might be two slightly . . . or 
maybe in some cases, a lot different structures together. 
 
And so the ability to be able to perhaps provide for a special 
levy until such time as the mill rates can be merged and the 
taxations . . . taxation systems made compatible would be a way 
to allow them to do that. 
 
There’s some discretionary authority being granted to 
communities here in allowing communities to develop 
community advisory committees to provide linkages between 
the councils of the amalgamated municipalities and the . . . what 
would be the new individual municipality that would be 
created. 
 
And I think this is probably an excellent idea, Mr. Speaker. And 
I think the only reason that we see this in here is because this is 
one thing that the government didn’t do when they instituted 
health care reform. They just went out there and they 
determined what the boundaries of the health districts were 
going to be without any regard, without any regard, absolutely 
no regard to what was going to happen to the small 
communities within the confines of those boundaries, Mr. 
Speaker, who had through hard work, volunteerism, 
fundraising, those kinds of ways, raised funds to build hospitals, 
to build health care facilities, and then lose the ability to be able 
to control any of that after the health districts were formed. So 
possibly it was a lesson learned by the government, Mr. 
Speaker, and one that they are hoping in a situation where 
municipalities will voluntarily amalgamate that it won’t be a 
mistake made again. 
 
This will provide the opportunity and the ability for 
communities that are going to be forming a larger community, 
larger municipality, to have advisory bodies that can, 
particularly in a transition period, Mr. Speaker, that can provide 
advice to the overall council, the overall governing body and 
allow them to be able to work in the concerns of the newly 
amalgamated communities into the larger structure. So I think 
that certainly will be something that municipalities can live 
with. 
 
With respect to municipal administrators, we see the movement 
more towards the self-regulated organization, Mr. Speaker. And 
that is something that I personally applaud. When we’ve got a 
situation where we have the fine professionals that we do 
operate as administrators, operating our rural and urban 
municipalities, I think that it is only a matter of respect to be 
able to allow them to become a self-regulating organization. 
 
They are now going to be able to establish a board of 
examiners. SUMA and the Saskatchewan . . . or the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipal Administrators’ Association 
will oversee this and then that board will certify administrators. 
So I think going the direction of SROs (self-regulated 
organization) is something that will be welcomed by 



1202 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2001 

 

administrators as well. 
 
With respect to financial requirements and financial reporting 
requirements going to a more locally determined approach to 
selecting accountants, those kind of things, Mr. Speaker, I think 
is going to be once again probably very well-received by the 
municipalities. 
 
The special municipal charges, once again we’ve talked a little 
bit about that, Mr. Speaker, and certainly those will assist 
communities in that transition period through to the 
municipality ultimately becoming one cohesive unit. 
 
I think the one thing we should talk about a little bit, Mr. 
Speaker, is the fact that municipalities coming together, because 
of the structure, the historical structure of urban and rural 
municipalities over the course of the history of this province, 
there are certainly going to be some difficulties. And merging, 
particularly rural and urban, are going to pose some serious 
problems for municipalities, particularly in the area of cost 
when it comes to assuming responsibility for something that’s 
been talked about much in the House in the last week, Mr. 
Speaker, sewer and water treatment facilities, those kind of 
things. 
 
I think one of the things that the government may have to look 
at here is when municipalities do decide to take the initiative, 
and when they do decide that it would be in the best interests of 
their citizens and their ratepayers to join forces and become a 
larger unit, then I think not only should the government be 
facilitating that through pieces of legislation such as this, but 
perhaps they should look at a way of being able to provide 
some funding for that transition as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There has been a tremendous amount of response to this 
particular amendment, Mr. Speaker, and we’re hearing 
everyday from rural and urban municipalities and all of their 
elected officials in terms of their reactions to this. We still have 
a number of stakeholders that have indicated they are willing to 
provide us some guidance and direction on this amendment. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 23 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 23 — The Rural 
Municipality Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me 
to rise and debate Bill No. 23, The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act. I’ve read the Act and I went through Hansard 
and I have some concerns about what’s happening there. 
 
As a person that was involved in my own RM, and I am one of 
those few people that Carl was talking about that sit on a 
council. And I spent eight years with . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, for one minute. I just want to remind 

the member that in reference to other members, he should refer 
to constituencies rather than first or second names. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker. I apologize to the member 
from Carrot River. 
 
After watching the past decade and seeing the lack of respect 
that this NDP government gives our hard-working and efficient 
local government leaders, I think it’s only fair to rise today and 
remind the members opposite of the many indignities that they 
have laid at the feet of RMs. 
 
Starting with the most recent example, we only have to go back 
a year or so. At that time we saw the members opposite, 
through the guise of government reports, launch a cynical and 
dishonest campaign to paint RMs and small communities as 
dreadful waste of money. 
 
This campaign by the NDP was waged solely for those living in 
larger centres, to convince the people that the people serving at 
local councils were the cause of rising taxes in this province. 
And of course most of those members over there know, or 
should know, that serving on a local council is virtually a 
full-time volunteer position. 
 
However the truth didn’t stop the NDP, since their overall goal 
of course was to worsen rural/urban split in this province, 
hoping to get some political advantage. 
 
So we saw them launch their forced amalgamation initiative just 
to lay the . . . slap the people living outside the city. Any 
argument that these people should have a great deal to say in 
the future of their local government was lost on the members 
opposite as they continued to drive ahead with their cynical 
attempt to once again drive another wedge between rural and 
urban voters. 
 
They told us that there was no sign of local governments 
wanting to co-operate or amalgamate because so few over the 
years had. Therefore the government had to step in and force 
them to. 
 
I’d like to remind the members opposite that . . . I’d like to 
remind the government members over on the other side that my 
RM in my home community shared an administrator for longer 
than I can remember. We shared an office. We also shared local 
services, EMO (Emergency Measures Organization) services, 
firefighting services, so that was not an issue. 
 
However, through the whole debate, at no one time did the 
members opposite admit to the fact that even if municipalities 
wanted to bring greater co-operation and amalgamation, there 
were rules in place in provincial legislation that precluded such 
co-operation. Once again the members opposite were satisfied 
to bend the truth to serve their own political purposes. 
 
However, once again those members forgot that the people of 
this province won’t be pushed around by their 
heavy-handedness any longer. The people fought back and they 
won — at least for the time being. 
 
That brings me to this legislation, which members opposite tell 
us takes away the impediments for amalgamation that the 



May 17, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1203 

 

province has in place. You can be sure that we will be looking 
very carefully at every comma in this Bill before allowing it to 
committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When it comes to issues involving municipalities, Mr. Speaker, 
I am not willing to simply take this government’s word for what 
they are doing here. We will be heavily consulting on this Bill 
with people throughout the province to ensure, Mr. Speaker, 
that it’s doing the right thing, first, on amalgamation, but on a 
number of other matters as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to touch on a few aspects of this Bill, 
but first, of course no discussion of RMs can go by without a 
word or two about this government’s 10-year attack on local 
governments. Municipalities have seen their funding from the 
provincial government cut and cut again, over and over, Mr. 
Speaker, and yet these municipalities continue to provide a 
good service to their ratepayers at tax rates they are desperately 
trying to hold down. But we know as well, in many cases, it 
will be impossible for many municipalities to keep their mill 
rate down this year. And even if they do, an increasing 
assessment could bring in more tax revenue anyway. 
 
This year both rural and municipalities . . . local governments 
saw their revenue-sharing grants increased by exactly zero, 
nothing, Mr. Speaker — zip. This government that for so many 
years wailed and moaned about federal off-loading onto 
provinces continues to do exact same thing to local 
governments. I would say it shows more hypocrisy from the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At any rate, Mr. Speaker, there are a few items in this Bill that 
do raise some serious concerns in my mind as well as numerous 
questions. 
 
One such item that stuck in my mind was the new voting 
provisions in rural municipalities. Now the way the changes are 
written here I think are extremely unclear. As all members 
know, under current legislation all ratepayers in an RM, 
regardless of whether they reside there, are given the right to 
vote since they do pay taxes. 
 
Now there’s one . . . there’s some changes . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, I have new glasses. 
 
Now there are some changes being made here that I am a little 
unclear of — what effects is and how it pertains to those RMs 
that amalgamate with urban municipalities in municipal districts 
or RMs that amalgamate with other RMs. 
 
We do need to make sure that these provisions are intended to 
do because they are written quite ambiguously. However, let me 
say this for the record. If the intention of the government is to 
take away the right to vote from those with property in an RM 
but do not live in the RM, I would be opposed to that. 
 
So I need to do much more consulting on this provision and I 
will make . . . have many questions at such time when we see 
this Bill go into committee, probably later on this fall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one aspect of this legislation that does appear 
quite positive is the attempt to do away with much on-hands 
interference. Many of the everyday practices in operating an 

RM currently are under direct control of the minister and are 
not necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment appears to loosen the grip to a 
certain extent, and I do believe that to be positive movement 
forward, though I still want to consult with our local councils 
and ratepayers before passing final judgment on this aspect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whenever you’re speaking about concept of 
increased co-operation between municipalities or indeed 
amalgamation, there is a real, natural worry about community 
identity and community voice. This amendment sets out 
something called community advisory committees and allows 
former urban municipalities to amalgamate with neighbouring 
RMs to maintain a body that voices concerns of that local 
community. 
 
And of course until we hear details on how such advisory 
committees are to operate and how much influence they 
actually have, it is hard to pass judgment on their effectiveness. 
However, as a concept it seems positive. 
 
We do see a similar type of system set up in the education 
system where individual communities have an advisory 
committee of sort to voice concerns to the board of education in 
question. While in most instances these bodies have very little 
authority, they do give voice to concerns in communities. 
 
I do question who gets to those . . . such committees however. 
As I read the Bill . . . And I don’t seen any impediment to 
former municipalities that strike such councils. However, in 
listening to the words of the minister here this week, I only 
heard him refer to urban municipalities’ councils using these 
councils. 
 
So I will need some clarification here to ensure that both current 
urban and rural municipalities have the right to such councils. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many other provisions in this Bill that 
are very important and on which many, if not all of my 
colleagues would like the opportunity to speak: things such as 
restructuring agreements and what entails in them . . . what is 
entailed in them; things like special levies councils will be able 
to impose. We need some answers as if . . . as to why this is 
necessary, and we need assurance from the members opposite 
that this is not another avenue for the province to download 
more costs onto local governments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need some answers in amendments on business licence 
restrictions that are being put in place. And there are many other 
areas that my colleagues will raise in which we need more 
clarification. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very important that we consult fully and 
completely on this legislation. Since we’ve only had this in 
hand for a very short time, I now move at this time to adjourn 
debate. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(15:30) 



1204 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2001 

 

Bill No. 25 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 25 — The 
Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2001 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to add a 
few brief comments if I could with regards to Bill No. 25. 
 
A lot of the concerns that were expressed earlier by my 
colleagues on Bill 24 and Bill 23 certainly do apply to this one. 
But these ones are a little bit different in that there’s . . . I think 
there’s a lot of . . . some positive things in this Bill that on the 
surface look pretty encouraging. 
 
Reducing government interference, for example, in local 
decision making. I think that has certainly some positive 
aspects. Reduction of the unnecessary political involvement, I 
think, also very positive. Political accountability, streamlining 
administrative procedures, all sound very good. 
 
The problem I would have with that, and I think, Mr. Speaker, 
the problem that others might have as well would be the track 
record that this government has had with those particular 
positive sounding statements. The signals that are coming back 
from the past have not . . . do not fit very well with the intention 
as put forward by the minister in this Bill No. 25. 
 
I’d like to address one or two of those if I could. When we 
talked about some of the things that the government has 
promised before, as they have in this Bill, one of the problems 
that we run into are the things that they promised in other 
jurisdictions but have not followed up with. 
 
And I’m going to use local decision making as an example of 
where we have less than full trust in what they’re proposing in 
this particular Bill. Granted, a lot of things in the northern 
municipalities certainly need correcting, and trust is a very big 
item there. 
 
But when I look at the items of local decision-making promises 
with, for instance, health district boards that gives me some 
concern. That was a promise, but in fact the government 
agencies, the Health department has put so many restrictions on 
local boards that they in fact are struggling to do what they’re 
asked to do by mandate — some elected, some appointed — but 
they’re struggling to do what they can do best because of the 
restrictions that are placed on those particular boards. 
 
I look at the restrictions that are placed on elected boards of 
education, for instance. Although there is a great deal of 
decision making proposed for those boards, in reality local 
school district boards have very little room to manoeuvre. 
 
The number, the amount of dollars that they have to use at their 
discretion, the conditions put in place, makes it very difficult 
for those boards to act autonomously and with any kind of 
consequence other than what the provincial government has 
placed on them. 
 
Municipalities is no different, Mr. Speaker. The restrictions on 
the municipalities and what they can do is very much dictated to 

by the policies and directives of the departments on those 
municipalities. I have several in my constituency that have 
found that they have very difficult times trying to maintain the 
services needed when the department restricts their money flow 
so severely that they struggle to be able to offer the basic 
services. 
 
Those are the problems we have in terms of the government 
trying to indicate that they want local autonomy and local 
decision making, but there are conditions placed that are very, 
very restrictive. 
 
I guess at the same time this becomes an excuse for the 
government to pass off responsibility for their own 
requirements for those particular areas. For instance, when there 
is a particular problem needed to be solved, the government has 
used these boards as both a sounding board and as a shield so 
that they don’t have to respond directly to the taxpayers. 
 
My sympathy very often goes to these local board members. 
Whether they’re elected for education boards, RM boards, 
urban or rural boards, their role is very, very difficult. They’re 
the ones that have to make the decisions under very restricted 
conditions placed on them. And yet they’re the ones that are 
going to have to talk to their neighbours in the coffee shop, at 
church, other social functions where they have to take the heat 
for the decisions that they’ve made. 
 
But the decisions have to be within a very tightly controlled 
environment. 
 
So I guess, Mr. Speaker, that’s a major concern I have when we 
talk about giving the RM or the municipalities more of local 
autonomy and local accountability. It’s very, very difficult for 
me to tell my constituents, for instance, with a lot of confidence 
that this in fact will happen. 
 
One of the things that I noticed in the amendments is in fact the 
number of business licences and the number of similar 
businesses that can be allowed to happen in a particular 
municipality. And in this case, we’re talking about the northern 
municipal regions. 
 
I have a great deal of difficulty in terms of artificially putting 
these kinds of boundaries on businesses, either the kind of 
businesses in terms of similar businesses or the number of 
licences that are issued. Granted, those decisions should be 
rightfully made by the municipal region and the municipal 
district. But when artificial conditions are placed on them, then 
I have much more difficulty in supporting that kind of 
legislation. 
 
Also one of the other things that jumped out at me when I was 
reviewing these amendments would be the discussion about the 
alteration of these municipal boundaries. From what I read and 
from what the minister’s brief description of the Act in this 
particular area leads me to conclude that if alterations to 
municipal boundaries are required, it will have to be shown to 
the satisfaction of the minister. 
 
That gives me some concern. That goes against what we have 
been discussing earlier about trying to work different 
municipalities in co-operation with each other in trying to bring 



May 17, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1205 

 

the common services together. 
 
And if they don’t have the ability to do that, but the 
responsibility goes back to the minister with his satisfaction, I 
think you’re really defeating the purpose of local autonomy and 
accountability as they promised at the beginning of this 
particular . . . the amendments to this Act. 
 
There’s lots of those kinds of subtleties in this legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. I think there’s . . . we need an opportunity to explore 
some of these further. And for that reason I’d like some of my 
other colleagues to be able to speak to this that have much more 
familiarity with the northern municipal regions. 
 
And in that case I would move, Mr. Speaker, that we adjourn 
debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Vote 27 
 
Subvote (CR01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much. Today with us is 
Ken Pontikes, the acting deputy minister; Jill McKeen, director 
of corporate development; Emile St. Amand, director of sport 
and recreation; Larry Chaykowski, executive director, finance 
administration and facilities; and Jocelyn Souliere, Centennial 
Summer Student Employment Program coordinator. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good afternoon, 
Madam Minister, and good afternoon to all your officials. And 
a special welcome today to Jill who is such a wonderful 
conversationalist in the halls of the legislature. 
 
Madam Minister, I just wanted to discuss with you the cultural 
facilities grants program. I have brought this grants program to 
the attention of your department a couple of times, and through 
written questions in the legislature, regarding the funding that 
has been allotted for cultural facilities, and I guess the whole 
program that was announced by your government a couple of 
years ago. 
 
Madam Minister, there was, according to what I understand, 
$4.9 million that was supposed to be designated to this program 
within the last two years, would be ’99-2000 and 2000-2001. Is 
that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The figure that we are working with, 
the 6.9 million from the AEF (Associated Entities Fund), 
understanding that that money has accumulated over the years, 
and in the subsequent years it’ll be 500,000 a year because this 
is a result of a buildup of funds over the years. It won’t be on a 
regular basis that it’ll be that high. 
 
Ms. Julé: — All right. Madam Minister, in the budget 
announcements that government put out — if I can correctly 

remember what I saw in the budget — there was $4.9 million 
that was designated for this cultural facilities grants program in 
each of those two years. So obviously, or possibly, there has 
been some re-jigging or . . . I’m asking why in fact, if that 
money is budgeted, why it hadn’t been used. And that statement 
to you will also lead me to subsequent questions regarding what 
happened to the funding and when it will be utilized. 
 
But if you could just maybe clarify for me whether the budget 
statements did indicate that 4.9 or around that amount would be 
used in both of those years? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Just to go back, I think we’ve found 
where that 4.9 figure comes from. In 1998-99 that was the 
figure, 4.9, but if you continue along in ’99-2000, 2000-2001, 
there’s an additional 500,000 in each of those years, and again 
will be in 2001-2002. And so when if you add it all up is where 
you get the larger figure from. 
 
Now originally there was a requirement in the funding to have 
matched federal funding. Because it was very difficult for many 
of the communities to come up with that because of the criteria 
for federal programs, the criteria was changed, and then 
communities were given an opportunity to apply under the 
change criteria and that created a delay in actually allocating the 
money. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So, Madam 
Minister, are you saying that there is an additional $500,000 in 
addition to the 4.9 million? Let’s just concentrate within the 
year 2000-2001. What will be allotment for cultural facilities 
grants? What will be the total sum of money for that program in 
the year 2000-2001? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The 6.9 that will be allocated, there’s a 
bit of that that goes into the future into the ’02, ’03 year. And 
part of that is because some of these are multi-year projects. 
They don’t all get expended in the one year when they’re 
approved. 
 
But if you add up the 500,000 for each of those subsequent 
years, the total you’d get to is the 6.9. 
 
Ms. Julé: — All right. Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I just want to make reference to a part of your remarks 
that you just made here. You said that there was part of the 
eligibility criteria was matching federal funding. 
 
Now a specific town in my constituency applied for this grant 
and was told about the matching federal funding. And they were 
also told it was up to them to acquire that funding, so that they 
had to contact the feds and do their research on who to contact, 
which was kind of a dilemma and difficult for them because 
they didn’t know exactly where to go and neither were they 
given any information where to go for this. 
 
So I found it a little disconcerting that if this is a program that 
the province is announcing and that there had been, I guess, a 
discussion with the feds, or an agreement with the feds to have 
matching federal funding in place that that should have been 
taken care of by the province so that people wouldn’t have to — 



1206 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2001 

 

at the time that they’re applying and trying to get their criteria 
down pat — have to end up starting to contact the federal 
government. It gets very complex. 
 
But nonetheless, my constituents did do that research 
themselves. And they did that by contacting an MP (Member of 
Parliament) from Saskatoon. That MP from Saskatoon told 
them, after his research into this, that he had no knowledge and 
neither did the federal government of them being responsible 
for providing any funding for this. 
 
So it led me to wonder whether or not in fact that there had 
been a discussion with the province and with the federal 
government on this. Because if there was no knowledge and no 
agreement by the federal government, how in goodness name 
could the province announce this or tell people in the province 
that this was part of a criteria? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There have been instances where there 
has been federal involvement. For example, in Prince Albert the 
federal government actually funded the feasibility study for that 
particular community for this cultural facility. 
 
However, the member’s point is well taken. If there’s going to 
be an expectation that someone to meet a requirement in order 
to get funding, then there should be some reasonable belief that 
the opportunity is there to get the other funding. And as well 
that people understand where they may have to go to have that 
inquiry. 
 
Now like the provincial government, the federal government 
has several different doors you can go through to be creative 
about looking for community funding for infrastructure. And I 
think some communities could have used their infrastructure 
money — if it was agreed to at the municipal level to get that 
portion — some communities may have been able to find some 
other pocket of federal funding through which they could 
justify, if it was a joint-use facility or something, that they could 
justify doing that work under a different umbrella. 
 
But I think your point is well taken. And I think, generally, 
governments should be as facilitative as they can to 
communities being able to put a reasonable amount of work 
into their funding proposals. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
when this program was developed, was determined by your 
government to be one that they would undertake to benefit 
communities, and part of the criteria was that there would 
matching federal funding, at that point or even prior to that 
point, it seems to me, there should have been a discussion with 
the federal government that they would collaborate with you on 
this. Did that discussion happen? Did the feds know anything 
about this? 
 
And if they didn’t know that they were supposed to be a part of 
it, why would you tell people in this province that part of the 
criteria set out by your government was for them to contact the 
federal government and expect some funding. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I guess with all due respect, 
sometimes governments do try to put a little pressure on each 
other to cough up money that we feel they should be 

contributing, because otherwise the tendency is to let the 
province carry the burden for everything. 
 
And the fact of the matter is we have seen an additional several 
millions put into the cultural envelope, including cultural 
facilities. So hopefully, the fact that people did contact them 
and asked for it helped prompt them to put new money in this 
envelope. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, Madam Minister, I certainly don’t charge 
you solely for the responsibility for this because this was under 
the . . . another department. And I don’t know what all took 
place. But I think there is a real . . . this is a very sad 
commentary on government that, you know, they introduce a 
program, state certain criteria, and really it is . . . I haven’t even 
got words for this. 
 
I don’t know how to sort of explain how very frustrating and 
deceiving I think this is to the people of the province who are 
trying to meet all the criteria; they’re doing their work. But a 
part of their criteria isn’t even feasible because there has been 
no discussion with the feds targeted to this particular program. 
And I think there should have been. 
 
There should have been everything in place and ready to roll so 
that when people did contact the federal government, they had 
knowledge of a certain pot of money that was there, and when 
people applied for it, all they’d have to do is make sure that 
their application was in and then things could move ahead. But 
without, without there even being an agreement at the federal 
level to provide funds for this particular program, I think it’s 
very deceiving. 
 
Madam Minister, when my constituent wrote and reapplied 
after they recognized that there didn’t have to be federal 
matching funding, one of your officials wrote back to them and 
said that in fact, thank you for applying but, you know, you 
have to have 75 per cent of funding in place at the time that you 
applied for funding. 
 
Well the first application they didn’t have 75 per cent of the 
funding in place; the second time they applied, they did. So the 
funding was in place, but still they were turned down because 
they didn’t have the funding in place at the time of the first 
application. At least that’s the way this seems to me. 
 
When this was made known to your department, that the 
funding was in place, then another criteria was added that they 
weren’t aware of, that was part of the initial criteria. And that 
criteria was that if money is going to be given out for this 
program, the cultural facility that you’re building has got to 
serve a population of, I think it’s 3,000 or . . . I can’t remember 
the number. But it’s certainly then, you know, was a criteria 
based on population. 
 
This is unreasonable because it wasn’t part of the initial criteria. 
It was criteria added on and it seems to me a reason — provided 
a reason for government to deny them a grant because the 
rationale of having the cultural facility in this particular town — 
which is Aberdeen — that town serves many, many 
surrounding towns and the whole surrounding area. There are a 
number of people that come into Aberdeen that would be using 
this facility. 



May 17, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1207 

 

So why was the new criteria added, Madam Minister, based on 
population within the community? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess I’ll make two comments on 
that. One is that the only criteria that changed from the first 
criteria to the second criteria was the criteria for federal 
funding. The rest of the criteria were consistent throughout. 
 
And my understanding on looking at the records here is that 
they are not totally out of the game. There’s information still 
being checked on, regarding the geographic area served and 
whether it qualifies under that criteria, which again I’ll 
re-emphasize was the same criteria in the first round of 
applications and the second round of applications. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, that’s very heartening to hear 
that you say they’re not completely out of the game this round. 
Because in this letter that they received from the . . . Associated 
Entities Fund is the heading on this letter and it’s from Lance 
Brown. He says to them, and this letter is dated March 20: 
 

Thank you for applying for the cultural facilities grants, but 
the response to this round of applications has exceeded the 
available funding. 
 

So that means to me that all the funding has already been 
granted or will be granted, but their application will not be 
considered, in Aberdeen. So how can you reassure them right 
now that they’re still being considered if there is no more 
available funding? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Some communities have had outright 
rejection letters. This is not the case in Aberdeen and that 
means that as additional monies flow into the pool, additional 
allocations will be made. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I do appreciate your 
assistance on this matter and your answers to my questions. 
 
One other thing I just wanted to bring to your attention is the 
comment by some of my constituents and other people 
throughout the province in fact, that the application forms often 
arrive at community town offices and so on, just prior to 
deadlines. They don’t get them in time to really get applications 
in on time. 
 
So I would just make a suggestion to your department or to 
Sask Sport, whoever sends out the applications, that it’s 
imperative that they get these applications out in time for 
people to deal with them in a timely fashion. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Perhaps if I could ask the member to 
suggest what you would consider a reasonable time frame to 
have the application ahead. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well certainly more than a week or two days 
before. And that was when the community of Aberdeen 
received theirs on the first round. They said that they got an 
application, I think through the department, or from the 
department, but it was late. And they also received one . . . not 
an application, but notification of the program that was in place 
through Sask Sport through a phone call that kind of gave them 
a heads-up, which was helpful. 

But just an observation that people have made and I would like 
to have some reassurance on, that applications will be out in 
time that would allow them to get it back in before the deadline. 
Just a matter of getting it through the mail and getting it back in 
takes more than a couple of days. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, there are 
a number of museums in rural Saskatchewan who are 
community-based organizations that work hard to raise funds to 
preserve the history of the province, and as you can well 
imagine, these organizations are always looking for extra help 
so that they can continue to do their good work. 
 
I wonder has your department got a program that would assist 
and help these museums? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, there is a program through the 
lotteries. And it strictly applies to community museums. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I wonder if you could . . . Is that part of that $1.4 
million allotment under Culture and Recreation? And I wonder 
if you could expand a bit on the number of dollars that are 
available in this fiscal year and how communities would access 
those dollars. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We can certainly provide you with that 
information. I haven’t got it right at my fingertips because it is 
under Sask Sport Trust. And that means that they apportion the 
money, they’re accountable for it, but I’m not sure exactly how 
much they have specifically in their museums pool. But we can 
certainly undertake to get that information for you and give you 
the detail that you’re looking for. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Do I understand then, Madam Minister, that the 
funds that are available to museums and like cultural 
organizations, this is money that comes through things like the 
video lottery terminals in hotels and lounges and that sort of 
thing? Is that where that money comes from or is it from 
another source as far as lotteries are concerned? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The lottery system is funded by lottery 
tickets. They’re the kind you buy in grocery stores, malls, etc. 
Yes. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Another area of concern is . . . deals with 
recreational facilities, whether they be skating rinks, curling 
rinks, community halls, ball diamonds, and the like. 
 
But I think probably the greatest concern would come from the 
winter sporting activity . . . recreational facilities and 
community halls where, as you can well imagine, the increase 
in energy costs is having a huge impact on the operation of 
these facilities. Many of these facilities are operated by 
community groups within the community. They receive little or 
no assistance from the urban and rural municipalities. Their 
operating funds are generated from . . . through user fees and 
rental of the facilities and those sorts of things. 
 
And I’ve had a number of community groups express to me 
their very deep concerns with the increased costs of energy that 
they may not be able to open their doors next year and if they 



1208 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2001 

 

do, they may not be able to . . . it would at a astronomical 
increase in skating fees and the like. 
 
Now has your department got any plans to assist communities 
and community organizations with the cost of operating their 
facilities? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think the best way I could answer that 
is just to say that we are conscious of the issue and that we are 
in discussion with the Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation 
people about the issue. 
 
What we’ll need to do is make an assessment of how big of a 
problem it is for how many communities, get some idea of the 
cost involved, and then when we’re sitting down to look at the 
whole issue of energy costs generally across the province — 
because of course obviously hospitals, big facilities, all kinds of 
people will be affected — we’ll just have to look at what’s 
doable within the framework of that. 
 
One of the things we are working on right now is, recently the 
federal government has announced some new initiatives in 
sports and recreation, and our department is involved in trying 
to get them to place more emphasis on the fact that sports is 
largely carried out at the municipal level and to provide more 
supports to municipal infrastructure, particularly deteriorating 
municipal infrastructure for sports and recreation. Because I’ve 
lived in a small community myself and I know how important 
those facilities are to what the whole community, never mind 
just the kids, are able to do in terms of recreation. 
 
So yes, this is something that we’ll keep top of mind as we look 
at the increased costs of operation. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, when you’re looking at that 
problem, and I’m not sure it may not fall within your 
responsibilities, but perhaps you could initiate it. I think we 
could look at some large cost savings in the operation of some 
of these facilities if there were some dollars for the facilities to 
become more energy efficient. And I realize that may not fall 
within your realm of responsibilities, but it seems to me that 
somebody has to take the initiative to start some action in that 
general area. 
 
And I wonder if that’s something that you have thought about 
as one of the ways of coping with these increasing energy costs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Actually I can’t remember what year it 
was, but I know there was an extensive program of retrofit and 
whatnot of community facilities. The problem is that given the 
just steadily increasing rates, it just isn’t enough even with that. 
 
Now I’m certain that the Power Corporation would look again 
at other programs like that if there were people who weren’t 
covered, or if we could perhaps get more savings by extending 
that program out again. 
 
But that program has been in place not that long ago. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I guess, Madam Minister, one other thing that I 
would like to perhaps recommend and put forward is there are a 
few . . . a number of communities that are looking at some time 
down the road, building new recreation facilities. I have a 

community in my constituency, Wynyard, which is at the 
moment starting to put some funds together to replace some of 
their recreation facilities. 
 
And I think something that would be very helpful to them 
would be a planning service that would help them in design of 
their facilities, and incorporating as many of these 
energy-saving techniques that are available. 
 
And perhaps . . . I know other communities have looked at in 
the past when they built facilities, looked at energy-saving 
systems and so on, and perhaps just to facilitate an exchange of 
information between communities. And perhaps a listing of 
some of the things that are available and some of the 
experiences that other communities have had in their past would 
be very useful. 
 
And I was wondering if your department has a service like that? 
And if not, would you look at providing that type of a service? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We don’t at the moment, but one of the 
opportunities that’s been afforded us by having the department 
established as a department is to take a second look at how we 
relate to all the services that the recreation side of Sask Sport 
Trust provides, how that complements what’s done in the 
department and whether there is a changing role for 
government. 
 
And certainly, I think, as we go down the road of communities 
deciding what kind of investments they can sustain in their 
communities, there is a feasibility period, I think, that would 
have to come before any project is entered into. 
 
And we’ll just at this point — if it’s okay with you — take that 
as a suggestion to consider in terms of the changing roles of the 
department vis-à-vis Sask Sport Trust. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, the video lottery 
terminals in particularly small-town Saskatchewan is seen by 
community leaders as a drain on monies that leave the 
community. And I’ve heard it or I’ve had it expressed to me by 
a number of community leaders, whether they be mayors of the 
town or head of a sports and cultural organization, the message 
is always the same. Why do we have to send all the profits into 
the government, is a phrase they use. Why can’t we keep some 
of those dollars in our own community where we could then 
apply them to recreational facilities and cultural facilities? 
 
And I wonder if your government is looking at changing that 
policy? And if you’re not looking at it, why aren’t you looking 
at it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess there’s two answers to that 
question. One of them is that one of the reasons why the 
lotteries money was dedicated to this area was to ensure that 
there would be a dedicated pool of funds that would go towards 
these purposes. 
 
But secondarily I would say that it’s a general rule of thumb by 
the Provincial Auditor that government monies should go into 
the General Revenue Fund at which point priorities are 
determined. And you’re suggesting that more of those revenues 
be retained in the community, but that doesn’t enable you to set 



May 17, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1209 

 

priorities among communities. 
 
And I think one of the things, even whether it’s school funding 
or whatnot, what you try to do is make it fair across the 
province, not just within a wealthy school division or a less 
wealthy school division. And the same thing applies here. The 
money goes into a general fund and then is apportioned 
according to needs across the province whether it’s for health 
care, for education, for recreation. 
 
The only real dedicated funds there are, from the point of view 
that you’re talking about, is the lottery funds and the AEF fund 
that comes out of the gaming area. But the rest goes into the 
General Revenue Fund and, I guess, is debated at budget time in 
terms of cross-province priorities. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, the province of Manitoba in 
1999 sent $42 million out to the communities outside of 
Winnipeg in the form of unconditional grants and so on to be 
used for rural economic development, and sports and cultural 
recreation facilities, and so on. It seems to me that perhaps, you 
know, this province could be looking at doing something more 
along the lines of what Manitoba has done. 
 
And again I know there’s more than one hotel owner has said to 
me in rural Saskatchewan that we know best what’s the needs 
of our community. And he says, this one particular person that 
spoke to me recently said: why do I have to send all of that 
money and then be part of a fundraising committee to raise 
funds for our community hall? Why can’t we have a mechanism 
worked out where a percentage of the funds raised at the video 
lottery terminals in my bar would just stay in my community? 
 
And I think that’s a reasonable request, and I think your 
government should look seriously at that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The amount that goes out right now 
through the lotteries process is 27 million. But I would have to 
say that there is several different decision-making bodies that 
make decisions about funds that are spent in communities. 
 
There’s the child action plan that allocates millions of dollars; 
this is made up of representatives from communities that make 
that decision. The Sask Sport Trust, that’s made up of a board 
that makes the decisions and involves the communities in those 
decisions. The AEF fund is made up of a board that makes 
those decisions. And it’s as much of a surprise to me as it is to 
you who gets the funding and who doesn’t. 
 
But there are a number of different pots of money that are 
created to support the kind of activities you talk about out in 
communities. And it’s not all within the lotteries pool, some is 
in the child benefit, some is in the AEF. 
 
I think it would be useful if we could know more, what 
resources flow into each community from all the various 
sources. And I’m actually hoping that as government gets more 
computerized that we will be able to provide better integrated 
data, both regionally and by community, so we can understand 
better the flows in both revenue and expenditures around the 
province. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Was it not the original agreement when the 

terminals were first put into bars and so on that 10 per cent of 
the profits would stay within the community? And it seems to 
me if in fact that was the case, we could short-circuit a lot of 
administration and bureaucracy by just having the money stay 
directly in the communities and the community . . . it could go, 
say, to a rec board. 
 
Most communities have some sort of a structure within their 
towns and areas to look after recreational dollars and cultural 
activities and that sort of thing. And it just seems to me it would 
make a whole lot more sense and be more effective if at least 
some of the monies were dispensed in that form. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, certainly that was discussed as a 
proposal at one time as a possible way to do it. I remember 
many discussions around how that money might be allocated. 
 
But the one thing I would say again, you can’t determine the 
relative merits of where money needs to be spent by the gaming 
proclivities of the people who live in a particular village. And 
so where there is some merit to that idea, there also is some 
merit some time, even though money comes from one source, to 
relocate it to a place where perhaps the need might be greater 
for a new facility or for whatever. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, I’d urge you to take another 
look at that proposal, in that it seems to me that the people who 
are being directly affected and live in the areas perhaps would 
be in a better position to determine the uses and the needs of the 
money, of those dollars, rather than having it all flow into a 
central fund and then having various agencies of government 
make those decisions for the communities. 
 
Certainly there is a need for assessments and feasibilities and 
that sort of thing. And I think the people, particularly in rural 
Saskatchewan, in areas such as my constituency, have enough 
common sense and the abilities to make some of those 
judgment call.  
 
And they’re not asking for all the profits, by any means. What 
they’re saying is, leave at least some of the money. The 
majority of the money is coming from our local people — they 
enjoy going in and doing some gaming in the local bar and so 
on — and so why shouldn’t that money stay in the community? 
And I would just urge you to revisit that decision. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I have a 
request of you in addition to my prior comments. Could you 
provide for me the names of successful applicants for the 
cultural facilities grants program that have been applied thus 
far? Because I take it that there has been a determination of 
those applicants. And I was wondering if that could be supplied 
to me. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll just read them out here into the 
record. And these are the ones that have been approved to date 
— the town of Foam Lake, 1,266; the town of Whitewood, 
10,000; the city of Lloydminster, 100,000; the city of Yorkton, 
675,000; the city of Assiniboia, 1,062,500; the city of Moose 
Jaw, 1.25 million; the city of Prince Albert, 2.3 million; the 
town of Porcupine Plain, 74,338; and the village of Denare 



1210 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2001 

 

Beach, 32,531 — for a total of 5,505,635. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. I 
appreciate having that, thanks. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Madam 
Minister, welcome again to your officials. I’ll just continue on 
with questions that I had before. And because I don’t remember 
all of the questions, I hope you don’t remember all of your 
answers because I might re-ask some questions that I did 
before. So I’ll see if you’ve got the same answers. 
 
I just wanted to just continue with a little bit on my colleague 
from Last Mountain-Touchwood on the videos and I come back 
to that a little bit later on. But we may have a cure for the 
problem of disbursement of monies to rural Saskatchewan from 
the VLTs (video lottery terminal) because with the 
reassessment and the programs that are been instituted of late, 
the hotels are starting to close. And in my constituency, I think 
within the last month I’ve had I believe four hotels close. So 
this may cure part of the problem of the disbursement of funds 
if we close all the facilities in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But I’d like to go back just briefly to the culture facilities grant. 
And I just touched on, and I believe last time we spoke in 
estimates, where I was getting to is who can apply . . . the 
criteria. And I believe I asked the criteria just about the time we 
shut down the last session. Who can apply for the culture 
facility grants, what criteria it takes, and the process to do that. 
And I believe you were going to give me the answer just when 
we ended last time. So if you could let me know that, I have a 
couple of specifics that I wish to address. But if you can give 
me the process. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The cultural facilities grant program 
supports both construction and renovation of cultural facilities. 
And it’s one-time funding of up to 25 per cent. And it can 
include community halls, museums, art centres, libraries, 
theatres, art galleries, and other facilities that serve a broad 
range of community needs. 
 
Now there was five criteria that had to be met. One was 
community support, a display of broad community support. 
Financial support, the 75 per cent of funding that’s needed. 
Sustainability, the ability to support the facility over the long 
term. Facility condition and life expectancy, if it . . . in the case 
of a renovation. And the service area, whether in fact it can 
serve a large enough geographic area of people to justify a 
facility that’s being proposed. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. With that 
in mind, with those five criteria in mind, did I hear you correct 
and say that 25 per cent would be from government and 75 
from local? 
 
Because meeting some of these criteria and again, I’m going to 
harp a little bit on rural Saskatchewan because we all know, I 
mean it’s not rocket science to see what’s happening in rural 
Saskatchewan as people move out, and we can debate for days 
as to why they’re moving out of rural Saskatchewan. But as 
people are moving out, some of these criteria are getting harder 
and harder to meet. 
 

And I’ll give you the example of one within my constituency 
right now that’s having a problem, is the petroglyphs at St. 
Victor. And I go through this criteria and how do you get 
support from petroglyphs? There’s just not that much. There’s 
tourism in there. The financial support for it, when you look at 
. . . This is extremely historic property, if you wish, property . . . 
It’s in, it’s in, the petroglyphs are in the hills. 
 
Sustainability. The criteria is extremely difficult to meet for this 
particular one initiative and they will be . . . they’ve talked to 
me already and they will be asking for some support some way 
or other. Quite a, quite an historic piece of property. 
 
And I’m wondering if there’s any exceptions to these five 
criteria that this particular organization that’s trying to preserve 
the petroglyphs, if there’s some way that they can apply to this 
fund and be granted some funds to preserve these? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We can provide you more information 
on this and . . . But one of the things I would say is there is a 
heritage portion of the Municipal Affairs department that my 
colleague, Ron Osika, could address during his questions. And 
that may well be the appropriate . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Just to advise the minister to use 
the, either the responsibility of the minister or the constituency, 
as opposed to the proper name. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, bad habit of calling people by 
their names. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
The minister responsible for Municipal Affairs could provide 
more information on the Heritage Fund. But we’ll check on that 
just to make sure that’s the appropriate spot, because there was 
a question in my own mind about whether it might also be in 
some way related to Parks. So I just want to be very clear that 
I’m giving you the right advice, on the advice of the member 
who raised questions previously. 
 
So we will check to make sure, but we think the appropriate 
place is the heritage portion. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You’d 
mentioned earlier there’s several doors to open for some of 
these issues, and that sometimes is the problem. Here we have 
an organization that has absolutely no idea where to go, and of 
course, they start with myself. So I look forward to . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well they know if they come to me, 
they’re going to get some voice and some action. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I’m looking forward to whatever you can 
provide me in terms of where these people can seek some 
assistance. 
 
The other one, Madam Minister, within my constituency, and I 
don’t want to dwell on my constituency, but it’s one that I’ve 
spoke to already, is the Metis village in Willow Bunch. And I 
do not know if they’ve applied to you for assistance or not, but I 
sat at their meeting and they have a prospectus and a plan 
layout and land already — maybe not purchased yet — but 
earmarked, if you wish, to build this Metis village. 
 
And if you’re familiar at all with Willow Bunch, it’s quite, 



May 17, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1211 

 

again, an historic area. It was part of Sitting Bull’s northern 
camp, along with Wood Mountain, and it kind of flows all 
along that southern area. And it’s another town, unfortunately, 
in rural Saskatchewan that is dying. And the local people have 
an initiative to try and create some tourism, and cultural 
tourism, which should really fit precisely and perfectly into 
what we’re trying to do with Youth, Culture and Recreation. 
 
And again I would like to be able to take to them some 
methodology by where they can apply for a grant. They’ve done 
the initial set-up. Now they’re in the process of trying to raise 
some money — feasibility at least of raising money — and how 
they can go . . . It’s about a $2 million, two and a half million 
dollar project, as I understand it, and from a community of a 
couple hundred people it’s pretty difficult to get 2 million. 
 
And then following the criteria that you have laid out, service 
area . . . I mean the area is obviously huge. If you’re referring to 
the numbers of people again, I’m harping back to what I say 
about rural Saskatchewan being depleted. And it would be very 
easy for me to take the five criteria that you have given me and 
deny everyone in rural Saskatchewan . . . and I don’t know, I 
don’t believe that’s the intent. But when we’re looking at a 
minimum number of dollars . . . substantially if you look in the 
rural area — 6.9 million — but it would be very easy to say, no 
you don’t qualify because of service area, you don’t have 
enough people. Sustainability — well how can you sustain a 
cultural tourism event when your roads are so bad you’re not 
going to get people in there? 
 
So again I would ask, Madam Minister, if you could provide me 
with the methodology whereby these people could apply for a 
grant, and I guess probably presumptuous but what their 
chances would be given the criteria that you have laid out? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well again these criteria are for a 
particular program and that’s not necessarily where the 
initiative that they are working on would be funded from, Mr. 
Chair. So I understand that the department is in discussion with 
this group and that there may well be a different place that’s 
more suitable for them to look at looking for funding from. 
 
But I will say, because you’ve mentioned it twice, the issue of 
rural towns dying. I think the member would agree that ever 
since the horse and buggy left and we had cars, the geography 
of rural Saskatchewan has been changing. And the fact of the 
matter is as people are able to travel farther and faster and are 
attracted to things like big box suppliers and whatnot where 
they can get bargains, etc., that people will sometimes not 
perhaps have as much loyalty to their local businesses, etc., as 
would make them more viable. And government can control 
some of that, but some of it it can’t. So I felt I needed to address 
that question as well. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
don’t know if that was an answer or not, but thank you anyway. 
 
And you’re right, rural Saskatchewan has changed. The 
blacksmith shop in my town closed a few years ago. But I think 
we could stand up and debate here for ages about why this 
happened and all we have to do is look at the track record of the 
last 50 or 60 years where other provinces are expanding and 
we’re actually staying the same or fluctuating up and down, 

with our cities expanding but our rural is depleting. And we can 
debate as to why that happened. 
 
If I may, Mr. Chair, I’d like to have my colleague from 
Humboldt . . . she has one more question that she would like to 
ask before I continue. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Madam 
Minister, I have to leave very shortly so it occurred to me to ask 
this question. As far as the mandate of your department now 
and your ministry, in reference to the youth part of it, does your 
mandate regarding youth just refer to recreational activities and 
so on or is it anything that might pertain to youths and the needs 
of youth in the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would say that our focus for some of 
the employment and career-related parts of our activities will be 
more on youth that are later years — high school to 
post-secondary or graduated youth. When it comes to the 
recreation and culture programs and whatnot, it refers to 
younger age groups. 
 
But what this is really all about is trying to make sure that youth 
both have the information they need but also that we have all of 
the Saskatchewan community engaged in aggressively 
retaining, attracting, recruiting youth, and that’s the business 
community, the public sector. And certainly we’re hoping to act 
as a conduit for vastly increasing the energy and effort put into 
both creating opportunities for youth in this province but also 
connecting youth up to those opportunities in the province. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What occurred to 
me is that if you have some influence as far as monies that 
come through the Associated Entities Fund, and it might pertain 
to youth and your ministry . . . As you well know, we have a 
committee established here of the legislature to address the 
needs of youth that are being exploited on the streets, and I was 
wondering whether or not you may have thought about a way 
that your ministry could support some of the initiatives that may 
have to be taken to help youth that are in the process of healing 
later on? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think it’s worth giving a little more of 
an answer to this. I’ll just pick a couple out here. 
 
But there is 2 million out of the Associated Entities Fund on top 
of the child action plan that’s targeted specifically at vulnerable 
children and families. And it includes things like youth camps, 
youth cultural camps, food programs, sports and cultural things, 
children’s festivals, youth and family activities, summer sport 
and play, back to the outdoors. There’s a lot of stuff that has to 
do with summer recreation — summer literacy, parent resource 
programs, computers for the community, fitness programs, 
wellness programs for youth and families. 
 
So there’s pages and pages here of programs for vulnerable 
families and children that are funded under that 2 million from 
the Associated Entities Fund. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
I’m just going to outrightly ask you to use your influence in the 
future to target some funding, possibly from Gaming, through 
the Associated Entities Fund that might be and will be needed 



1212 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2001 

 

most likely to address the whole comprehensive care and 
healing process that will be needed for children in the province. 
 
And I think if we can do it by establishing a program for 
cultural facilities, that we might be able to suggest using some 
of the Gaming money for children that have been exploited and 
sexually abused on the streets of our province. 
 
I don’t ask you for an answer unless of course you’d like to 
comment, but I wanted to ask you to certainly consider that and 
work towards it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll just comment that in the absence of 
having had the recommendations from your committee, this 2 
million is already directed that way. And of course you know 
about the program in this year’s budget for families at risk 
where we’ll be engaging with the families right from the point 
of an anticipated birth through to age 5. 
 
But what I will say is that we are looking forward to the 
recommendations of that report. And of course, programs are 
constantly revaluated for whether they’re being spent in the best 
way — solving the problems that we’re trying to solve together, 
creating the opportunities. So we look forward to your report 
and any direction it might give for the future. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. My 
colleague seems to have taken off with my estimate sheet but 
I’ll go from a couple of notes that I have here. If he’s watching, 
maybe he’d bring them back. 
 
Madam Minister, just on the estimate sheets, I noticed that the 
MacKenzie Art Gallery funding was cut from $275,000 to zero. 
Could you explain this, and will the MacKenzie Art Gallery 
receive any other government or further government funding? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — What we did . . . Not even I would be 
brave enough to cut all the funding to the MacKenzie Art 
Gallery. What we did was the money has merely been moved to 
a different location so that it’s more in sync with the way 
funding is provided to all of these facilities. And that money has 
moved under the lotteries, and we recognized that expenditure 
by increasing their retained revenues in order to cover that 
expenditure. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Madam Minister, did I . . . Just for my 
own clarification, is that now under lotteries funding? The 
funding does come from the lotteries? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, the funding comes from the 
lotteries. But I’ll emphasize that we redo the agreement with the 
lotteries every three years and negotiate. If there’s things that it 
seems more appropriate that they should be managing rather 
than the government, then that’s recognized in the funding 
agreement. And certainly this amount of money was recognized 
as additional monies they would need in that pool if they were 
going to take on that responsibility. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Madam Minister, I believe you touched 
on this last time — just by my notes — but cultural industries 
development funding has increased by $250,000. And am I 
correct in saying that’s for training and marketing and that’s 
totally what it’s for? Have some programs been specifically 

targeted? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Previously there was 200,000 in this 
fund, and it was used to do such things as industry workshops 
for skill development. It was used for marketing Saskatchewan 
publishers and authors. And the additional monies, there’ll be 
some negotiation around the priorities on how that’s spent 
before it’s actually spent. 
 
And we’re certainly hoping to, with the new federal money, to 
use some of our expenditures to partner with their expenditures 
and create more opportunities for cultural workers to get both 
the experience and the information needed. 
 
Because really when you look at it, people in this industry are 
small-business people. And they’re the smallest of business 
people because sometimes it’s an individual, sometimes it’s a 
group of individuals who have formed together on an artistic 
endeavour, music, whatever. But certainly we’re looking at this 
very much as developing the entrepreneurial skill of people 
involved in the cultural sector. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Is this 
going to be an annual . . . continuous annual expense then, this 
extra $250,000, or is it one time for this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well there’s no such thing as money 
that’s forever and ever. But in this case certainly this would be 
seen as core funding for them to undertake the work they need 
to do over the next several years. And if at some point I suppose 
they ran out of useful things to do with that money, you would 
then have to question whether that was the best way to spend it. 
But at the moment this is a growing industry that’s doing very 
well, and I certainly would foresee that this money would be 
there for some time to come. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, the Centennial Summer Student 
Employment Program . . . was there any . . . I noticed that the 
employment opportunities for students this summer under this 
program are fairly limited, primarily dealing with — in fact 
totally exclusively dealing with the public sector. I believe 
some of my colleagues asked some questions in the earlier 
estimates about this program. 
 
I guess one of the questions I would have is we experience a 
shortage of health care workers — nurses, technicians, the like 
— and I noticed that there aren’t any . . . that’s not part of this 
year’s program. It seems to me that this would be a great 
opportunity for students to gain some on-the-job experience, be 
exposed to hospital in the hospital setting, and be an 
opportunity for students to see whether a career as a health 
services worker is a career for them. And I’m wondering why 
wasn’t that included in the program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think it’s a very good suggestion 
you’re making that we should look at the health sector. I think 
one of the things was we had a number of areas where there was 
a fairly specific identified need. There was a desire to get the 
program moving quickly so that students could apply within 
this year for the program. So we tended to go with things that 
were fairly quickly mobilized where there was already an 
established need. 
 



May 17, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1213 

 

Right now there are committees working within the health 
community on recruitment retention, and certainly would make 
a lot of sense to contact them and ask for guidance on a health 
component to this program. And I think it’s a very good 
suggestion that you make to add a health component to the 
employment program. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I’m happy to hear that you’re looking at that and 
that it could perhaps be a component of the program next year. 
 
When I look at the federal summer career . . . the federal 
program for students, some of the . . . In fact the two priorities 
that are listed are the ability of the job to provide a 
career-related experience and the second one is the potential of 
the job to prepare students for the future labour market 
participation. 
 
And it seems to me in this year’s program, those two 
components are — in the provincial program, in your program 
— are not being fully addressed. I mean it’s . . . As I once was a 
student and I have had family members who were students, and 
I guess they enjoyed summer employment cutting grass and that 
sort of stuff, but it really doesn’t relate to the priorities. I mean 
we only can use so many turf specialists in the province and 
that sort of thing. 
 
It seems to me that this program should be . . . It seems to me it 
was hastily put together is the impression I had when I first was 
made aware of this program. In fact it seemed to me that 
perhaps there was a need for the new Premier to make some 
sort of an announcement, and it seems as if this was the 
program that he announced way back when during the winter 
months. And as a result, I think there are some . . . it’s pretty 
limited and there’s some real shortcomings to it. 
 
As my colleagues have already indicated to you, the private 
sector was completely excluded from this year’s program. I 
think they could have easily been incorporated in this year’s 
program. 
 
And so I would hope, and I would make the suggestion, and I 
guess the question I would have is: for next year’s program are 
you going to look at the priorities set down by the federal 
program and perhaps dovetail the provincial program more 
closely with the federal program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again let me try to go at this from a big 
picture point of view. 
 
We have a substantial number of people in the province 
employed in both the private and the public sector. And if some 
of my colleagues would restrain themselves, I’d have a little 
easier time answering this question. But the fact of the matter is 
there is a federal program that covers the private sector and we 
will not duplicate what they’re doing. We’re trying to 
complement career opportunities. And there are many young 
people who are interested in employment in a range of 
professional capacities, many of which are available through the 
public sector. 
 
And I would have to say that when the program was generically 
advertised, the uptake wasn’t really that great — about 500 
applications. But when we put up on the Web site what the 

specific jobs were, once we got the job descriptions back from 
all the various people, that people were so excited about the 
jobs that within a couple of days there was 7,000 applications 
came in via the Internet. 
 
And certainly, as soon as people recognized there was a real 
opportunity for a career-related job, the response was huge. And 
in fact, you feel bad that you don’t have a job for every single 
one of those students that applied. 
 
But one of the reasons for the parks programs — or two — the 
Regional Parks Association has very much wanted to do more 
in the development of the regional parks which, of course, serve 
the rural areas. And there’s considerable amount of, I would 
say, not grass-cutting work that has to do with special projects 
in the parks, renewal of the parks, and because of the maybe 
lack of some of the other type of opportunities in those areas, it 
was seen to be important to provide some support to the parks 
system in projects that they’ve been waiting to do for quite a 
while. 
 
So I think that you’ll find that the kind of work people are doing 
in the parks environment . . . in some instances they’re building 
bike trails, they’re doing renewal projects in the various areas. 
And hopefully we’ll see some stories about some of the projects 
the students are working on in your newspapers this summer. 
 
But I’ll also mention that in the public sector, we’re looking at 
about 80 per cent of the workforce retiring in the next 10 years. 
And certainly it’s important that as students are in school, that 
they take a look at the kind of work opportunities that there are. 
And some may choose to go into small business, but there’s 
many people who have chosen a professional path. And 
certainly the kind of jobs that are here give them the 
opportunity for that kind of work experience related to their 
professional career choice. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, I certainly wasn’t indicating 
that you would . . . for your program to duplicate the federal 
program. What I was referring to was the priorities within the 
federal program where the summer employment opportunities 
provide job experience or career experience for students, so 
once they graduate they have some work experience in their 
chosen field. Because this is . . . very often when students will 
tell you I’m sure, as they’ve told me, that they’ve got all of the 
educational requirements, but they’re often told you don’t have 
any work experience, and therefore it is very difficult for them 
to find appropriate employment. 
 
And it seems to me a student employment program, that should 
be one of its top priorities, is to provide some career experience 
for students, you know, over and above just a summer job. If we 
can put those two components together in a program, it’s 
certainly much more beneficial and much more effective. 
 
Now I guess I have to take issue a little bit with some of your 
statements where, if you want to become a professional, that the 
only place to do that and follow a profession, that you have to 
do that in the public service. I think that’s certainly not the case, 
and many small businesses nowadays have professional people 
within their employment. 



1214 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2001 

 

And I think that’s an area that we have to grow. I think we 
certainly have seen in the past an overemphasis in the public 
sector and an under-emphasis in the private sector. And I think 
that’s perhaps one of the reasons why we are . . . this province 
is in the situation it is in today. 
 
So once again, could you outline your proposals for next year’s 
program? Because if the program works the way — and I’m 
sure it will because of the time frame — the guidelines and the 
parameters of the program will be in place before we have that 
opportunity to review it in next year’s estimates. And so 
therefore I think it’s important to have an indication from you 
as to what initiatives your department is looking at in next 
year’s program, particularly with regards to the private sector. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well again I will mention that I 
wouldn’t want the member to think that I had anything against 
the private sector. The cultural industries development fund is 
very much targeted at entrepreneurial people involved in the 
cultural industries. 
 
But what I will give you is a list of some of the kinds of jobs 
that have come forward — audit assistant, biology assistant, 
business analyst, computer-assisted drafting, electronic 
data-base coordinator, engineering technicians, geologists and 
geological assistants, librarian technicians and assistants, 
pharmacy, probation officer, recreation coordinators, therapist, 
and veterinary researchers, Web site designers. 
 
So as you can see, there’s quite a range of career opportunities 
here that may well be available in the private sector. 
 
But again I make the point there is a private sector program. It’s 
not that there isn’t one; there is one. And we want to make sure 
there’s the balance between the resources allocated by the 
federal government. 
 
And as we move into this next year, and once we’re not in 
session so I can actually leave the House without worrying 
about the numbers for a vote, I’ll be able to get down and talk to 
my federal counterparts and see how we can work together. 
 
Because I couldn’t agree with you more. The most important 
missing thing is that experience on the resumé. And anything 
we can do — either public sector, private sector — to have 
young people here get that experience factor on their resumé, 
we’re going to be making a big difference for them in their 
career opportunities. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, beyond the student employment 
program, what other initiatives is your department planning to 
promote youth employment and training? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — One of the things we’re engaged in 
right now, you may be familiar with a group called the 
Saskatchewan Labour Force Development Board. They do quite 
a bit of good work in identifying gaps, overlaps, opportunities. 
Basically what they do is they look at where the developing 
sectors are in Saskatchewan’s economy. And it’s a board that’s 
made up of both employees, employers. The Co-Chairs — 
there’s one from business, one from labour. You may be 
familiar . . . Their executive director is Janis Stone who is just a 
very highly capable person. 

And they’ve put a fair bit of effort into trying to determine what 
we need to do to make sure that youth have more opportunities 
in the province. And right now we’re sitting down to work out a 
partnership with them that will include the private sector as 
well, to let youth know what the opportunities are in 
Saskatchewan. Because what they found out through the work 
they did was that youth were unable to tell them what the job 
opportunities were. They were unable to tell them what the 
growing sectors were in the Saskatchewan economy. They were 
unable to tell them where the labour shortages were. 
 
And so what we’re finding out is that young people in 
Saskatchewan have a lack of the most basic information to be 
making life decisions with. So we’re partnering up with them 
and there’ll be a team of young people that will be going around 
to speak to young people around the province, giving them 
basic information about their province, where the growth is, 
where the opportunities are, and how they can be more 
knowledgeable in assessing what it is they would like to do, 
what kind of education they would need to do it, and where they 
would need to go to do that. So that would be, I guess, one very 
specific initiative. 
 
Another very specific initiative that I would be working on with 
the Minister of Economic Development is the youth PACE 
(Provincial Action Committee on the Economy) initiative 
involving young people in being part of guiding how economic 
opportunities in the province could be more attractive to young 
people, young entrepreneurs. 
 
Another thing I might mention is I’d like to see us get more 
involved with some of the organizations around the province 
that provide opportunities for young entrepreneurs to actually 
be mentored in businesses, to start their own small businesses. 
And I think anything we can do to facilitate that opportunity 
being available around the province and support the 
organizations that are doing that kind of work that it would be a 
very worthwhile thing to do. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I’m certainly pleased that you’re working with 
youth in promoting youth entrepreneurism. That is certainly an 
area that I think we need to emphasize a lot more. I agree that 
today’s youth quite often is not aware of the opportunities that 
are out there, and certainly there are opportunities within the 
labour force and so on. But what we really lack is young people 
that have the entrepreneurial spirit and the initiative to develop 
new businesses and get involved with existing businesses. 
 
And I wonder if you could just expand on that activity that your 
department in co-operation with Economic Development has 
with it promoting youth entrepreneurship. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, this is an area that we’ve started 
to focus on as the young entrepreneur area, and people keep 
coming back to it that it’s very important to do it. 
 
So I would have to say that with the new department, we have 
an opportunity here to really take a look at how we’re creating 
that potential for entrepreneurial development around the 
province. Because I agree with you: people have to be . . . 
whether they’re thinking of how to apply their professions in an 
entrepreneurial setting or whether you’re just wanting to create 
that initiative where people in the North, people in rural areas, 



May 17, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1215 

 

will be able to be creative about their own opportunities that 
they can actually establish. 
 
I think the entrepreneurial skill is a very important skill in both 
urban and rural areas, but particularly in the rural areas and the 
North where there is not going to be that job quite often waiting 
for someone to go into. They’re going to have to create it for 
themselves. 
 
So I couldn’t agree with you more that we have to figure out 
how to get a systematic way of ensuring that youth have the 
entrepreneurial option. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Madam Minister, as we all know we 
certainly have a problem in this province. One of our export 
commodities is educated young people, and that’s something 
that’s very disturbing to us on this side of the House, and I 
would hope it’s disturbing to you on your side of the House. 
 
Does your department have any initiatives or plans to help deal 
with this problem and keep more of our educated youth in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The last survey that was done actually 
. . . I admit I missed part of your question because I was trying 
to get some information from my colleague. But the last report 
that was done on graduates staying in the province, we actually 
had a four and a half per cent plus, net number of graduates in 
the province over what we actually trained ourselves. So we 
may have situations with youth leaving for employment, but we 
also have a good ability to attract youth into the province. 
 
And I do think that one of the areas we have to smarten up on is 
our recruiting techniques, because when people tell me stories 
about how they were recruited to Alberta, it’s very clear to me 
that they are much more aggressive in their recruiting style than 
we are and much more proactive in their recruiting style. 
 
And I think it’s important that businesses understand that in 
Saskatchewan, that the public sector understand that, and that 
we work hard at ensuring that people in Saskatchewan don’t 
just take their youth for granted and that we court them in the 
same way that other people court our youth. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, I find it surprising I guess to 
hear that we actually have a net gain of trained . . . or youth 
coming into the province. I would suspect though that our 
people with more years of training and more specialized — and 
therefore more education and skills training — would be more 
costly to provide these young people with; those are the ones 
that are leaving the province. Perhaps we have some young 
people coming in with minimal skills and so therefore the 
statistics may at first glance look quite encouraging. 
 
But I mean we hear reports of a high percentage of engineers in 
the graduating class leaving the province — many of them 
heading west, some heading south, and a few heading east and 
that sort of thing. And I’m not privy to all the statistics, but I 
would suspect that perhaps we have young people with a lesser 
level of training coming in and therefore making our numbers 
look better. 
 
And I wonder if you could clarify this net gain that you had 

indicated we are experiencing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I should be specific that I was speaking 
of graduates. These are people with university graduation. 
People who have . . . not necessarily university but people who 
have graduated as opposed to people who haven’t graduated. 
 
But I will also mention, I’ve talked about a few components 
today. We’ve talked about creating the opportunity to gain work 
experience through jobs. We’ve talked about the project on 
understanding the opportunity and recruitment with the labour 
force development people. We’ve talked about the cultural 
industries for young entrepreneurs. In that sector, certainly the 
film industry is a young industry that we’ve given a great deal 
of support to. 
 
As well in this budget, we’ve put huge, new expenditures into 
the information technology sector, which is one of the sectors 
that young people are leaving the province for. And its very 
important that with our broadband Internet and whatnot that we 
do all the value added that goes along with the development of 
that sector because this is one of the areas where youth are 
leaving to work in the technology sector. 
 
So it’s not going to be any one thing. It’s going to be a whole 
range of efforts. But it is important that there are quality jobs in 
. . . so that young people are attracted not only just for jobs, but 
for jobs that are quality jobs linked to the kind of education that 
they have. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 
 


