















































Hansard: June 26, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2171 
 June 26, 2001 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Water Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
The Chair: — I’d ask the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’m 
very pleased to introduce to introduce Mr. Clare Kirkland who 
is the president, Mr. Wayne Dybvig who is the vice-president of 
water resource management. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chair, just looking at the Bill there it’s just 
a kind of a one-page Bill, but I do have a few questions on it. 
Could you give a brief outline of the Bill and what you hope to 
accomplish with it? Does it going to affect the sale of water 
outside the province? Is that what it basically deals with, this 
particular piece of legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member. The Act, 
the Bill, is meant to prevent the transfer of water out of 
Saskatchewan and thereby preventing any sale. So the 
movement of water out of Saskatchewan is the intent and 
thereby preventing the opportunity for the sale of that water to 
be moved in any way, shape or form, particularly through sale. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Does it affect the 
movement of water in Saskatchewan, how they would normally 
apply? Would they have to apply it different now? Let’s say 
C&Ds (conservation and development), if they’re moving water 
from one shed to the other or in situation that’s happening right 
now, we’re in a drought situation and there may have to be 
maybe movement of water being released from certain dams or 
certain areas to maybe another area. Would that Bill affect that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member again. Yes, 
and I appreciate the concern. The intent of the Act is to allow 
movement of water within Saskatchewan but not the sale or 
export of Saskatchewan water. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just one final 
question on it. You had talked about this Bill will prevent the 
sale of water outside Saskatchewan, which is a great concern. 
It’s been mentioned to me and probably you that people in 
Saskatchewan definitely don’t want water being sold or traded 
outside this province. 
 
But dealing with NAFTA (North American Free Trade 
Agreement), would this piece of legislation be in conflict to 
them? Could you see a law suit or would this Bill that . . . or 
provide protection against anything like that, that NAFTA, the 
rules and regulations that were put in place at the feds, at the 
federal level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, our advice is, our legal 
advice is that it will not affect any agreements under NAFTA. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Class Actions Act/ 
Loi sur les recours collectifs 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Water Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Women’s Secretariat 

Vote 41 
 
Subvote (WS01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, this 
evening I have with me on my immediate left, Joan Pederson, 
the acting executive coordinator for the Women’s Secretariat. 
And right behind Joan would be Cheryl Senecal, the senior 
policy analyst. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and welcome, 
Madam Minister, to your officials. 
 
Madam Minister, I have a number of questions I want to go 
through, but one issue I would like to discuss up front is an 
article that was in the paper a while ago on farm women and the 
services that they are requiring and the stress that they are 
involved in right now in their lives. 
 
And I know that with the minister of Rural Revitalization, 
concerns of rural women must be a big issue around your 
cabinet table. So the report, or this study that was released this 
year talking about rural districts, they talked . . . the University 
of Regina researchers made several suggestions, and they talked 
about things like a mobile health services — like a 
mammogram van, more use of nurse practitioners. 
 
What type of involvement have you had in this report? And 
what kind of work are you doing now to make sure that some of 
these problems are being addressed? 
 



2172 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Mr. Chair. I think I know 
the report the member’s talking to, and I believe it would be the 
community-based reporting done out of the Humboldt area, but 
maybe I’d ask her to give me more specifics on that report. 
 
But to the broader issue that she talks about. In essence 
Women’s Secretariat doesn’t do the programming for women, 
but what we do would be to certainly maintain close working 
relationships with key farm women’s groups as a means of 
ensuring that the needs and perspectives of Saskatchewan farm 
women are being met when we’re considering programs and 
development of public policy. 
 
We’ve done that in a number of ways. One of them the member 
would be aware of because she certainly attended, as I tried to, 
for some of the If Gender Mattered conference, Policies and 
Strategies to Advance Women’s Equality. And some of the 
sessions did address the changing roles of farm women and 
discussion of violence issues from the perspective of farm 
women. We’ve paid close attention to the stresses that farm 
women are under due to the financial strains that have been 
placed on them because of the rural economy. 
 
So on an ongoing basis we’re being able to get in touch with 
and keep in touch with the women’s groups like SWAN 
(Saskatchewan Women’s Agricultural Network), and the SWI 
(Saskatchewan Women’s Institutes) and the NFU (National 
Farmers Union), and to, from them, get their perspective, 
understand how their issues should be considered in programs 
and policies that would be developed in Rural Revitalization, in 
Education and Training, in Social Services, in planning of 
programs wherever those programs would be housed. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, the report that I am talking 
about is actually a survey and a study that was done. There was 
3,000 questionnaires mailed to farm women in 20 
Saskatchewan RMs (rural municipality) and they received 717 
replies back. 
 
One of the concerns that women brought forward was health 
issues — 55 per cent of them said their lives were somewhat 
stressful. And when they were asked what the best features of 
the health care was in their communities, 61 per cent said it was 
local access to doctors and to services. 
 
Madam Minister, I know that at the same time your government 
is dealing with a Fyke report that is talking about closing down 
hospitals, ending up with 20 hospitals in all of Saskatchewan, 
and this report, these women are saying that this is one of the 
biggest drawbacks that they have. 
 
Madam Minister, has the secretariat made a presentation to the 
Fyke report? Do you plan on doing that? Do you plan on 
bringing women’s issues, health issues, to this board to let them 
know that there is major concerns with women’s health issues 
and something that has to be addressed in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
(19:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, and thank you to the 
member for that question. The report was a report that was 

being done on unpaid work, Mr. Chair. And when they were 
looking at that issue, of course for farm women — many of 
them now working on the farm, working off the farm, child care 
responsibilities, caring for senior relatives, the distances that 
they must travel for some of their services — then brought in to 
question how they felt about that depended on how they felt 
about accessibility to health care. 
 
The responses would have been in the order of saying this either 
reduces their stresses or it can increase that or enhance that 
depending on what the services are that are available to them. 
 
Now there are some programs that we always put in the 
forefront for women to be able to have located in their area, and 
one was talked about earlier today: the mobile screening, breast 
cancer screening for women; the air ambulance, making sure 
that we have those available for rural and remote areas. There 
are some of the initiatives within the community health centres 
now that are more a more proactive approach and provide the 
networking and some of the support programs, and I believe 
that’s what’s contemplated when we’re talking about some of 
the discussions through Fyke. 
 
Women’s Secretariat will be listening to women throughout this 
process and will be looking at gender-based analysis on the 
Fyke report and how government would intend to respond to 
the final recommendations of Fyke and the input from the 
community. So we certainly want to be a part of that and make 
certain that the rural women’s voices are not lost but enhanced 
through the Women’s Secretariat processes. 
 
It would be good to note that, at the If Gender Mattered 
conference, there were representatives who had been working 
with Saskatchewan Health, Women’s Secretariat people 
working with Saskatchewan Health as well as the Prairie 
Women’s Health Centre of Excellence and that’s to advance the 
increased understanding of how gender-based analysis can more 
effectively be integrated into the health sector. So we’re hoping 
with all of things coming together that we will be a significant 
input into those processes. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I know that the 
mandate of the Women’s Secretariat is huge, and I’ve always 
wondered how you can possibly do everything that you’re 
suppose to be able to do when it comes to looking at women’s 
issues and all the problems that women are faced with, not only 
in just the working world but within their homes as well. And 
when we talk about this report that one of the questions that was 
asked was, what was the worst feature of the health care, and 
they said half of it was lack of services in their community. Half 
of the women said lack of services in the community was the 
big problem. 
 
Madam Minister, saying that you are going to look at the Fyke 
report and monitor it isn’t good enough for women in rural 
Saskatchewan. If you’re going to be the voice there, somebody 
has to be right there in the face of the people that are making the 
decisions, not looking at the report afterwards. When half of the 
women that are interviewed say a lack of services is a huge 
concern, then I think it’s not okay to sit back and say well wait 
and see what’s going to happen; you have to be in their face. 
 
So Madam Minister, is your department going to be at every 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2173 

 

one of these meetings? Are you going to be monitoring it so 
that you can actually have a voice at the table and make a 
difference to the women in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Certainly 
women are not strangers to the do-everything approach, but 
here it’s very important to understand that Women’s Secretariat 
cannot do everything. 
 
Its mandate is to be able to work with all areas of government 
so that their consciousness is raised on the issues that are 
present for women in particular because those voices are clearly 
under-represented at all of those tables. 
 
So what Women’s Secretariat would do is make certain that 
when programs and services are being developed that they 
would be there with the voice of women and not only that 
voice, but armed with the research and statistics needed to be 
able to advance the reasons why they should be priorized, and 
certainly understand that accessibility to programming is a 
major concern. 
 
Now that can’t just be done by one department alone, although 
Health will be the key to that. But certainly integrating some of 
the services that can be provided to women and how they’re 
provided in the communities and developed would be modules 
that you would like to capture and to put into other places. And 
there are some that are working. And again the Prairie 
Women’s Health Centre, in conjunction with Health and the 
secretariat, would be looking at those and saying how those 
kinds of services could be accessible to more and more women. 
 
And in the area of the Fyke we would be, as a secretariat, at the 
table working with Health to understand the concerns that 
women have — particularly in this instance in rural 
Saskatchewan — because we have heard them from women in 
rural Saskatchewan with the working relationship that we have. 
We’re no stranger to those issues. 
 
And then we would work with Department of Health to provide 
them with the best analysis that we can, and certainly the 
understanding of where the priorities for programming are for 
women who are saying that the number one issue for them 
would be accessibility to services that they need closer to home. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Farm women of 
course are involved in the farm crisis that we have out in rural 
Saskatchewan. It isn’t talked about very much any more, but it 
is still very much alive and very much a huge problem. And 
with the drought in many areas, it is getting to be a bigger 
problem. 
 
Madam Minister, earlier this year we talked about sending a 
delegation to Ottawa to make sure that the concerns of farmers 
and the economy as a whole was brought into the face of the 
federal government, and your government defeated that motion 
or that suggestion that we do that. 
 
And so the women that are involved in the farming industry 
right now are bearing a lot of the brunt of the problem, not just 
doing work . . . working off the farm and doing work on the 
farm and raising their families and keeping their community 
going. Their voice has to be heard. And I always thought it 

would be nice to have a different perspective. Maybe the federal 
government would have been very appreciative and open to 
having a voice of women, of the farm women, brought to their 
table. 
 
Did your department have any type of correspondence or 
interaction with the federal government to make sure that they 
recognize that farm women are being affected in this crisis to a 
great extent? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Well, not being the Minister of 
Agriculture or the Minister of Rural Revitalization, I would say 
this as a member who’s representing women’s issues and 
talking about Agriculture. 
 
The decision not to send all of us at once without any organized 
work being done on who we would be able to approach and 
what we would be able to present and not get a proper hearing, 
and perhaps do more damage to the presentations that are made 
in a formal way through many groups that have been in the past 
but also the groups who are here and working really hard to get 
that message out, I would think there were the reasons that we 
articulate in this Assembly why we wouldn’t all be going to 
Ottawa, Mr. Chair. That being said, there were approaches 
made to Ottawa. 
 
The member would remember that we all came back; we were 
going to have a unified voice. And it’s that member’s critics 
work that split that voice and cost this province a lot of dollars 
in trying to find the additional supports that we would have to 
come up with — more dollars than ever before out of provincial 
coffers that take away from the kinds of dollars we have for 
programs and services for women. 
 
In my role, Mr. Chair, when I would go out to federal meetings 
with ministers of this same interest, the women’s secretariats 
and the other organizations and other governments that cover 
the issues that would be addressed on behalf of women, it’s 
certainly something I would bring forward in those forms 
because it’s the top of mind issue for Saskatchewan. 
 
When you look at the kind of economic situation women are 
facing and in doing that sometimes having a triple and 
sometimes quadruple workday, Mr. Chair. 
 
I would say that in the previous delegation that went we were 
keeping an eye on what kind of delegation would be sent and 
influencing the decisions not just to send farm men or men to 
different organizations, but be very mindful that women needed 
to be a part of that delegation and women were present there, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I would think that maybe 
you better check your facts on what happened when it came to 
the problems in agriculture and better place the blame firmly at 
the feet of the people who didn’t do anything. 
 
You talked about the damage that we could’ve done. There was 
nothing done. There was nothing done in Ottawa and there’s 
nothing helping the farmers in Saskatchewan here at all. 
Anything you could have done would have been a benefit. 
There is absolutely nothing done by this government for 
farmers of any sort. And when it comes to rural . . . the farm 



2174 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

women especially so. 
 
You talked about the wonderful job that you’ve been doing. 
Well maybe if we want to get away from farming for a few 
minutes maybe you could talk about women entrepreneurs and 
the fact that there is a . . . they themselves have special 
problems as well. I’ve had a number of young women say to 
me, if I’m going to start a job, a business, and create 
employment in this province as an entrepreneur and then have a 
family as well it doesn’t leave . . . I have no ability to collect 
maternity leave through the EI (Employment Insurance) 
benefits. 
 
And I’m wondering if your department has looked at that issue 
at all because of course the young women not only are . . . 
we’re banking on them to keep the economy going but we’re 
also banking on them to make sure we have children for the 
future as well. So what has your department done in that area 
when it comes to working with women entrepreneurs? 
 
(19:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Through you to the member, Mr. 
Chair, we know that women-led businesses are a powerful force 
in this province. Women are starting businesses at more than 
twice the national average, and they are creating jobs at four 
times the average rate. And I would say nothing but praise and 
congratulations to those women who have that entrepreneurial 
spirit, who tend to do their homework, develop their business 
plans, and tend to be more successful when they are starting a 
business because they’ve done that work. And the member 
would know that clearly that there’s nothing but good to be said 
about women who are becoming entrepreneurial and getting 
into the business world. 
 
In the area of EI benefits, it’s one of the areas that we’re going 
to be talking about at the federal-provincial-territorial ministers’ 
meetings because we’re going to examine that whole area: how 
we support women who are in non-standard work. And there 
are benefits that are not accruing there, are not following 
women into those categories although we know that these 
women are a powerful force in the economy and provide benefit 
to the economic development of communities and provide work 
and jobs for people within those communities and would be 
looking at attendant benefits for those kinds of situations. 
 
So it’s certainly a top-of-the-mind agenda. And it will be 
brought forward in a national sense at our 
federal-provincial-territorial ministers’ meeting. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To the minister, 
I agree with you. We’re definitely on the same wavelength 
when it comes to the success of women and the importance of 
women in the business. I’m sure that you’re aware that women 
who start businesses are three times more likely than men to 
make a go of their business. 
 
And to hear you say that you’re going to bring it up at the 
provincial-territorial meeting is important, and you’ll have full 
support from all members on this side of the House when it 
comes to hearing that women’s issues are going to be brought 
forward. And things like extending EI benefits for women in 
business is very important. So I’m very pleased to hear that. 

The last time we had an opportunity to speak, we talked about 
Working for Women and the annual grant proposal that had 
been rejected by your government. And now the Working for 
Women has been forced to close the doors. The reason that was 
given to us for this is that the grant proposal was too narrow; it 
served too narrow an interest group. Working for Women has a 
20-year history in the province, and on an annual basis the 
operation served 400 women. And they helped them with 
counselling, skills training, and employment. 
 
From the Women’s Secretariat standpoint, what alternatives are 
there now for women who will not be able to access these 
programs and services that were supplied before by Working 
for Women? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — This is the first time that the 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 
are developing processes to evaluate proposals that are using 
now specific criteria and all the proposals are being assessed on 
the same set of criteria. 
 
We’ve also requested, and we have the commitment from 
Post-Secondary Education, to make certain that gender-based 
analysis and particular information that Women’s Secretariat 
has gathered and understands about the community-based 
organizations like Working for Women, would be a part of that 
process. 
 
The needs of women would be incorporated within the broader 
theme of this one as multi-barriered. And we believe that those 
agencies that are receiving funding now through the processes 
that we’re developing, and through the checklist of Women’s 
Secretariat and Post-Secondary working together to do the work 
of understanding the services that were provided by one 
organization but another one who in those processes has put in 
proposals that addressed the broad spectrum of issues but also 
how they would identify with those needs of that particular 
organization, would be met through the proposal. 
 
So we’re remaining confident that those organizations receiving 
funding with services provided by the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Career and Employment Services offices would be able to 
provide career and employment services to meet the needs of all 
women. But we’re working very closely with Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training and the YWCA in Saskatoon to 
respond to the needs of the women in the community, making 
certain that the aspects of that organization and the way that 
they were addressing the needs of women who have 
multi-barriers to face would be met through the programming 
that was successful. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, Post-Secondary Education is 
dealing with the issue now, and I’m wondering when this 
program is going to be available through Post-Secondary 
Education? And how are you going to let the women that were 
previously involved with Working for Women know that they 
now have to go to a different department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — The Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training is probably chomping at the bit to 
answer this question, and I’m going to give it my best shot too 
because I know for a few months now there has been transition 
planning in place with this group working toward the new 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2175 

 

programming. 
 
The contracts are now being in their final stages of negotiation 
and should be secured soon. And in the meantime, the 
Canadian-Saskatchewan service centres are operational, and 
they’re providing some of the employment services, and we’re 
hoping that through those steps that are being taken, the needs 
of those women — not all of them perhaps at one time but in 
this transition period hopefully as smoothly as possible — can 
transition into the new programs that are in place and the 
contracts that have been finalized. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m sure that 
there will be . . . women will be pleased to know that there is 
going to be some help for them, and I know that it’s going to 
take some work and some advertising to let them know about 
the availability of some of the programs. 
 
I’d like to talk about the Network of Saskatchewan Women. 
They’ve identified barriers to women’s education. Has the 
Women’s Secretariat had the opportunity to work with the 
Network of Saskatchewan Women, and if so in what capacity? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — We’re not clear about the Network of 
Saskatchewan Women, Mr. Chair, and so we need some 
clarification on that. That’s not saying that we don’t already 
network with a number of women’s groups who have concerns 
about the new program and the way they’ll be delivered through 
Post-Secondary Education. And we know that in talking with 
the people responsible for the programming in that department 
that they are aware of the women in the community who are 
trying to make certain that this transition goes well. 
 
So if we could have some clarification on who you would think 
belong to the Network of Saskatchewan Women, particularly 
with Post-Secondary Education, we would try and get a better 
answer for the member opposite. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, I’ll 
send the minister over some information and probably then 
she’ll be able to answer the questions for me. But in the 
meantime, one of the recommendations is we tie it to the 
provincial training allowance. It says the government should 
revise the criteria and it should be based on individual income 
or cash flow so women are not tied to spousal or family income 
sources. And I’m just wondering if you could give me an idea 
of how you’re dealing with provincial training allowances as 
well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — The Saskatchewan Action Committee 
received some monies from the federal government to look at 
this area and developed from that a working group which I 
would believe is the Network of Saskatchewan Women. As the 
minister says to me, he met with that group about a year ago 
now and talked about some of those issues, such as the bridging 
program that was a federal-provincial initiative. And we know 
when the bridging programs were in place and discontinued 
there was not the transition. There was a falling off of the table 
of some of that programming to women because it had not been 
immediately identified and picked up as quickly as it could be. 
And that’s why we were trying to make this transition with 
those ideas in mind. 
 

They’ve also presented to us the, and as you’ve mentioned here, 
the women in trades and technology which is very important to 
a new age economy because we know that women who are 
trained from some of the trade and technology programs are 
finding record number of jobs right here at home. And it’s very 
important to have us identify for them the training that can be 
available and the jobs available as well. 
 
And I think that there’s much work that’s been done by the 
Saskatchewan Labour Force Development Board as well. They 
have good information and statistics. We’ve seen those and are 
able to feed in some of the information we have from our close 
relationship with the Saskatchewan Action Committee and 
other women’s groups to be able to further some of the 
recommendations that you’ve presented to me. Thank you for 
sharing that information this evening. 
 
Ms. Draude: — You’re welcome, Madam Minister. I just have 
one other question. This is one area that I think is very 
interesting. There’s been a lot of work done and I think that we 
can all benefit from the intense amount of studies that were 
done with the Network of Saskatchewan Women. They 
recommend that isolated, rural, and northern groups of women 
should not live in fear of losing custody of their children while 
they attend school or they’re in training programs far from their 
homes. 
 
Have you heard of this happening? And if you have, what is the 
Women’s Secretariat’s stand on this issue. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — We’re not aware of any cases where 
women going to school would have that problem or fear. What 
we do know is it’s one of the reasons why it’s so important to 
begin to develop programs closer to home. And there are many 
venues to do that through Post-Secondary Education, and 
certainly into the future it’s going to be very important when we 
talk about CommunityNet and to provide on-line services in 
communities where women can then not have to worry about 
leaving home and/or children and the costs of child care. 
 
I know in the training allowances area we’ve had a review. 
We’re trying to provide those kinds of supports to women and 
we certainly would look at . . . in the bridging to independence 
strategy those kinds of initiatives where we need to support 
women particularly in their child-bearing and raising function 
to be able to continue to do that while they’re achieving their 
education. And we know that women are very capable of doing 
just that. 
 
If there’s someone that you’re aware of we’d appreciate 
knowing about that and seeing if there is a gap or, if it’s just 
that the women who are involved in the situations that you 
might be aware of, need us to be able to understand how best to 
meet their needs in the programs that are available today. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good evening to the 
minister and her officials. Madam Minister, I’m sure that you 
are very well aware that Tamara’s House in Saskatoon is doing 
some fabulous work in regards to assisting women who have 
experienced sexual abuse as children with their trauma and 
helping them work through it. 



2176 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

I’m wondering just at this point whether or not the board of 
Tamara’s House has approached you to assist them with your 
influence in government, I guess to cabinet, to provide some 
provincial assistance for Tamara’s House. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — To the member, Mr. Chair, your 
question is very timely. I did sign a letter today to Tamara’s 
House, the women representing the house. And I know that this 
week they’re meeting with a number of ministers from the 
relevant departments that would provide the financial 
supporting to the work they do. 
 
With that in mind I’ve been, as the Minister Responsible for the 
Status of Women, lending my support to the valuable work that 
they provide to the community and I was mentioning that early 
this fall, I’m looking for an opportunity to go and see the work 
myself and to be able to understand more fully all of the 
valuable service provided there. I have heard colleagues who’ve 
had some very positive discussions, and I know the minister 
who has Tamara’s House within the constituency is very 
concerned for them and wanting to provide as much support as 
possible. So this is a timely question. I can only say that I know 
we’re trying to have the appropriate ministers meet and see how 
we can make certain that Tamara’s House provides those 
services. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and I’m heartened 
and confident that you, in fact, do support them as far, in 
principle. But I guess that it’s important for them to recognize 
and to be able to be the benefactors, or beneficiaries rather, of 
financial assistance. Because up until now, I believe, that 
primarily all of their money or a very large portion of it came 
through the federal government. 
 
So I would be happy if, in fact, the provincial government 
would see to it that there is funding coming from the province 
because, as you well know, they’re expanding their place. They 
are going to be having basically in-house placements for 
women that are suffering from trauma, and they’re also 
introducing and promoting a lot of alternative therapies, natural 
therapies, holistic therapy, whereby the women who are in need 
of them and who have witnessed that they’re very helpful will 
continue to benefit from them. 
 
So I just wanted to make the comment. I don’t have a question 
for you in that regard. But Madam Minister, I do have a 
question for you. 
 
I know that I can’t imagine quite right now what it’s like to be 
in cabinet and discussing the different issues and so on and 
what, you know, how much influence you may have. But when 
cabinet is discussing things like what should be under the drug 
plan, I’m wondering if you’ve ever brought forward to cabinet 
the idea — and certainly whether or not you’ve supported the 
idea — of estrogen being under the drug plan. I say that simply 
because the larger part of our Saskatchewan population are 
women. This is a very real need as women, women go through, 
through mid-life and they have a great need for this, and I’m 
wondering why that is not, not considered as being important 
enough to be in the drug plan. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — And I thought my electric moments 
were going unnoticed by the member opposite, Mr. Chair. 

There are a number of many, many serious issues that we’re 
talking about of course and she’s been doing some many hours 
of work on a committee that is paying much attention to one of 
those issues of extreme importance. 
 
I guess with that in mind, when we’re talking about Department 
of Health and what they’re looking at covering and not 
covering, that one topic hasn’t come up. But certainly when 
we’re looking at what’s provided under the Formulary it might 
be worth having a look-see, have the committee or Health take a 
look at that, because we are a boomer generation and there are 
many out there and I’m sure that the quality of life of men and 
women would be improved with the availability of the product. 
So at that point that’s all I can say for now, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, this is just a really interesting 
conversation and I guess we are kind of chuckling a bit about 
this, but in reality it is I think deep concern of many women and 
you know you can have . . . we’ve gone through all kinds of 
description of what women are like if they don’t have the 
replacement therapy they need. 
 
Hormonal rage can lead to men getting beat up. Hormonal rage 
can lead to disruption in families. So I think it’s really very 
important that women have the available treatment that they 
need and that’s covered because a lot of women can not afford 
to have that particular replacement therapy simply because they 
don’t have the money. 
 
So I thank you for your comments, Madam Minister, and I wish 
you a good evening. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the 
minister and her officials and that’s all the questions that I have 
for this department. 
 
Subvote (WS01) agreed to. 
 
Subvote (WS02) agreed to. 
 
Vote 41 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chair, I move that we report 
progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 
Subvote (SW01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to 
introduce once again Mr. Clare Kirkland who is president of 
Sask Water Corporation; Mr. Wayne Dybvig who is the 
vice-president of water resource management; and Mr. Bill 
Duncan who is the chief engineer; and Mr. Dave Schiman who 
is the manager of financial planning. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It wouldn’t be fair to 
talk about Sask Water without talking potatoes. I don’t think we 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2177 

 

talked about them last time. So we’ll discuss them a little bit 
this time. 
 
I want to discuss the, I guess, the current crop year that was 
taken off last fall. Can you tell me how many acres were 
planted last year? And how much of that production has been 
sold so far? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the number of acres that 
were planted to potatoes were 1,329. But as a result of the 
business transaction that took place we do not have the figures 
or we’re not aware of what has been sold because of the 
transfer, that the member is aware of, the transfer in ownership, 
if you wish. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Going back, when did you transfer ownership, I 
believe now it’s Sask Valley all under CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). Can you give me the exact date 
when the transfer took place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The total transaction, Mr. Chair, took 
place June 30, 2000. And all of the assets were then . . . became 
the property of CIC. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I’m going to regret asking Sask Water about 
potatoes next year. I don’t know what we’re going to discuss 
now that you’ve sold them. I hope I wasn’t the cause of that. 
 
Can you tell me what the total amount of the sale was at that 
particular time that the assets were transferred over to CIC? 
 
(20:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member. There were 
actually two transactions that took place. The two transfers, 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) of course, from Sask Water to CIC and then on to 
Sask Valley Potato Corporation. And the other part of the 
transaction involved the potato storage association. And that 
similarly went to the Sask Valley Potato Corporation. 
 
I’m not sure if the member is looking for dollar figures and if 
that’s the case, I anticipated correctly, Mr. Chair. We will have 
that. Please be patient. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the assets that went to Sask Valley Potato 
Corporation, $16.6 million. That was from Sask Water. And 
from the storage, from the Riverhurst and Tullis storage that 
went over to Sask Valley Potato Corporation was $5.2 million. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, was that done by an order in 
council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I’m advised that it was the first 
transaction from Sask Water to CIC, and then to Sask Valley 
Potato Corporation. The figure I mentioned of 16.6 million was 
as a result of order in council; the second one was not. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Going back to the order in council, is there a 
particular figure that you have to go to before you need an order 
in council? Like a level like you say . . . you said the one was 
about 5 million, the other was 16 million. Let’s say $6 million, 
anything above that would you need an order in council? 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that if it’s sold 
to a third party, then the figure is $250,000. But if it’s from 
subsidiary to subsidiary, then it’s not required. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So 250,000. How 
about when you acquired the sheds from . . . when you assumed 
the mortgages when Lake Diefenbaker went broke, I believe 
you’d assumed some of them for 5.810 million. Did you get an 
order in council then when you took that over? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, those mortgages were not 
assumed. They were continued to be held by the potato storage 
companies. So the mortgages were not assumed. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — You didn’t . . . just now maybe I 
misunderstood here. You didn’t buy out CIBC (Canadian 
Imperial Bank of Commerce) then, their share or Farm Credit, 
on their mortgages? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, it was the storage company 
that paid out the mortgage and that particular mortgage was 
subsequently part of the deal that was sold through the Lucky 
Lake potato company. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — That was then they were sold to, but didn’t you 
purchase . . . have to assume the mortgages when Lake 
Diefenbaker went bankrupt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, I know 
these are important questions that need to be specifically 
answered as the member and Mr. Chair, you’ll recognize some 
of the technical and specific responses are difficult to put 
together and my concern is a misinterpretation or 
misunderstanding. 
 
I would be very, very pleased to accommodate the member to 
respond to specific written questions on this important issue and 
respond in writing so that we make sure that there’s no 
misunderstanding in what the questions are intended or the 
answers that are given because I want to assure the member 
opposite and the House and, Mr. Chair, yourself that I want to 
make sure that the answer is given on this and any other issue 
are factual and that they’re not misunderstood and misread or 
misinterpreted. 
 
I would prefer to do that. It is . . . and I’m sure that members 
will appreciate and understand as we all do, sometimes when 
you get to talk on high financing issues and you’re dealing with 
accounting matters, mortgages and so on and transactions in 
properties and shares and whatever, it does get a little complex 
for yours truly, it certainly does, and perhaps for others who are 
not as fine-tuned in these financial transactions. 
 
So I would prefer to do that, if the member would be amenable 
to that I’d very much appreciate it and to ensure that the proper, 
the right answers were given to these very technical questions. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Okay, I’ve many questions here 
and yes I will forward to you on the mortgage end of it. 
 
One other question when we’re under . . . looking back through 
here we talked about Crown tendering that was done in 1998. 
You said you’d provide details. Did you, on the sheds; did you 



2178 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

talk to the officials? Have you looked that up yet to see if you 
followed it up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sure that’s the issue 
that the member is referring to that occurred three to four years 
ago. I am aware that there have been some questions 
surrounding that particular transaction have been posed at the 
Crown corporations meeting and that there was a letter 
requested explaining in detail again what was involved during 
those transactions and that letter is being prepared to the 
member, Mr. Chair. And it will be . . . all those details once 
again explained to their fullest will be addressed to the member 
from Arm River. And I thank you for that. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr. 
Minister. Okay I will look forward for that letter. 
 
One more question on potatoes. And I know you’re not 
involved with the 2000 crop year, 2001 crop year that’s being 
spread out on the ground right now in Broderick. But as being a 
Sask Water official are you aware of where they’re being spread 
in proximity of Broderick’s water supply right now? 
 
(20:15) 
 
I’ll just give you some more information. I believe that it’s 
being . . . the field that they’re being spread on right now is 
about a hundred feet from their well that is being used, and I 
know that there has been complaints issued, I think — I believe 
— officially Sask Water and I believe to SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) about that. 
 
Have you talked to CIC about this spreading of potatoes? I was 
. . . just talked to the councillor yesterday in Broderick and they 
were still dumping potatoes and now they’re in the process of 
working them in the ground. And the town councillor and the 
mayor and the many residents are very concerned about their 
water being contaminated by the potatoes that are being 
dumped in the field. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I’m told . . . I’m not aware of 
any formal complaint, any formal complaint that’s been made 
with respect to the potatoes being spread on any fields adjacent 
to ours. But that is a concern and will certainly be looked into 
as soon as possible. It’s not been brought in any formal way to 
our attention that people in the area have expressed a major 
concern, but it certainly is a concern and it will be looked into. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Yes, we will pass that on to the councillor and 
the mayor and they probably will contact your office. They may 
have contacted Moose Jaw — I’m not sure. 
 
Mr. Chairman, with that, I’ll turn it over to the member from 
Watrous. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have two situations 
in my constituency that I would like to bring up or bring to your 
attention. One — if you’ll bear with me it’ll take a few minutes 
to describe what’s happening so that you have an understanding 
of their situation — but it’s in the community that’s 
surrounding South Allan, and they applied to the PFRA (Prairie 

Farm Rehabilitation Administration) for assistance for a water 
project. 
 
And a survey was conducted at that time to identify the extent 
of the need for better quality water in the area. There was found 
that there was a need, and so the application was filed in 1998. 
And earlier in this year of 2001 their application was approved. 
And at that time they were advised to form a utility, get the 
appropriate documentation and registration numbers, set up a 
bank account, and to elect a board. 
 
And in February, the PFRA advised the new utility which they 
named Allan south rural water utility to apply for FIP funding. 
The board was advised by PFRA that if the new utility did not 
qualify for funding under FIP that the funding allocated by the 
PFRA would remain in place for them if they needed it. So the 
board decided to follow that advice, but when they applied for 
the FIP program they found they had to complete even more 
paperwork and there was a lengthy wait from that program to 
see whether or not they would qualify. 
 
When they did finally hear from FIP, they were told that they 
did not qualify. And during the delay in the reply they 
discovered that PFRA had reallocated the monies initially 
delegated for their project and they had given it elsewhere. So 
now they’re back to having no funding. They’ve spent a great 
deal of time and some money, and they still have extremely 
poor-quality water. 
 
In the letters that I received on this, one particular letter dated 
June 19, 2001 written by Charles Smith — he’s one of the 
fellows who was on the steering committee for forming the 
Allan south rural water utility — he writes: 
 

A boil-water order for this community would be considered 
a blessing, as the water would be safe after boiling. This 
water is not fit to wash clothes in, drink, or shower in 
unless a film of brown, rusty crud on your body is 
considered acceptable. Some residents complain that their 
children are often ill but for no reason. 
 

He goes on to say that: 
 

We perceive this to be yet another event where cities or 
towns with ecoli or boil-water warnings or areas where 
there have no doubt been problems have captured the eye 
of the media or politicians and therefore the money follows. 
In the meantime, rural people in communities live with 
water, which is not even fit to wash in. 

 
He also sent me a copy of a letter from Sask Water to the South 
Allan community dated April 8, 1999. The letter does state that 
the water supply is of very poor quality. And also I have a letter 
by the earth science division of PFRA dated April 24, 1997. 
This letter was written after a new well had been dug and tested 
in an attempt for the community to obtain better water. And that 
letter states: 
 

There is no question that the water quality from the new 
well is even poorer than the old source. 

 
Clearly the people of South Allan community no longer know 
which way to turn. They are in a situation where they no longer 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2179 

 

know what to do. 
 
So considering that there definitely seems to be the need for 
better quality water in their community and the unfortunate way 
in which all these events unfolded, is there any avenue that they 
have available to them where their fifth application would be 
reconsidered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I’m not sure I 
was clear on which programs South Allan had applied under. If 
it was a Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program . . . if, 
I’m not sure if that was a program but regardless there’s still an 
option I’m told that — but it’s a costly one — that would help 
ease some of the problems that the member was relating. And it 
would require an extension of pipe, again which would be a 
costly endeavour from one of the other areas to that particular 
location. And I’m not clear either whether there’s ongoing 
dialogue. I’ve made note of dates of a couple of letters but they 
go back to ’97, ’98, and ’99. 
 
The most recent ones would really be of interest to me and 
perhaps supply a clearer picture of what the concerns and 
determination of whether it’s under the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program that there was an application and a 
denial. If it was a green project and an area that there was some 
concern expressed about, I’d really be interested in being more 
aware of what the project was and the correspondence and 
between whom. 
 
The member had mentioned a FIP program, and I’m not . . . not 
. . . that one doesn’t . . . is not clear in my mind whether that 
might be a program that PFRA had in place but I’m not aware 
of that one. 
 
It’s the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program that is 
administered through Municipal Affairs but involves SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), and 
representatives on a project board to determine priorities for 
applications in situations that the member has described. 
 
So I’d appreciate it if he could share some recent 
correspondence and details because I certainly would like to 
look into that to find out what is happening, and if there’s some 
assistance available or some guidance or some advice, we’d be 
more than happy to supply it. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I have 
. . . he sent me quite a bundle of information. I’d be more than 
happy to photocopy it all, forward it to you tomorrow, and any 
assistance I’m sure they will more than appreciate it. So thank 
you very, very much. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — If you’re sending some information I would 
just . . . I see a global has just come. I just got them. I was just 
looking at some more information you could fill out on them 
though. You’ve got no salaries for office personnel and 
minister’s travel or fees and charges on legal action. I can’t 
believe the trouble Sask Water’s been in over the number of 
years that you would have no fees on legal action. I’ll just ask 
that. Would you have an idea how much you spent on legal 
action this past year? 
 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, the information supplied in the 
globals are in response to specific questions that are asked for 
specific answers. I understand that those were not specifically 
asked for. But if those answers are not there and they were 
specifically asked for, we will certainly supply them. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You can look in 
Hansard in what I requested for the salaries and minister’s 
travel. But the question I’ll ask you right now, how much 
money did you spend last year on legal fees? Would you have 
that there? 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — To request leave to introduce a guest, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Chair, it is my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, a guest 
in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Ken Rauch. Mr. Rauch just 
recently retired after a 20-year career with government, the last 
15 of which were spent as a community program consultant 
with community living division of Social Services. And in that 
capacity, I, as general manager of Porcupine Opportunities 
Program and as president of SARC (Saskatchewan Association 
of Rehabilitation Centres), spent a lot of time with Ken and 
very much respected his professional approach to the services 
and the communities that provide those services for people with 
disabilities in our communities. And I’d ask everyone to join 
me in welcoming Ken this evening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Permission to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(20:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 
like to join with the member from Carrot River Valley in 
welcoming Mr. Ken Rauch to the legislature. And I am so 
pleased to hear that the member from Carrot River Valley is 
very impressed with Ken Rauch because, as members on this 
side of the House will know, Mr. Rauch, now that he has 
retired, is doing wonders for the New Democratic Party and 
indeed is the treasurer of that party. 
 
And I am sure that when the member from Carrot River Valley 
goes up to talk with him in the gallery, that Mr. Rauch will be 
more than pleased to sign him up on a pre-authorized chequing 
account and take his membership for the NDP (New 
Democratic Party). 
 
Please welcome Mr. Rauch to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2180 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 

Subvote (SW01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — In response to the member’s question, 
there was a total of $93,013 for legal fees last year. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that. Some 
questions we’d asked under the Crown Corporations Committee 
meeting that one morning there, one of the questions we’d 
asked was dealing with the water, rural water quality programs. 
And you had kind of broken it down. 
 
And I think in 2000 you had said . . . I’d asked for research 
money and I believe it’s got written here respectively in 2000, 
$500 for research that was the amount budgeted. Can you tell 
me how much research that would have bought? Five hundred 
dollars doesn’t seem like a lot and I think the whole budget was 
about $300,000. Why so little money budgeted for research and 
development, and what was that $500 used for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, the intent 
was to carry out certain amount of research. The opportunity to 
carry that research did not surface so the money, there was only 
$500 spent although there had been a larger budget applied for 
or there had been more money budgeted for. 
 
For example this year, now that there are major, specific 
programs or projects that need to have adequate research there 
is $70,000 that has been budgeted for. So there will be some 
extensive research programs. There are those occasions when 
you look to the future, and you have a plan to do certain . . . 
carry out certain initiatives that perhaps don’t come to fruition 
because of other attention that’s needed elsewhere. But the 
money is there. It was there. If there had been specific projects 
targeted for research, they didn’t come to fruition but will be 
this year, and that’s why the extended amount of monies for in 
the budget for this current year. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, can 
the minister provide me with the breakdown of how that money 
was spent for the year 2000, the money that was budgeted for 
the whole rural water quality program? Do you have a 
breakdown of that, right there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, Deputy Chair, to the member. 
The variety of projects within the water quality program, the 
expenditures totalled $374,000. And I believe in my discussions 
with the member previously on this issue, we had discussed that 
there were targeted issues within that particular project. Such 
as, in general terms, the rural water quality which had an 
expenditure of its own; the rural quality . . . water quality 
advisory program — there were numerous small issues within 
this major project; water quality inquiries then again elicited 
some costs; education and awareness; and research and 
development. So all of these components into the rural water 
quality component or project, if you wish, totalled $374,000. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What I wanted, and 

you can . . . I want that now I guess because I was asked if you 
had it. Can you provide me just a breakdown of each 
department, what department it was spent on? Of the 374,000, 
you named four departments. You can get back to me with a 
letter with the other information; just a breakdown of each 
department, what it was spent in. 
 
And in advance I’ll thank you and your ministers for your 
questions. And I believe the member for Watrous has one quick 
one. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have another 
situation in my constituency that just recently happened. And 
I’m not sure if you’re totally familiar with the practices that 
intensive hog operation use in injecting the hog waste into the 
fields. But when the machines that are able to do this are used, 
they have to, at the end of the field, lift the shanks out of the 
soil and there is no check valve mechanism that’s yet been 
invented that they can stop the flow of the raw sewage from just 
dumping on to the surface of the soil. And so therefore at the 
ends or the corners wherever the machine has to turn around, 
the raw sewage is just being dumped on the surface rather than 
injected. 
 
In the situation that’s happened in my constituency the field that 
was being used for injecting the hog waste had a slope towards 
the ditch at the one side, and directly across the ditch was 
another producer’s water supply in the form of a dugout. The 
dugout was wide open to view. It wasn’t hidden and so it was 
obvious it was there. 
 
There was a culvert through the road at that particular location. 
So the raw sewage would enter the ditch. It passed through the 
culvert and go directly to the other fellow’s water supply, which 
was only a few metres from the road. 
 
Is there any regulatory . . . or regulations or any standards or 
any restrictions that are in place when it comes to injecting the 
raw sewage from hog operations or any animal operations to 
protect water supplies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member 
opposite, I’m advised that this type of a situation comes under 
The Agricultural Operations Act and there are guidelines that 
Sask Ag and Food sets for these types of operations. And I 
appreciate you raising that concern because it would be a 
concern. 
 
And I would suggest that the gentleman who fears for 
contamination of his water would contact Sask Ag and Food 
and indicate what the specific concerns are. And I apologize for 
not being able to address that more directly. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I’m sure you 
do agree that practices such as this is severely damaging the 
public acceptance of having intensive hog operations in the 
area. And in my case there’s a number of producers who do 
have such operations and so the public acceptance is very 
important in my area. 
 
With that I’d like to thank you and thank your officials for 
being here tonight. 
 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2181 

 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and to the 
members opposite I want to express appreciation to the 
questions asked by the members opposite. I also want to express 
appreciation to members of the staff in Sask Water who are 
there and are there to hear any concerns that people may have 
with respect to water, which is very important to all of us. 
While I’m on my feet, I’d like to introduce to other people who 
work with Sask Water and that’s Greg Argue and Tom Gehlen 
who are sitting in the Speaker’s Gallery and watching 
proceedings here tonight. Once again thank you to everybody 
and thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 
report progress on Sask Water. 
 
(20:45) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 

Vote 45 
 
Subvote (EC09) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated to my left 
is Doug Tastad, vice-president of the research parks division. 
To my right is Vern Rourke, director of investments; directly 
behind me is Charlene Callander, corporate controller; and 
behind me and to my right is Moses Kanhai, director of 
corporate affairs. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees, and 
welcome to your officials, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to address some of the issues and questions that have 
come up with regards to the Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation. I think there’s a lot of activity that’s been going on 
in that area. 
 
And I would like to first of all, Mr. Minister, ask if you would 
give me just a brief overview as to what the role of the SOCO 
(Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) is in your view and 
what it’s overall objective and mandate is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think I could to the member probably 
just read directly from our corporate overview and it is as 
following: 
 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation’s mandate is to 
facilitate economic growth in Saskatchewan through 
investment in viable businesses and infrastructure that 
supports the development of business. 
 
The corporation makes loan and equity investments in 
export-oriented and import-replacement businesses and 
those that result in manufacturing and value-added 
processing in Saskatchewan. (The Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation) syndicates its investments with 
other investment agencies wherever possible. It also 
develops and operates research parks. 

 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I noticed that 
from the budget, and I’m looking at page 37, vote 45 of the 
Economic Development where it says summary of expenditures 
under the heading Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, 
that the level of budgetary expense for this line has increased 
quite substantively. My calculation is about 4 per cent. 
 
When I look back a year earlier, I noticed that it has increased 
rather substantively over that. It’s something like about 31 per 
cent in two years. Can you give me an idea of why there is such 
an increase in expenditure in that particular line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It has to do with the operation of the 
research parks. And in this particular case, just because of the 
timing of the year, this growth would be particularly associated 
with the Regina Research Park. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, in order to increase the 
expenditure in the budget items that much, I’d looked back to 
see what the overall disbursements were, the loans, the 
borrowing requirements for Crown corporations. And I guess 
I’m looking at page no. 16, schedule for borrowing 
requirements. And again I noticed that the borrowing 
requirements have made a very large jump, almost 70 per cent. 
There is not only a line item budget increase, but also an 
indebtedness for SOCO. Can you explain that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The borrowing requirements are as a 
result of substantial building . . . new buildings in both research 
parks, both Saskatoon and Regina. And as a result of more 
activity, of course there’s increased operating expenses, which I 
was referring to in the last answer. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The increase in 
activity, does that mean the programmed activity or is it 
investment in capital assets like the Research Park? I know 
there’s been an expansion of the Research Park and I can see 
some real value for the Research Park. For instance, Innovation 
Place in Saskatoon is returning considerable dollars on 
investment there. I assume that the Research Park here in 
Regina may do that. 
 
I do notice that in Regina though there is a vacancy rate that’s 
still pretty high and trying to find occupancy for those buildings 
while other buildings in Regina, in real estate competition 
terms, are remaining empty. So I’m kind of interested to see if 
the indebtedness that you’re incurring under that line is all asset 
orientated or is it an expanding program of equity and loan 
function? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Sorry for taking so long to get your 
answer for you here but first of all with respect, I want to 
address the vacancy rate. Here in Regina the vacancy rate 
actually might be less than you think it is. The vacancy rate 
right now is less than 10 per cent, with over half of that space 
already committed. So it’s . . . Well obviously we’d like to see 
100 per cent vacancy . . . or I should say occupancy. The 
vacancy rate is fairly low. 
 
The question around the total capital expenditure, 29 million of 
that is for capital construction in . . . approximately 29 I should 
say is for buildings. The other 8 to 10 approximately is in 
investments. 



2182 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would I be 
correct in saying that not only is there a line item increase in the 
budget but also an indebtedness for the Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation in order to fulfill their mandate of 
loans and equity? I’m wondering if in fact the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan are incurring a debt through SOCO for equity 
positions in companies that you are supporting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I guess I would frame it up a little bit 
differently than what the member did. But I mean we are 
borrowing money and we are investing in equity positions in 
businesses to hopefully do what I described earlier in the 
corporation’s mandate, that is, to stimulate business here in 
Saskatchewan and hopefully grow our economy a bit and get 
new businesses up and running and started here in our province. 
So to some degree I guess I would characterize it just a little bit 
different than the member has. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think we are 
probably going in the same direction, maybe just a little 
different focus on the wording of it. If Saskatchewan 
Opportunities has to borrow that kind of money, where does 
SOCO borrow its money from? Is it from some other part of the 
Saskatchewan government or is it outside borrowing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member, we get an allocation 
and we actually . . . I guess it would be described as an 
allocation, but it’s from the General Revenue Fund from my 
friend the Minister of Finance but we pay an interest rate of 
course on that money as well. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I notice in 
another line item on page 40 of the budget, under Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation there’s a line item called investment 
loss contribution. Is there a fund building up with regards to 
anticipated problems with loans? If there is, how large is this 
loan and how is it utilized? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m not sure I’m answering your 
question correctly but it is a loan loss provision and I don’t 
know if that, if that clarifies what you were asking. If not, 
please just ask the question again. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — No, I understood that it was a loan loss 
provision and I noticed that each year there is about $2 million 
set aside for that and I wondered if, is that built up into an 
accumulated fund? Or does that revert back to the general 
revenue if it’s not used? 
 
(21:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes it is an accumulated fund. And I 
guess logically as well in any loan that you might have 
anticipated a loss and that you would collect revenue on, that it 
will also decrease as well if you collect on a loan that you 
thought you might collect funds on. But it is an accumulated 
fund. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Along that same 
line then, is there on the listing of the current projects that 
SOCO supports, is there any of those projects that are in 
jeopardy? Is there any of these projects that you anticipate will 
require provision out of that accumulated loan loss account? 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — For reasons of confidentiality I can’t 
give the member a specific answer about specific investments 
or specific loans. But I would refer back to Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation’s mandate which is involved in 
lending I would say at probably higher risk to start businesses 
up, new businesses up here in Saskatchewan, and clearly we 
will have — as a result of that — we will have higher risk that 
will cause us to set aside more allowances, as I described them. 
But I can’t provide the details as a result of confidentiality with 
investments that we’ve made with the private sector here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When I look 
through the list I see that there’s still projects on the list here 
that have been listed and I’m reading the list of projects up to 
November 30, 2000, which would be just last fall. I noticed 
several on here that I’m wondering why they’re still there. For 
example, Provincial Forest Products Ltd. from Prince Albert is 
a company that was in bankruptcy, and I think they’ve had a 
dispersal sale. I looked at other ones. For instance, Shuttlecraft 
International that has . . . more than a year ago has ceased 
operation in Saskatchewan. And I don’t see any follow-up 
unless I haven’t found that information yet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The reason that they’re still on the 
books, to the member, is that the first one he referred to is still 
in bankruptcy and it’s not been concluded yet. And I’m not 
sure, but I guess with Shuttlecraft similar circumstances would 
exist although technically not bankruptcy, I guess. There still is 
issues that where the books have not been closed on them so 
that’s why we keep them listed there for the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you 
tell me then if the loan . . . And what I see in this report, for 
Provincial Forest Products there’s a loan of $400,000; for 
Shuttlecraft a loan of 1,250,000. Are those loans in jeopardy 
then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It would be our view that appropriate 
reserves were set aside when the loans and/or investments were 
set up. Once the book is closed, if you will, we’ll provide the 
final details for the public. 
 
To some degree, as a result of confidentiality I’m not allowed to 
. . . I’m not permitted to give you specific details. But we are of 
the view — in trying to answer the question as fully as I can — 
we are of the view that appropriate reserves were set aside and 
once the book has been closed, we will provide all of the details 
in our annual reports with the exact detail. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I assume those 
. . . the money set aside in the eventuality of a loss would come 
out of that accumulated fund that we were talking about earlier. 
I notice a nod. I assume that that is a correct response, a correct 
assumption on my part. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — You are correct in that assumption. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — I guess I’m wondering, Mr. Minister . . . 
And I know that one of the roles of SOCO, Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation, is to try to assist these corporations 
and companies just starting up in getting a start, and I think 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2183 

 

there’s a lot of success stories here. 
 
Now if I was going to assume that in order for you to lend a 
million or $2 million and so on, that there’s been a lot of due 
diligence done. 
 
The one that comes to mind — and I was conferring with my 
colleague from Redberry Lake — there’s one at Biggar for 
instance that I noticed was resolved, and that was called 
Microgro International Research Inc. Although it’s not a large 
amount of money — $100,000 compared to some of the others 
— that particular company has gone bankrupt and has now been 
changed. 
 
And I see SOCO has put that under resolved accounts, but then 
again lent it money under a different name called Microgro 
Farm Limited and lent it now a quarter of a million dollars. And 
I just understand that that went into receivership, something to 
do about the same time as SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company), and it is now something called 
Milner Greenhouse. I assume that that money has been lost in 
the bankruptcy. Would that be correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Sorry I wanted to be clear before I 
answered the question for you. The first company — to refer to 
Microgro — they paid back their loans fully and completely, 
sold their business to a second company with a similar name. 
 
I’m understanding . . . we believe . . . By the way I did forget to 
say at the very beginning that we don’t have with us our 
president and one or two other officials who would be more 
knowledgeable in answering some of your questions. So I 
apologize for that. 
 
It was sold to a second company, Microgro, in 1999, I believe 
that is probably what it was referred to although please don’t 
hold me to that exactly. And we are now . . . that company 
failed and that is being wound up. 
 
The maximum exposure is I think as you have correctly 
identified $100,000, although we don’t know yet until it’s 
completely wound up what the losses might be. We would 
obviously believe they will be somewhat less than that because 
there will be some assets I believe probably to recover. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I just have a 
couple more questions. One of them is . . . kind of strikes close 
to home. There’s a $2 million loan to Bellator Explorations 
from Calgary with the idea of an increased production capacity 
in my home area, in the Lloydminster area. 
 
But my question would be because there’s a lot of companies 
operating in the Lloydminster area, several of them if not all of 
them are headquartered out of Calgary, why was Bellator 
selected as the recipient of a $2 million loan from SOCO? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The company that the member refers to, 
Bellator, approached the Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation. We did the due diligence and made the investment 
or the loan, if you will. 
 
The question I think that the member asks is why we would do 
that with a company in Calgary? It’s because they conduct their 

activity in the province of Saskatchewan, and that’s the 
mandate of the Opportunities Corporation is to create jobs here 
in Saskatchewan. And I think the member knows they are a 
successful company. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If in fact Bellator 
was the one that applied, or was it the one that came first, or 
was it the only one that applied to SOCO? There’s lots of 
companies doing a lot of good work there in Lloydminster in 
exploration. I just wondered why you would pick the one 
company. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m advised that the only reason that we 
dealt with this company specifically is because, first of all as I 
described, they applied to the corporation. We have been in 
discussion with other companies in the area, but have simply 
not been able to put together a deal. They may have found 
financing that they found more appealing somewhere else or 
situations like that. 
 
We’d be always open to any company in your area that’s 
interested in creating jobs in Saskatchewan and we’d be happy 
to sit down and try to make a deal with them as well. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll give them 
your phone number because there’s probably quite a few. 
 
Mr. Minister, I only have one small question and before I ask 
that I wanted to thank your officials for coming. 
 
My question is that the SOCO estimates last time that we were 
doing this was under the direction or the administration of the 
Minister of Economic and Co-operative Development. I 
wondered why it has been under your direction this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I guess the short answer is that it’s the 
Premier’s prerogative about who’s in charge of the corporation. 
And that really is the correct answer as well. 
 
While I’m on my feet as well, I want to thank the member for 
the good questions that he’s asked; and take the opportunity to 
thank my officials who I know are feeling a little uncomfortable 
before they came in here because they were believing that 
someone else would be providing the advice to me and 
believing we’d be here probably on a different night. So thank 
you very much to them as well. 
 
The Chair: — We are dealing with Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation subvote (EC09). In order to vote this 
off, we need leave to move to (EC09). 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Subvote (EC09) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 
Vote 154 

 
Subvote (SO01) — Statutory. 



2184 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
 
Subvote (EC01) 
 
The Chair: — Before we begin, I’ll invite the minister to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my right 
is Larry Spannier, the deputy minister of the department; to his 
right is Doreen Yurkoski, director of administrative and 
financial services. To my right is Debbie Wilkie, executive 
director of marketing and corporate affairs. Behind Debbie is 
Bryon Burnett, the assistant deputy minister of community and 
economic and business development. Immediately behind me is 
Jim Marshall, assistant deputy minister of policy; and to his 
right is Robert Hersche, the executive director of information 
and technology office. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. And 
Mr. Minister, I would like to welcome your officials here 
tonight. 
 
I don’t have a great number of questions. As you know we’ve 
covered quite a few of the basic questions over the last while. 
There may be just one or two questions that I would like to refer 
back to before we get into some of the items that I want to talk 
to regarding Saskatchewan Government Growth Funds and so 
on. 
 
The one question that I didn’t get around to before to ask was 
something about the office that you have or your department 
has in Ottawa. And I would like to ask you the role of that 
office and how much that office is expensed into the budget of 
Economic and Co-operative Development, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, while 
my officials are looking up some information with respect to 
your question, I omitted to introduce some of the folks that are 
with me in the back row. 
 
Roy Anderson, president and CEO (chief executive officer) of 
Tourism Saskatchewan; Tim Frass, director of finance and 
administration, Tourism Saskatchewan; John Treleaven, 
president and CEO of Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership. Gerry Adamson, vice-president of STEP 
(Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership Inc.) and Kathryn 
— I’m sorry — Buitenhuis, executive director of strategic 
management of Crown Investments Corporation. And I’m 
sorry, Kathryn, I will do better next time. 
 
Okay, Mr. Chairman, the business development office in 
Ottawa focuses on increasing our share, our province’s share, of 
the federal procurement market. We try to ensure effective 
representation of the policies, the views, and the positions of 
Saskatchewan as it relates to selected federal forums in 
providing intelligence regarding federal activities and priorities. 
 
So really it’s, I guess, an information flow to Ottawa to try and 
enhance our ability to do business with the federal government. 
Our budget is $128,000. 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess the 
Ottawa office is a . . . what would you call it, a lobby office for 
information as well as trying to solicit any kind of business or 
support here into the province. How many people, Mr. Minister, 
are employed in that office in Ottawa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I am told by the officials there are 
two contract employees. And I guess as opposed to lobbyists, 
they attempt to interface with the federal administration. They 
have some understanding of how their system operates and 
know some of the folks there that can enhance the ability for us 
to forward the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I wanted to 
go now if I could to the program known as Saskatchewan 
Government Growth Funds. Over the years there has been quite 
a change in how these funds were solicited, how they were 
administered, and recently just a year ago, there’s been a very 
large change. 
 
But maybe just for the record could you summarize what the 
intent of the Saskatchewan Government Growth Funds were 
for, why were they set up, and what was their shortcoming 
resulting in the changes that have happened in the last couple of 
years, last year in particular? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 
SGGF (Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund) was 
established in 1989, and as you will probably know, the purpose 
was creating and managing fund companies that had been 
accepted as government-administrated venture capital funds 
under the federal government’s Immigrant Investor Program. 
Under this there are eight fund companies that represent about 
155 million in capital. 
 
The province decided to opt out of the participation in the 
revised federal IIP (Immigrant Investor Program). The source 
for new replacement capital that had to be managed by the 
management corporation disappeared, so the restructuring was 
as a result of opting out of the federal program. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know there was 
a sizable amount of money that was solicited from immigrant 
investors to be directed to different functions and ventures or 
investments here in Saskatchewan. 
 
What is the operating structure of what — maybe it’s certainly 
changed now — but what was the operating structure of the 
growth funds? The private individuals were contracted to solicit 
these funds. They in turn then administered these funds for a 
fee. Is that correct? Could you explain how these operated if I 
don’t have the correct idea? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Yes we have made a 
contract to manage the investment of these funds from a private 
investment management firm. The management services 
agreement was negotiated with Crown Life through Crown 
Capital Partners Inc. In addition to managing the assets of the 
SGGF, they will focus on expanding its client base and 
attracting, just sort of as a mandate, new institutional capital to 
Saskatchewan to provide for more opportunities for 
Saskatchewan businesses. 
 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2185 

 

Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, are there any Saskatchewan 
Government Growth Funds still active or have they all been 
converted over to the management of capital Crown partners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — There were initially eight funds and 
seven of those are still active, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, can you tell us what led up to 
the administration of some of these funds now under Crown 
Capital Partners? There was an announcement just a year ago 
by your predecessor, or about a year ago or so, in that these 
funds are now being administered under a different 
administrator or they are now under Crown Capital Partners. 
 
Could you tell me what led up to that and why the change was 
seen to be necessary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well as the funds had changed and 
there will be some changes and ultimately these funds will 
come to maturity, the diminishing capital base couldn’t sustain 
the costs that were concurred in, in terms of operating them as it 
was. And so it was felt that to make a contract with a private 
management service would make more sense. So really it’s a 
cost of administration as the nature of funds change and as the 
capital base was known to contract and would be contracting as 
the funds matured and wound down. 
 
(21:30) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The private 
administrators, that first of all obtained the funds and then were 
administrating these funds under the Saskatchewan Government 
Growth Fund’s formula, are they now out of the picture or are 
they still receiving administration funds now that the 
administration of these funds is turned over to Crown Capital 
Partners. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Really there’s no change from the 
initial management service agreement. The agreement that was 
signed is what they’re operating under now. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, it’s my understanding that the 
Crown Capital Partners purchased the Saskatchewan 
Government Growth Fund’s management corporation. I 
understand that that was the management corporation that 
received a fairly substantive administrative fee. My information 
shows that it’s about $2.5 million a year. Is that now, that 2.5 
million, is that now being directed to Crown Capital Partners 
instead of Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund 
management corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Right, I’m told that the cost of 
administration before it was transferred to the private 
management companies was around two and a half million 
dollars. That was the initial concept and that was the initial 
agreement when the management contract was signed. As the 
fund diminishes, that will diminish proportionately as well. So 
if initially there was $150 million, if it decreased or declined to 
$100 million, that percentage decreased and a formula was 
factored in to account for the decrease and how much money 
was being managed. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is that in addition 

then to the private administrators that were in place 
administering these funds up to this point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the assets of the 
subcontractor were transferred along with that, so that’s part of 
this. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, there was an agreement 
earlier on, I believe, with Saskatchewan Government Growth 
Funds that any profit that was being generated would be turned 
over to charities. What happened . . . then the 20 million . . . I 
think there was about $20 million in profit, if I remember 
reading the information correctly. That profit was then changed 
to be reinvested. What happened to that $20 million when there 
was the transition to Crown Capital Partners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, there was a bit of a transition 
initially. The profits were earmarked for charities. Over a period 
of time, it was determined that that may not be the most 
appropriate way for those profits to be used. There had been 
developed other sources of funding for those kind of initiatives 
through the GRF (General Revenue Fund) and through other 
funds. So it was determined that it would be reinvested. 
 
And ultimately what will be done with it is to have it transferred 
to the General Revenue Fund and, through the General Revenue 
Fund, for health research. It’s one of the growing areas, and 
certainly it’s one of the pressures in terms of expanding and 
growing our economy. And I know you and your colleagues 
have spoken of that on a number of occasions during this 
session. So ultimately the profits of this will be transferred for 
health research as they become available. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Right, anything 
that can go toward health is probably to an advantage to people 
in this province. Is Crown Capital Partners . . . are they 
administering that part of the fund as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — They will be managed by the 
management company until they’re transferred to the General 
Revenue Fund, at which point they’ll be probably under health 
research. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, there’s always been a 
question that is asked in the investment community, why was 
Crown Capital Partners selected as the company that would 
administer in this new arrangement? Were other investment 
companies solicited for their bid on trying to do this? Can you 
help me there with why there was just Crown Capital Partners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I would want to say that there were 
a number of other companies that were looked at at the time and 
an analysis was done in terms of their operations and how they 
would fit in with the Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund 
and the goals and the objectives and strategies of the growth 
fund. 
 
But as well Crown Life was chosen because it committed 
another 60 million in investment within the Western provinces 
and potentially with the . . . (inaudible) . . . within the Western 
provinces and potentially in the United States. 
 
So it was felt overall, in terms of the strength of 



2186 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

Saskatchewan’s economy retaining employment opportunities 
here for Saskatchewan people, that this would be the 
appropriate company to have as the management company. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ve read in the 
paper some comments from the industry and I think with the 
response from the previous minister, but one of the observations 
in the newspaper at least that I read was there was a . . . they 
were unsure if other companies had been asked to bid on this, if 
there was review of any other companies. 
 
Is there a listing that you’re able to share with us of other 
companies that were solicited at the time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, there were three 
other companies that were part of this analysis when this 
decision was made. Rather than to trot the names through the 
legislature, I would just as soon — if you’d be agreeable — to 
send you a list of the three companies, the three other 
companies who were involved in this process. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — No, that’s fine, Mr. Minister. I think that 
would be appropriate. 
 
Another item that I noticed in reviewing this particular file was 
that Mr. Gary Benson was the president of Saskatchewan 
Government Growth Funds, and he was — I assume, at least 
from what I read in the paper — he was also doing the selection 
and negotiation with Crown Capital Partners at which time he 
also became a senior official of Crown Capital Partners, 
responsible for government growth funds of which he was 
president. It just seems like that is a conflict of interest from 
what I read. Is that correct? Is Mr. Gary Benson, is he still the 
president of Saskatchewan Government Growth Funds and a 
senior officer with Crown Capital Partners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 
individual you speak of had actually very little to do with the 
negotiations or with the agreement, and it was done . . . the 
management agreement was negotiated by employees of Crown 
Investments Corporation. There was legal counsel, independent. 
There was analysis of the whole agreement. It was independent 
of the individual you speak of. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is he still 
occupying those two roles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, he is president and 
as well an employee of Crown Investment Corp. No, of Crown 
Capital Corp., sorry. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I was sure that 
you meant Crown Capital Partners, I think is the name. 
 
Something tells me that that is a conflict of interest when the 
administration of the Saskatchewan Government Growth Funds 
of which the president . . . or the president of which is also a 
senior officer in charge of administering that growth fund. That 
just seems a little awkward to me, and I think in terms of the 
investment industry that is perceived that way as well. 
 
One of the other things I noticed, Mr. Minister, when I was 
reading the press releases from that transition was that there 

was a question as to the liability of Saskatchewan Government 
Growth Funds. Was that also the liability of a default? Was that 
transferred also to Crown Capital Partners or are they just a 
beneficiary of approximately $2.5 million in administration fee? 
 
(21:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the liability was 
transferred along with the transfer of the funds. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan has no liabilities here. You 
know it’s also important to understand these are not 
Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars; these are immigrant investor 
funds. They’re being managed under a federal program initially; 
that program changed. We weren’t satisfied with the new 
program. We then set up a new management. We’ve now 
moved into a private management arrangement that will 
diminish as the funds decrease. 
 
With respect to the management of the operation I can tell you 
that there are some very capable people who are working with 
the president of the fund companies. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the funds 
that comes to mind and I just saw a review of this recently and 
that’s the investment, investors’ — immigrant investors’ — 
money invested in Lateral Vector Resources. It now I think it is 
in a receivership situation, if I’m not mistaken. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think that’s correct. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — The president of Lateral Vector, in a press 
release statement back in January, let’s see, made the remarks 
that the company has no debt aside from several hundred 
thousand dollars owed to insiders. No outstanding bills to pay. 
 
I’m wondering if there’s any liability involved or is it just the 
immigrant investors that have completely lost their money? 
 
And I know that they were involved in both the Ukraine and in 
China and I think both of those projects failed for them. Is there 
any other liability involved or is it just the investors that lost the 
money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — You know the nature of the 
immigrant investors funds are that foreign investment comes to 
the fund; there’s no public funds. It’s all administered with the 
funds that come as a result of that investment. It was 
unfortunate that Lateral Vector was not able to succeed. They 
did owe one of the funds some capital but fortunately none of it 
was Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
I guess it’s fair to say not every business will succeed. There are 
some ventures that are more risky than others. Lateral Vector 
was involved in doing business offshore, and sometimes there 
are some incremental risks. Part of the immigrant investor fund 
portfolio is pretty varied. I think it’s fair to say that the funds 
have had some successes, and they will have some failures as 
with any business venture. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, I’m sure that 
that’s correct. The signals that it sends unfortunately is not 
always the best signal. But I think the fund was set up in such 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2187 

 

way that it was strictly the investors. The president, if I could, is 
quoted here in the paper as saying: 
 

Mr. Goranson admits that he made mistakes but said there 
was no impropriety on his part. “I’m absolutely 
comfortable with the things that we’ve done. Have I made 
mistakes, absolutely. In hindsight we could have done 
things differently. Yes.” 

 
I guess that’s really the admission that a president of a company 
has to take. Unfortunately, the signals again are rather awkward 
for further investment. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund is 
ongoing as you say, and I’m not sure that you told me or 
anticipated how many more years it has to play out. Would you 
be able to tell me that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, in the annual report 
you will see the position of each one of the seven remaining 
funds. The last one will mature in ten years. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Maybe just my 
last question will be again with Saskatchewan Government 
Growth Funds. That would be the arrangement that was made 
with Crown Capital Partners because it was really dealing with 
investors’ money, but there’s also taxpayers’ money involved 
here. Will the details of that particular transition to the Crown 
Capital Partners . . . will the details of that deal be made public 
at any time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t think I 
understand the nature of the member’s question with respect to 
the Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund. There are no 
public funds at risk. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The profits from 
the government growth funds are in fact taxpayers’ money. Is 
that not correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I guess we can split hairs as to 
whether they’re the profits from investors’ investment is 
taxpayers’ money. I would suggest that it would be better 
referred to as being profits from investments that others have 
made under the immigrant investors fund, and I think that’s 
probably a more realistic way to approach it. 
 
Now if you’re asking if there’s money being wasted on the 
management fees — and I think that’s what you’re trying to get 
at in sort of the polite manner that you use; that is your nature 
and I understand that — but I think maybe I can, if you would 
like, read into the record the highlights of the agreement. That 
might in some way help you to be more comfortable with the 
terms of the agreement and to ensure you that they are being 
responsible and have to be responsible for those funds. 
 
We have a commitment to the people who invested under that 
program — we as a province; we as a country. And I 
understand that. But I want to make the point as well with 
respect to the portfolio of companies and the different loans and 
the different investments it will make. Surely you must agree 
with me that although there will be some unfortunate failures, 
there will also be some successes. That’s the nature of an 

investment portfolio. And for an investment portfolio to be 
successful, you need to have more successes than failures. 
 
But with respect to image and the image that’s portrayed by one 
company failing — you see I think that’s part of the difficulty 
with the attitude that members on that side of the House take — 
you will trot out one failure out of perhaps 20 or 30 successes, 
but that becomes the mantra. And I think that’s rather 
unfortunate. 
 
But what I will do is send over a copy of the highlights of the 
management agreement that took effect on October 1 of 2000, 
and hopefully that will satisfy your concern that the 
arrangements made with this private management company in 
competition with other companies who were vying for the 
position will be . . . that perhaps the right decision was made 
and that there will be some good, positive jobs here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, I certainly can’t quarrel with 
the objective of getting jobs into Saskatchewan. I can’t quarrel 
with investments coming into Saskatchewan. I would take 
exception to your reference that we’re only looking at the 
negative sides. 
 
When you’re dealing with investors’ money, we’re talking 
about confidence. And when you say that some are good, some 
are bad, I don’t think that’s quite good enough. I think you have 
to assume that every one is a special fund, and you give it your 
very best effort. And just because it fails, you can’t just throw 
up your hands and say, well we won some and lost some. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t have any further questions at this time. I 
wanted to thank you and your officials for being here to answer 
these questions on a very complicated part of your portfolio, the 
Saskatchewan Government Growth Funds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, before we continue 
I’d like to table a copy of the highlights of the management 
agreement. And I’ll just read in a couple of key points: delivery 
of management services, competitive commercial terms based 
on funds under management, incorporated standards and 
guidelines for ongoing performance monitoring, evaluation, 
control, approvals, and decision making. These are just a couple 
of highlights of what is expected of this management company 
under the agreement. 
 
Subvote (EC01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (EC02), (EC05), (EC07), (EC06), (EC13), (EC12), 
(EC04), (EC11) agreed to. 
 
The division bells rang from 21:58 until 22:08. 
 
The Chair: — The question before the committee is the 
motion: 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 
twelve months ending March 31, 2002, the following sums 
for Economic and Co-operative Development for the 
amount of $67,896,000. 

 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 



2188 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

Yeas — 22 
 
Lautermilch Hagel Cline 
Sonntag Goulet Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Wartman Thomson 
Prebble Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Junor Harper 
Jones Kasperski Trew 
Osika Lorjé Yates 
McCall   
 

Nays — 26 
 
Hermanson Heppner Julé 
Krawetz Draude Boyd 
Gantefoer Toth Stewart 
Eagles Wall Bakken 
McMorris D’Autremont Weekes 
Bjornerud Kwiatkowski Brkich 
Harpauer Wakefield Wiberg 
Hart Allchurch Peters 
Huyghebaert Hillson  
 

Supplementary Estimates 2000-01 
General Revenue Fund 

Economic and Co-operative Development 
Vote 45 

 
The Chair: — Subvote (EC07) and subvote (EC09), is that 
agreed? Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Asking the purpose of this vote? I’m not 
sure what it is. 
 
The Chair: — It is the next item of business in the Estimates 
book, Saskatchewan Supplementary Estimates on page 3, and 
it’s vote 45, Economic and Co-operative Development. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I believe it 
now would be appropriate to rise and report progress and ask 
for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — Is the member moving that? Would the member 
please rise and . . . 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Chairman, I move that we rise, 
report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The division bells rang from 22:12 until 22:22. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 26 
 
Hermanson Heppner Julé 
Krawetz Draude Boyd 
Gantefoer Toth Stewart 
Eagles Wall Bakken 
McMorris D’Autremont Weekes 
Bjornerud Kwiatkowski Brkich 
Harpauer Wakefield Wiberg 
Hart Allchurch Peters 
Huyghebaert Hillson  

Nays — 23 
 
Hagel Lautermilch Cline 
Sonntag Goulet Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Wartman Thomson 
Prebble Belanger Crofford 
Axworthy Nilson Junor 
Harper Jones Kasperski 
Trew Osika Lorjé 
Yates McCall  
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to draw 
attention to the clock. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it now being past 
the hour of 10:30, this House stands adjourned until tomorrow 
at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:31. 
 
 


