















































Hansard: June 27, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2189 
 June 27, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have petitions signed by residents of Saskatchewan that reveal 
that commercial greenhouses in Saskatchewan are classified 
differently than agricultural enterprises under the current 
Labour Standards Act. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary amendments to The Labour Standards Act to 
recognize the needs and realities faced by commercial 
greenhouse proprietors and employees. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from the community of 
Biggar. And I’m pleased to present the petition on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my petition today is regarding 
the Fyke report. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Kelvington health 
centre be maintained in its current level offering 24-hour 
acute care, emergency and physician services and that 
laboratory, physiotherapy, public health, home care, 
long-term care service be readily accessible to users from 
Kelvington and district. 
 

People that have signed this are from Kelvington, Lintlaw, and 
Okla. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present over 50 
petitions today which were collected by Virginia Bonsan of 
Turtleford concerning the crying need for speech and language 
services for preschoolers in this province. And the prayer of 
relief reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may take immediate steps to 
increase funding in all areas of speech and language 
services for preschoolers in our province so that such 
services are adequate and accessible for all families 
regardless of income. 

 
The petitioners that have signed this petition have come from 
all over the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
concerned citizens on the issue of the state of the Swift Current 
hospital. And the prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 

government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 

And the petitioners today, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of 
Swift Current as well as the communities in the southwest of 
Wymark, Waldeck, Webb, and Eastend, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding the EMS (emergency medical services) service in the 
province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Brandon, to 
Redvers, to Storthoaks, and Bellegarde. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition dealing with the health care in Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral 
services available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to the users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the good people of 
Redvers; Bellegarde; Brandon, Manitoba; Fertile; Weyburn; 
Storthoaks; Sinclair, Manitoba; and Antler. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about cellular 
telephone coverage. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of Rabbit 
Lake, Hafford, Blaine Lake, Leask, Radisson, Borden, 
Perdue, Maymont, Mistawasis, and Muskeg Lake. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Leask, Saskatchewan. 



2190 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2001 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present to do with the lack of funding to non-profit personal 
care homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Kamsack, Calder, Bangor, and Atwater. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens worried about the rate increases for residential and 
business customers. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Moose Jaw, Elbow, Loreburn, 
and Kenaston. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of constituents concerned about centralization 
of ambulance services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
And signatures to this petition come from the communities of 
Foam Lake and Wynyard. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today with concerns from the 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency in their regards to cellular 
telephone coverage in the area. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Where your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Spiritwood, Medstead, Glaslyn, Leoville, Chitek Lake, Big 
River, Canwood, Debden, Shellbrook, Parkside, Shell 
Lake, Duck Lake, and Macdowall. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Leoville, Spiritwood, Shell Lake, Mildred, and Meeting Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
signed by people from the province that are concerned about the 
high energy costs. And their prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Unity and 
Reward, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise with a petition from citizens concerned about the high 
energy costs. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Wood Mountain. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions . . . citizens of the province on five matters 
that are tabled as addendums to previously tabled petitions. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse and 
Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade 

 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased today to table in the Assembly on behalf 
of myself and my other six colleagues in The Special 
Committee to Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children 
Through the Sex Trade, the final report of the committee. 
 
And at the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving a 
motion: 
 

That the final report of The Special Committee to Prevent 
the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through the Sex 
Trade be now concurred in. 
 



June 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2191 

 

But I’ll first table the report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the committee is pleased to report and to present 
its final report to this Assembly. The seven members of the 
committee have had the opportunity to visit with and receive 
testimony from 188 witnesses. Our work has spanned a year 
and a half, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to first of all express appreciation to all those who 
testified before the committee. Some of those members are here 
today in the galleries and we welcome them warmly. And I also 
want to express my appreciation both to my Co-Chair, the 
member for Humboldt, and also to each of the members of the 
legislature who served on the committee, Mr. Speaker, and that 
included the member for Regina Northeast, the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin, the member for Regina Dewdney, the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena, and the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to express appreciation at this point to 
our staff who served us very well on this committee. I want to 
recognize Randy Pritchard, who served as our technical adviser; 
Meta Woods, who served as Clerk to the committee. They both 
provided us with excellent support. And we want to thank all 
other members of the Legislative Assembly staff who supported 
us, the Law Clerk, staff members from Hansard and legislative 
broadcasting. We appreciated that support very much. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to highlight for members of the 
Assembly some of the key recommendations in this report. We 
were confronted I think with one of the darkest sides of 
Saskatchewan life, namely the involvement of children as 
young as nine or ten in the commercial sex trade, and the reality 
that hundreds of children are impacted by this phenomena, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we see this phenomena, Mr. Speaker, as a case of child 
abuse. It’s often referred to as child prostitution, but members 
of our committee are unanimous in viewing this as the abuse of 
children. And we’ve taken the view from the outset that zero 
tolerance of this activity is our goal. 
 
And the reality, Mr. Speaker, is that hundreds of men are 
engaging in I guess an activity that can only really be described 
as a sexual predator on the strolls of Regina, Saskatoon, and 
Prince Albert. And men are driving into those three urban 
centres from around our province to engage in this activity. 
 
And the reality, Mr. Speaker, is that although we have a lot of 
wonderful people in our communities that are trying to help 
children get off the street — many with success, Mr. Speaker — 
every time a child gets off the street they’re replaced by another 
child who’s on the street. And the driving force behind this 
activity is the sexual predators who seek contact with these 
children. 
 
And the only way to stop this activity in the view of members 
of the committee is to stop the johns and pimps who engage in 
this activity, Mr. Speaker. So a large part of our report deals 
with deterring these sexual predators, which are commonly 
referred to as johns. And, Mr. Speaker, members of the 
committee are determined to see Saskatchewan put an end to 
johns and pimps being out on the strolls of Saskatoon, Regina, 

and Prince Albert. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in order to accomplish that, the seven 
members of the committee are recommending some fairly 
groundbreaking legislation to this Assembly which we hope 
will be adopted. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, we’re recommending that the police 
gather a database where they collect the names of children who 
are at risk on the stroll and also men who are found to be in 
contact with these children — whether it be in their cars or 
approaching them in some other way. And then once that 
database is gathered, we’re recommending significant legal 
action against the men who engage in this activity. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, we’re recommending that The Child 
and Family Services Act be amended so that we broaden the 
concept of a protective intervention order so that it cannot only 
be applied in such a way that it prevents a suspected predator 
from having contact with a child, but it can also be applied in 
such a way that it prevents a suspected sexual predator from 
being in the geographic area of the strolls — period. And I think 
this is a very important change to the concept of a protective 
intervention order. 
 
(13:45) 
 
We’re then recommending, Mr. Speaker, that we develop new 
provincial offences that men who engage in these activities can 
be charged with. For instance, we’re recommending that anyone 
who entices a child into prostitution can be levied with a 
minimum mandatory fine of $25,000. Anybody who endlessly 
drives up and down the stroll and is obviously circling the 
blocks looking for children to have sexual contact with — 
minimum fine $5,000. So once those people’s names are on that 
police database, if they’re back there again, they’ll be charged, 
and hopefully, they’ll be convicted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re also recommending, Mr. Speaker, that we implement 
new legislation in this province modelled on what the 
Government of Manitoba has done with respect to seizure of 
vehicles. We’ve got to get the traffic — the sexual predator 
traffic — off, out of the residential streets of our 
neighbourhoods in Saskatoon and Regina. It is totally 
inappropriate for children in Prince Albert or Saskatoon or 
Regina to have to live in a neighbourhood where hundreds of 
men are going up and down the streets over the course of a 
week looking for sexual activity. 
 
So we are recommending in this report, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government introduce seizure of vehicle legislation. And when 
a man is charged under section 211 or 212 or 213 of the 
Criminal Code, at the time they are charged, we’re 
recommending that their vehicle be seized and that it be 
returned if they enrol in a john’s school. But if a child is in the 
vehicle, we’re recommending that the vehicle not be returned 
but that it be held, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So those are some examples of the legislative initiatives that 
we’re proposing. We’re also recommending changes to the law 
that would allow a police officer to more fully investigate the 
relationship between the man in the car and the child in the car. 
 



2192 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2001 

 

We heard many reports from police officers frustrated by the 
fact that they couldn’t lay charges against the john, and they 
didn’t have the ability to investigate the relationship between 
the child in the car and the man in the car. And they told us how 
heartbroken they were to see those cars drive away. And there 
was, they said, under the existing law, there’s nothing they 
could do unless they could charge the man with a Breathalyzer 
offence or unless he didn’t have proper registration or a driver’s 
licence. If the child said nothing, they felt they couldn’t 
intervene. 
 
Well we on the committee say that it’s time to change the law to 
make sure that police officers can intervene. And we’re 
recommending such a change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I want to add one more comment 
about legal changes and that is that we not only need changes at 
the provincial level but we need Ottawa to play a leadership 
role here with us. And one of the things we’re recommending is 
a change to the federal Criminal Code that would increase the 
age of consent from 14 years to 16 years. 
 
And we’re also recommending that the federal government help 
fund some of the initiatives that I’m going to make reference to 
now, Mr. Speaker. Because the other side of this equation is 
ensuring that there are adequate services in place for children 
who’ve been victimized. 
 
And right now, Mr. Speaker, we found that while there are 
many important helping agencies in place . . . every city, for 
instance, has very good street outreach services, funded with the 
support, significant support, from the province of 
Saskatchewan. The city of Saskatoon has a place of safe refuge 
for children under 16 who are at risk of being sexually abused, 
or have been sexually abused. And that’s jointly funded by the 
province and Saskatoon District Health. Those are just two 
examples of the services that are in place. 
 
But we also found service gaps, Mr. Speaker. And we are 
recommending that every one of the three major cities should 
have a voluntary safe house located in it where children who are 
either at risk of being sexually abused on the street, or have 
been, can seek refuge. And we’re recommending that the 
province contribute to the funding of those voluntary safe 
houses. 
 
We’re also recommending, Mr. Speaker, that there be one 
protective, secure safe house. And this will be a facility that is 
difficult to plan, Mr. Speaker, but we’re recommending that on 
a pilot basis, in the city of Regina, we establish one secure safe 
house that is a lock-up facility. And it’s going to be difficult to 
plan because it has to be a loving lock-up facility — and that 
will not be easy to do, Mr. Speaker. The province needs to enter 
into this arena with caution. 
 
But we’re recommending that for children 14 years of age, and 
under that we establish on a pilot basis one secure-care facility 
where children can be held involuntarily to prevent them from 
experiencing the dangers of the street and to ensure that they are 
provided with good services. 
 

And it’s good services, Mr. Speaker, that we need to provide in 
every centre — Saskatoon, Regina, and Prince Albert. Every 
one of those centres, as I say, needs a voluntary safe house. 
Every one of those centres we’re recommending, Mr. Speaker, 
should also have follow-up caseworkers who are put in place to 
stay with these children and help them stay off the street, and to 
stick with them no matter what and to make sure they know 
where they are — no matter what. 
 
We recommending that these caseworkers operate on a case 
ratio of 14 to 1, Mr. Speaker. Fourteen children to every 
follow-up worker. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that that service 
will be key in terms of helping children to get off the street. 
 
We’re also recommending, Mr. Speaker, that the province put 
in place addictions treatment services for these children. We 
found as a committee that there were not adequate addiction 
treatment services for children in the province in general, and 
we found that many of these children do not get the addiction 
treatment services that they require, Mr. Speaker. And we’re 
therefore urging that the province invest in ensuring that these 
children do get services. 
 
In fact we’re recommending, Mr. Speaker, that the province 
extend a guarantee of services to these children so that they are 
not forgotten children but that they are among our highest 
priorities to make sure that every child is safe in this province 
should be, and I believe all members want to see, will be one of 
the highest priorities of this Assembly and this government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say in closing that we also . . . I 
want to make two or three other comments. One is that we 
found, as we travelled the province, that the problem of child 
sexual abuse on the street is rooted in several other larger social 
problems. One is poverty. Another is the problem of addictions. 
A third is the reality of racism in our communities which is 
reflected in the fact that most of the men on the strolls of 
Saskatoon, Regina and Prince Albert are non-Aboriginal, 80 per 
cent of the children are Aboriginal. 
 
We found, Mr. Speaker, that this problem is rooted in domestic 
abuse. The vast majority of the children who are on the street 
have first been abused somewhere else in their community or in 
their home. And we’re recommending, Mr. Speaker, that the 
province launch two important campaigns. 
 
One is a campaign against racism. I believe every member of 
this Assembly wants to ensure that we have tolerance in our 
society, but we’re recommending that we plan a campaign 
against racism and have the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations) and the Métis Nation join us in that campaign. 
 
We’re recommending that we give more priority to stopping 
domestic abuse in the home, and this report recognizes the work 
that is being done by this government in terms of launching 
home visitation services for families where children are 
believed to be at risk as a preventive measure to stop domestic 
abuse in the home. And we’re recommending that initiative that 
was launched this year with the help of the federal government 
be expanded throughout the province over the next 10 years. 
 
And we’re recommending, Mr. Speaker, that we do even more 
than we have already done to address the issues of poverty that 



June 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2193 

 

these families are confronting. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, those are some of the other 
recommendations that are in the report. 
 
I want to again sincerely thank all members who served on this 
committee, and I will move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the 
member for Humboldt: 
 

That the final report of The Special Committee to Prevent 
the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through the Sex 
Trade be now concurred in. 

 
If I may be allowed, Mr. Speaker, I want to make one more 
comment and that is that all the recommendations that are in the 
report, all the recommendations are unanimous among the 
committee members. There’s a draft Bill in the report that is 
there for public discussion. Not all elements of the draft Bill 
have the support of all members. But all the recommendations 
that are in the report do, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very pleased at 
this point to move, seconded by the member from Humboldt, 
that this report be now concurred in. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is indeed 
my privilege to join with all committee members of The Special 
Committee to Prevent the Sexual Abuse and Exploitation of 
Children in tabling our final report today. 
 
And it is my privilege to address all members of this Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan and the highly esteemed guests and 
people present today who contributed to the report; and to 
address the citizens of Saskatchewan, and especially, Mr. 
Speaker, to address the unbelievably large number of children 
and youth in Saskatchewan who are suffering and who have 
suffered sexual, physical, emotional, spiritual, and 
psychological abuse and torment at the hands of sick and evil 
people who would stoop so low as to sexually use and abuse 
children to satisfy their own perverse appetites. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many, many precious children in Saskatchewan — 
numbers of up to 600 — have been manipulated and coerced, 
are being intimidated and frightened beyond measure. They 
have been threatened, beaten, molested, and violated through 
the terrible slavery of child sexual abuse and exploitation that is 
taking place every minute of every hour of every day in this, 
our province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It is, Mr. Speaker, and it has been painful to look at the vicious 
reality that children are being so deeply hurt and to recognize 
that adults with powerful positions in society have been so 
painfully slow to respond in helping these children. 
 
But finally, Mr. Speaker, finally, I am gratified after five years 
of public pressure, five years of pleading with government to do 
something to stop this horrible atrocity against our children, I 
am heartened that a legislative committee was finally formed to 
do something to stop the pain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can not underscore how very precious our 
children are. They are God’s children, and they are to be valued 
not to be abused. Our children are not commodities to be 

bought and sold and our children are not slaves. Our children 
are not to be violated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our children are hurting and the hurting must stop 
so that all children can once again be treated with dignity and 
experience the joy of life associated with being a child and 
enjoy the respect that should naturally come with being a child 
of God. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our children cannot wait any longer. Many 
children are suffering from disease due to sexual abuse and 
exploitation. Many of them will die. Many of them have died 
because society has tolerated their abuse. This is truly a fall 
from grace. There must be no more delay. 
 
There have been numerous studies, task forces, and committees 
to discuss this issue. We now all know the reasons children 
have been abused and exploited. The committee has identified 
the gaps in the system and it is time for action. Responsible 
adults must now take action to protect our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the most compelling message heard by the 
Committee to Prevent the Sexual Abuse and Exploitation of 
Children was that johns, pimps, and anyone who sexually 
abuses our children or contributes to their exploitation must 
face harsher penalties. And children who are victims of sexual 
abuse need to have holistic, comprehensive services in place to 
assist them in their healing journey. 
 
In response, Mr. Speaker, the committee has put forward 
recommendations for governments and communities to act on 
in that regard. These recommendations provide the elements for 
a concrete, strategic, comprehensive plan to end the child sex 
trade in Saskatchewan. 
 
(14:00) 
 
The recommendations also provide a pathway for holistic, 
immediate, and long-term healing opportunities for children 
who have experienced the trauma of sexual abuse to be assisted 
on the road to recovery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my deepest and most sincere hope that these 
recommendations are acted upon immediately. The lives of 
Saskatchewan’s children depend on it. 
 
The committee’s recommendations also include preventative 
measures such as education for parents, children, and society as 
a whole in order to alert people to the zero tolerance of this 
criminal activity, and change societal attitudes in order to place 
a high value on children’s mental, spiritual, emotional, and 
physical health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I wish to sincerely thank all those 
people who have contributed their thoughts, their wisdom, 
ideas, experience, and who have put forward recommendations 
to our committee through public hearings. And in particular I 
wish to thank the youth who have given heart-wrenching 
testimony of their own experiences and whose witness drove 
home the message to us that children do need help now and 
offenders must be punished. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, I express my deep felt gratitude to the 



2194 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2001 

 

Aboriginal communities as it was so important to have their 
input because, as my colleague from Saskatoon Greystone 
mentioned, 80 to 90 per cent of the children involved in the sex 
trade are Aboriginal children, children who are disadvantaged. 
 
I thank and commend all members of the committee on their 
fine work. And I thank and commend the staff who worked so 
diligently with us for their dedicated effort. 
 
And I do thank the media for their constant expression of 
support and concern and their very effective coverage, raising 
awareness of this horrendous issue in our province. 
 
I thank all the people of Saskatchewan because I know they’re 
all paying attention and they want change. 
 
And I thank the children, once again, who came forward. And I 
look forward to the day when the children who do not have 
voices, need no longer have a voice to express their pain. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m just going to 
make a few brief comments because I want to take this 
opportunity to thank all members of this all-party committee for 
the excellent work that they have done over the past few 
months. 
 
I would also like to thank all the people who made presentations 
to the committee including those who were at one time involved 
in the child sex trade, those who came forward to tell their 
stories. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to take a moment 
specifically to say a few words about one MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) who got this issue on the public agenda 
in the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, six years ago this month, a rookie MLA entered 
this legislature with a mission. She was determined to talk about 
an issue that most people would rather ignore. Mr. Speaker, for 
most of us it’s a lot easier not to think about it. It’s easier just to 
pretend that the child sex trade does not exist. But it does exist. 
And every year it ruins the lives of hundreds of children in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, six years ago this was simply an issue that nobody 
talked about. One MLA set out to change that and, Mr. Speaker, 
she succeeded through sheer will and perseverance and 
determination. She talked about it when she was a Liberal 
MLA, she talked about it when she was an independent MLA, 
and she continued to talk about it when she became a 
Saskatchewan Party MLA. Some people would say that she 
alone has been an all-party committee on this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the first few years she was kind of a lone voice 
in the wilderness on this issue and she didn’t really seem to be 
getting anywhere. But slowly something started to change. The 
public started to realize that we could not ignore this problem 
any longer. Other members of this legislature started to realize 
we could not ignore the problem because too many children 

were being hurt, too many lives were being destroyed, and 
something had to be done. 
 
So after five years the government created this all-party 
committee, and after another year of hard work we finally have 
the report that has just been tabled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that many people today look at our system 
of government and they wonder what can one MLA do. Can 
one MLA really make a difference? The report is proof that one 
MLA can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not naive enough to think that the 
recommendations of this report will completely cure this 
terrible cancer on our society. But, Mr. Speaker, if the 
government acts on these recommendations it will be a major 
step forward. I believe many children will benefit from the 
effort, but if even one child is saved from having their life 
destroyed, then it was an effort well worthwhile. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to encourage the government to act 
quickly on these recommendations, and I would once again like 
to thank all members of the committee for their work. But I 
particularly want to pay tribute to the one person who put this 
issue on the public agenda in the first place, my colleague, the 
member from Humboldt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly a guest who is seated in your gallery and I wonder if 
she could rise and I would point out Ms. Peggy Rubin. She is 
the youth coordinator for the city of Prince Albert youth 
outreach program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to warmly welcome 
Peggy here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, two very special guests seated in your gallery. They 
are my sister Sharen Munn, and her son, Craig. They come to us 
from Surrey, BC (British Columbia). They’re here today to 
observe the proceedings of the House. 
 
I would like to mention, Mr. Speaker, that Craig is a recent 
journalism graduate and is currently employed as a reporter 
with the South Delta Leader and he’s anxiously awaiting 
question period. 
 
Sharen and her family have come home to Saskatchewan to 
help celebrate our father’s 80th birthday this weekend. I’d ask 
all members of the Assembly to join in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2195 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to all members of the 
Assembly several guests that are here to see the tabling of the 
special committee report. I see, Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery 
several members who have been active for many years in 
working with children who are at risk on the street. 
 
I want to welcome Jacqui Barclay, who has been a staff person 
with Saskatoon Communities for Children for many years, and 
Sarah Ninnie who’s made a major contribution in this work as 
one of the young people who’s been very intensively involved 
and made a huge difference. 
 
I want to recognize two people with Egadz who’ve done 
outstanding work in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. Don Meikle 
who’s involved in street outreach and devotes many, many 
hours beyond his 40 hours a week of paid time to helping 
children who’ve been abused on the street. 
 
Bill Thibodeau, who’s also made a big contribution in this field 
for many years is now the executive director at Egadz. And I’m 
just looking around to see if there are others who have not been 
introduced yet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as I’m searching, I want to recognize, Mr. Speaker, Roxane 
Schury, from the Children’s Advocate office, who I see is here, 
and has provided us with some very good advice during the 
hearings. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize two people who 
are very dear to me. My sister’s visiting from Ontario this week. 
And I’m very happy to have my sister, Coral, in the Speaker’s 
gallery, and my mother, who’s been a constant support 
throughout my political career, my mother, Trudy, is here. And 
I’d like all members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming 
her. 
 
So please join me in welcoming all these guests to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d just like 
to take this opportunity to welcome all the members in the 
gallery, all the people in the gallery, who we know and do 
appreciate for their continual work and support of children on 
the streets. There are many, many people who have spent many, 
many hours and years of their lives in trying to help children off 
the streets. 
 
And they deserve a great deal of commendation. These are the 
good people of Saskatchewan who have their heart in the right 
place and who truly want to see our children lead a purposeful 
and meaningful life. 
 
So welcome today and thank you for attending the press 
conference this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly a young guest seated in your gallery. 

Her name is Jessica Pritchard. And she’s 15 years old. She’s 
here to watch the tabling of our report with her father, Randy 
Pritchard. 
 
And Jessica is very interested in this topic. And indeed I 
understand that she actually made a speech in her school of 
Walter Murray Collegiate a little while ago. And she’s just 
finished grade 9. And she’s here with her dad. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I’d like to thank Mr. Pritchard for 
his technical advice; as well as Hansard staff and our Clerks for 
all the hard work that they put in. 
 
So please welcome Jessica and her dad. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, a visitor from the Government of South Australia, 
seated in your gallery. Susan Ball is the project manager of the 
Automated Lands Administration System project at the 
Department of Administrative and Information Services in 
South Australia. 
 
The project is designing an electronic land administration 
system for South Australia, and Ms. Ball is here in 
Saskatchewan to meet with officials of the Information Services 
Corporation about our LAND (Land Titles Automated Network 
Development Project) system. 
 
And she is . . . sitting beside her is Rob Greenwood, 
vice-president of the Information Services Corporation. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today seated in your gallery are four members of my staff. And 
some of them have asked that I just call them the usual suspects. 
 
But as well today we have joining us a new person who joined 
our office this summer. And it was a tough choice, we had such 
good applicants. But Michelle Wesaquate joined our staff this 
summer. And as well, I don’t think she’s been introduced 
before in the House — Leane Goldsmith, from my constituency 
office. 
 
And without these people, Mr. Speaker, I guarantee you I 
wouldn’t make it through the day, so . . . and I’m sure it’s true 
of all our staff. So if the Assembly could join me in welcoming 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Historic Event in Legislative Assembly 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in this 
Assembly to talk about the importance of last evening’s historic 
event in which vote 45, the estimates for Economic and 



2196 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2001 

 

Co-operative Development, were defeated. 
 
It has clearly been the focus of the Saskatchewan Party to 
criticize the questionable strategy and the lack of 
implementation of any sustainable economic development in 
our province, beginning with a vote months ago on the Speech 
from the Throne, which contained few specifics and directions 
to grow Saskatchewan; to a vote against the budget, a budget 
that we have shown to be unsustainable; to a motion of 
non-confidence a few weeks back in this NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government’s disastrous economic policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these policies have eliminated 21,000 jobs from 
this province over the last year — the worst record since the 
Depression. And only yesterday, another StatsCanada report 
showing our province has lost 9,000 people — next to 
Newfoundland the worst in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the reasons why we voted against the 
Economic Development’s portion of this budget. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Members on this side of the House have no confidence in this 
tired, old, arrogant government. And the people of 
Saskatchewan have no confidence in this tired, old, arrogant 
government. Mr. Speaker, the government’s on record . . . it’s 
own record on economic development to help grow 
Saskatchewan is disastrous. The government should do the 
proper and moral thing and call an immediate election. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Successes 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe some 
members are saying that if you do “much research” you can 
finally find an article optimistic about the Saskatchewan 
economy. Which is true. And if you did your research perhaps 
you may take yesterday’s Fort Qu’Appelle Times, page 5, 
which reports on the grand opening of a new business in Fort 
Qu’Appelle. 
 
Or if you really wanted to expand your research you could go to 
any magazine stand in the province, buy a copy of that fine 
publication Sask Business, and this month turn to page 11 where 
you’ll find the following, “More good news for Saskatchewan.” 
 
The Redvers newspaper The New Optimist won two awards for 
best all around newspaper for the year 2000 from SWNA 
(Saskatchewan Weekly Newspaper Association). That’s The 
New Optimist, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You will read that Arne Peterson, founder of the Elk Ridge 
Resort by Waskesiu, won the Saskatchewan Tourism Builder 
Award of Excellence for his development of Elk Ridge Resort 
and golf course. 
 
You will read that the credit unions and co-ops in Meadow 
Lake, Swift Current, Shaunavon, Melfort, and Wynyard had 
very profitable years for their members. Not to mention, the 

completion of Unity’s northwest terminal’s $4.8 million 
expansion, or the Birch Hills’ OmniTRAX producer car facility. 
 
Finally you can read on page 6 of the agreement reached 
between Battleford’s Tribal Council, the SFIN, and Enbridge 
Pipeline for employment and education opportunities. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this massive amount of research took 
me all of three minutes. And I’d encourage the other members 
to conduct similar research. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to all Provincial High School Graduates 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the House today, and on behalf of all members, extend our 
sincere congratulations and best wishes to this year’s high 
school graduates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these past few weeks represent the culmination of 
12 years of hard work. Through the years, not only have these 
young people acquired the skills and abilities necessary to 
become active and responsible members of society, but they’ve 
also helped build their communities, and this is a legacy we 
cannot forget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these young people have given us their time, their 
energy, their enthusiasm, and their knowledge. In return it is our 
hope that our wisdom and our courage and knowledge has been 
passed on to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today’s youth are tomorrow’s leaders. They’re 
nearing the end of their high school education and representing 
not only the future of our province, but also our country. 
 
Once again, on behalf of all the members of the House, 
congratulations and best wishes to this year’s graduates. We 
hope you stay in Saskatchewan. Our province desperately needs 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

FiberLINK Technology Unveiled 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Speaker, an Innovation Place company has 
found a way to allow telephone companies to deliver broadband 
services such as high-speed Internet and video on demand to 
remote suburbs at a much lower cost. Critical Telecom unveiled 
its FiberLINK device Tuesday at a technology launch event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the connection to high-speed Internet is made 
from the home to the nearby telephone company wiring 
pedestal via the regular copper telephone wires coming into the 
house. From the pedestal, the signal is converted onto fibre 
optic cable for transmission to a central point up to 12 
kilometres in distance. 
 
This new technology is presently being tested by Bell Canada 
and being evaluated for field trials by SaskTel and TELUS. As 
well, Mr. Speaker, the potential market opportunity for 



June 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2197 

 

FiberLINK is estimated to exceed $3 billion in North America 
alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, FiberLINK was conceived in Saskatchewan, 
designed by engineers trained in this province, and was 
completed through the hard work, creativity, and ingenuity of a 
Saskatchewan-based company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote Mr. Oliver Cruder, president and 
CEO (chief executive officer) of Critical Telecom. He said, and 
I quote: 
 

I believe that this accomplishment is a credit to the 
government’s vision and support of technology-based 
companies through initiatives like the prestigious 
Innovation Place research park. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate Oliver Cruder and his 
dedicated Saskatchewan team on their FiberLINK technology 
and wish them the best of luck in their future right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Craik Lions Club’s Cavalcade for Diabetes 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with pride that I 
rise in the House today to talk about the Lions Cavalcade for 
Diabetes, which was held this past Saturday at the regional park 
in Craik. 
 
I had the opportunity to attend this important charitable event 
which was put on by the local Craik Lions Club and attended by 
Lions Club members from across Saskatchewan. 
 
The day began with a 30-car parade which concluded at the 
regional park. There were over 100 people in attendance. My 
friend Harvey from the Craik Weekly News advised me that the 
event raised well over $42,000. 
 
The Lions in Saskatchewan have achieved a great success over 
the past decade supporting the Canadian Diabetes Association 
through cavalcade, providing nearly $200,000 support for 
educational events, literature, support groups, and other services 
for Saskatchewan people who have been affected by diabetes. 
From 1999 to 2000 the Lions raised almost $70,000 from the 
clubs throughout our province. 
 
The Craik Lions and the people of Craik can be very proud of 
hosting this event and of all their past accomplishments which 
include the beautiful regional park and all the recreational 
activities that are available to local residents and travellers. 
 
I know that Craik residents are further developing their golf 
course and have developed historic sites where an early sod 
house and barn were established over a hundred years ago. 
 
I congratulate Mayor Ron Haugerud and his hard-working town 
council on the continuing efforts to develop new initiatives for 
the town which will ensure the future progress of their 
community. 
 
I would ask all the members to join me in congratulating the 

Lions of Saskatchewan for their ongoing efforts to assist the 
Canadian Diabetes Association. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good News for Regina 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Don’t take our word 
for it — here’s some third party validation that this province is 
on the path to success. 
 
I’d like to reference an article written by Mr. M. L. Klyne, 
president and chief operating officer of the Regina Regional 
Economic Development Authority. Mr. Klyne stated in his June 
26 article in The Leader-Post some of the real facts about job 
loss and the real effect on Regina’s business community. He 
stated and I quote: 
 

Regina’s economy is doing okay. Relatively speaking, it’s 
doing just fine, (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Here are some of the highlights that support Mr. Klyne’s 
positive position. In the last five months of this year, Regina’s 
total employment is up by almost 300 new jobs. Job growth in 
Regina over the next five years is expected to average nearly 2 
per cent per year. That is almost 2,000 jobs per year, Mr. 
Speaker. Retail sales increased nearly 4 per cent. Construction 
of a $20 million Saskatchewan Indian Federated College is 
underway, Mr. Speaker. And real personal disposal income per 
capita is expected to grow by 2.5 per cent in 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on. These highlights do not 
seem to represent the opposition’s so-called job loss death 
spiral. The sky is not falling, Mr. Speaker. The government is 
equipped and ready for the challenges ahead, ensuring a 
prosperous future for all those within the borders of 
Saskatchewan, even if the opposition golfs more than they 
spend time in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

High School Rodeo Association of Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Most people are not 
aware that the high schools in Saskatchewan have a High 
School Rodeo Association. The organization is recognized by 
the province and its schools. 
 
The athletes have the opportunity to compete in 18 different 
rodeos during the course of the year. The events range from bull 
riding, break-away roping, team roping, pole bending, barrel 
racing, calf roping, steer wrestling, goat tying, cutting, 
bareback, saddle bronc, and rodeo queen. The athletes must 
have permission from their school, be attending school, and 
have a passing average in their studies. 
 
Biggar Central School 2000 have a variety of students partaking 
in the high school rodeo. This year, there are two students who 
are taking part, Jordan Laventure and Christen Laventure. 
 
Jordan took part in bull riding and finished for the season after 
an excellent season. Christen had a super year as well and also 
had great results at the Saskatchewan finals held last Friday, 



2198 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2001 

 

Saturday, and Sunday in Shaunavon. Christen competed in the 
breakaway, finished second overall; goat tying, finishing third 
overall; cutting, third overall; and team roping, seventh. 
 
With her great placing in both breakaway, goat tying, and 
cutting, Christen will be moving on to Springfield, Illinois, July 
22nd to 29th, to compete in the National High School Rodeo, 
and to Regina to compete in the Canadian High School Rodeo, 
August 3rd and 5th. 
 
We wish Christen the best of luck in the national and Canadian 
high school championships, and we look forward to hearing her 
results. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Confidence in the Government 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have lost 
confidence in the NDP’s ability to grow the economy. 
 
Twenty-one thousand jobs lost in the last year. Nine thousand 
people moved off to other provinces. That’s the NDP record, 
and that is a disaster. 
 
The people have lost confidence in the NDP and now so has 
this Assembly. Last night the Premier could not even muster the 
support of his own government for his own failing economic 
policies. 
 
The Premier has lost the confidence of the people of 
Saskatchewan. Now he has lost the confidence of the Assembly. 
Will he do the right thing? Will he dissolve the Assembly, and 
call an election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the first thing I want to say 
today is welcome back, to all of the members of the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — If . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The House will come to order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — If I may say, Mr. Speaker, to make an 
observation, things are quieter in this House when they’re gone. 
And, Mr. Speaker, they look well tanned and rested for the 
effort. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the final question and I’m sure we’re going 
to have more questions to discuss issues surrounding last night 
and issues of Economic Development, but let me address the 
final question to which the Leader of the Opposition put to me 
— the question about calling an election. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in the last several months we’ve had not one 
but two by-elections in this province. And I’ll tell you, the 
results of those by-elections gave very clear indication of the 

mood and the view of Saskatchewan people. And what 
surprises me, Mr. Speaker, what surprises me in hearing a call 
for an election from the Leader of the Opposition, I want to 
quote a former House Leader of this House who said he was 
surprised that so many turkeys wished for Thanksgiving. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well if the 
Premier’s confident, why doesn’t he call an election? Why 
doesn’t he call it if he’s so confident? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier started off his 
answer by talking to himself, asking where he was last night. 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP blame other people 
for everything. They blame others for the job numbers. They 
blame others for the health crisis. Now they try to blame us for 
their problems last night when they can’t get their members up 
to show for a vote on their budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party called the vote on 
Economic Development because the NDP record is a disaster 
— 21,000 jobs lost over the last year; 9,000 people have fled 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has lost the confidence of the people. 
They have lost the confidence of this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, 
when is the NDP and the Premier going to stop blaming others 
and take responsibility for their incompetence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It is in my view about time the Leader of 
the Opposition took responsibility for his actions and the 
actions of that opposition. 
 
Look at what . . . listen to the . . . Listen, Mr. Speaker, to what 
is incredible in this entire circumstance. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Subvote by subvote they voted for the budget of the Economic 
and Co-operative Development department. They voted for the 
business investment programs. They voted for the information 
technology office. They voted for co-operative development. 
They voted for Tourism Saskatchewan. They voted for the trade 
and exports partnership. They voted for the Opportunities 
Corporation. They voted for every element of this department’s 
budget — every element. 
 
Then at the end, what do they do? They vote against it. Mr. 
Speaker, an obvious political stunt to try and get a headline 
because they’ve not been able to achieve that through the course 
of this session, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2199 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier is spouting nonsense and verbal stunts here in the 
legislature, when the fact is the Premier could not get his own 
members out to vote last night. And now we understand he 
wants to call a second vote today. He’s starting to sound a little 
bit like Al Gore. He wants to keep recounting the votes until he 
gets a result he likes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every day in this legislature — every day — the 
Saskatchewan Party has talked about the NDP’s failing 
economic record. We’ve talked about 21,000 job losses; about 
9,000 people leaving Saskatchewan. Yesterday we called a vote 
on their failing record and the NDP couldn’t even get their own 
members out for a vote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP can’t count to 27, how can they run the 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, they vote for every 
component, every component of the budget for the Department 
of Economic and Co-operative Development. They vote for 
every component. Then at the end of the day, they vote against 
the whole package, Mr. Speaker. We know what’s going on 
here. 
 
But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the consequence of what they did 
in this House last night. What has happened, Mr. Speaker, as a 
result of their political gamesmanship is that the funding now 
for all of these valuable programs, including Tourism 
Saskatchewan, including funding to the REDAs (regional 
economic development authority), including funding for our 
Trade and Export Partnership, including staff within 
government is now put in a difficult circumstance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we have been working from early this morning to find a 
solution to the created problem from their political 
gamesmanship. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that we have a 
solution because we’re not going to let down the people of 
Saskatchewan. We’re not going to let down economic 
development in this province. We’re going to do the work of 
government, no matter what they do over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier is nearsighted. He’s focusing only on the vote last 
night. But there’s more than a loss of confidence expressed in 
the vote in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are expressing their loss of confidence in 
this government by leaving the province. By not creating jobs in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have voted 
against this government thousands and thousands of times. 
Saskatchewan people . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’d ask the 
members to come to order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
people have absolutely no confidence in the government’s 
ability to grow the economy. That’s why people are leaving, 

that’s why jobs are leaving, and that’s why we defeated the 
government last night — to drive home that point, to see the big 
picture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier finally admit that his economic 
policies are failing? Has he realized that yet? That’s what’s 
important here, and that he has lost the confidence of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Has the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, I wonder, realized the importance of the role of 
opposition. I don’t think so, because in the course of this 
session, Mr. Speaker, have we heard from that opposition one 
positive or progressive idea about any aspect of this province’s 
life, never mind economic development. Not one. Not one, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What we witnessed last night, what we witnessed last night, 
was political gamesmanship and an attempt to grab some 
headlines. And fair enough, fair enough, Mr. Speaker. We were 
caught — fair enough. 
 
But do they recognize the difficulties they have caused or have 
potentially caused the people in this province? Do they realize 
that? Or do they just go off on a two-day holiday to plan this 
kind of game and then, not thinking of consequences for real 
people, just institute the game without any thought. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the kind of opposition that any person 
in Saskatchewan wants to entrust with the responsibilities of 
government — I guarantee you that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, have you ever heard of such a pathetic list of 
excuses from the NDP House Leader as last night when the 
NDP House Leader is telling the media that there wasn’t even a 
scheduled sitting last night of the House. 
 
What nonsense, Mr. Speaker. Rule no. 3 says Tuesday 1:30 to 5 
p.m., 7 to 10:30 p.m. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the Government House 
Leader has been elected . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order! Order! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
Government House Leader doesn’t even know what day he’s 
supposed to be here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he’s been elected since 1986 and we were voting 
on his department budget, Mr. Speaker, and his members 
couldn’t even show up to vote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Economic Development can’t get 



2200 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2001 

 

his own members to agree with his failed economic policies, 
why should the people of Saskatchewan put up with that 
incompetent minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased 
to respond to the House Leader on the opposition side. I want to 
ask him and his whip why he can’t get his members to attend 
this session of the legislature. Why we sit in here when two and 
three members sit in here for estimates from the time we start 
till the time we adjourn. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Speaker, what the Leader of the Opposition 
is going to do about his whip? That’s what I want to know, 
because they can’t put together enough to put a good opposition 
together. They haven’t discussed health care, they haven’t 
discussed agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what they’re good at is organizing a little sneak 
campaign in the Wascana Park and they come in, in the middle 
of the night, and oh my goodness, we have done it to the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no policies, no direction, no credibility, no 
opposition, and never, never, never government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 
you’ve never heard a sore loser, just read his answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Minister 
of Economic Development can’t even count to 27. Why should 
we expect him to be able to turn the economy around, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
So let’s go through it again: 21,000 jobs lost in the last year, 
thanks to the NDP; 9,000 people lost to this province because 
they moved away, thanks to the NDP. Those are pretty big 
numbers, Mr. Speaker, for a minister who can’t count to 27. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — But that minister is still responsible. It’s 
his job to grow our economy, Mr. Speaker, and he’s failing 
miserably. Mr. Speaker, why would Saskatchewan people 
support this minister’s economic record when he can’t even get 
his cabinet colleagues to support him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well you know what, Mr. Speaker, 
second chance — we’re going to give the opposition a second 
chance because we have asked for a ruling on an emergency 
debate that would call their actions into question. And I’ll tell 
you, we’ll see who will win that vote. We’ll see who will win 
that vote. 
 
And I’ll tell you what — I tell you what — I’m challenging the 
House Leader to lead his caucus into supporting this resolution 

giving us leave to debate this resolution today and then to vote 
on it. 
 
Now I’m going to ask the Leader of the Opposition if he’ll 
instruct his House Leader to ensure that they support leave so 
that we can discuss this resolution this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said before they’re good at some things but 
they’re not good at opposition. They’re not good at putting 
forward thoughts and ideas as to how to move this economy 
around, they haven’t seen an idea that they didn’t like if it was 
negative and that’s why the people don’t trust them. And I say 
to you, Mr. Speaker, that’s why they’ve taken a dip of 10 points 
in the public opinion poll since last fall and they’re continuing 
to spiral downhill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is typical NDP policy. Simply rewrite history in their own 
vein, Mr. Speaker. Not once in 10 years has this government 
taken responsibility for its failed record. 
 
Health system is a disaster and they blame everybody else; 
we’re losing thousands of jobs and they blame somebody else; 
we’re losing thousands of people out of this province, they 
blame somebody else; and now they can’t even count to 27 and 
they try to blame that on the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are tired of this incompetent 
and bumbling government. They can’t manage the economy; 
they can’t manage the health system or highways; and now they 
can’t even manage their own caucus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan no longer believe the NDP are 
capable of managing this province, Mr. Speaker, since they 
can’t even manage themselves. Mr. Speaker, will this minister 
resign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me answer that 
very clearly. This minister will not resign because I believe . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I want to tell you why, Mr. 
Speaker. You know this opposition has been trotting out 
half-truths, quarter-truths. They know this economy has grown 
year over year with respect to GDP (gross domestic product). 
And you know what GDP is, Mr. Speaker? It’s the money that 
this province has in its pocket to spend on consumer goods. 
That’s happened for 10 years under this administration. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to give you a little . . . numbers 
from last year. I’ll refresh the member’s memory. Department 
store sales up 8.2 per cent; building permits up 33 per cent; new 
motor vehicle sales up 4.9 per cent; oil production up 3 per 
cent; mineral production up 15 per cent; new business 
incorporations up 7 per cent; value of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — . . . time has elapsed. 
 



June 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2201 

 

Farm Safety Net Program 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While, Mr. Speaker, 
while the minister may not resign, a lot of people in this House 
and probably across this province are wondering whether this 
Premier will fire him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — My question is for the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, one excuse the NDP, another one of the excuses they 
are using for their dismal performance last night in the 
legislature was because the Minister of Agriculture is attending 
an Agriculture ministers’ meeting in Whitehorse. My response 
to that is well, finally that minister will do something for . . . 
(inaudible) . . . for the farmers in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Because, Mr. Speaker, that was not the 
government, this is not the government that was at the table 
when AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) was put 
in place. You forgot to get around to getting to that meeting. 
They walked away from the table when AIDA was being 
revamped and then signed up for it anyway. And they remained 
silent when CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) was being 
discussed and implemented and the farm families in this 
province wound up with nothing once again. 
 
My question to the Premier is the following, Mr. Speaker: what 
exactly are the details of any farm income safety net program 
that your minister, the Minister of Agriculture, is taking to the 
Agriculture ministers’ meeting in Whitehorse? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Here exactly, Mr. Speaker, is of what we 
speak. While our Minister of Agriculture is speaking for 
Saskatchewan farm families at the Agriculture meeting in 
Yukon, that member from Kindersley and all his colleagues are 
sneaking around playing golf and planning political 
shenanigans in this House. 
 
How many questions, Mr. Speaker, in this session have we had 
from that member or that leader on the subject of agriculture? 
Well I’ll tell you it’s very few, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What happened, Mr. Speaker, a year ago when we joined 
together in an effort for all-party unanimity to go to Ottawa to 
work with the federal government and with other provinces? 
Who went south on us? That group over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture is in the Yukon. He is 
speaking on behalf of Saskatchewan farm families. He’s talking 
about long-term safety net programs. He’s talking about the 
need for drought assistance in this year. He is talking about 
things that matter to people, unlike the group of men and 
women across the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:45) 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 
very interesting. The Premier said he was going to go to the 
wall for farm families in this province and what did the Minister 
of Agriculture say just before he left for those meetings. He 
said, we are giving up any idea, any view that the federal 
government should come forward with any additional 
assistance. So while the Premier is saying one thing, his Ag 
minister is saying exactly the opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And while we’re at it, while we’re at it, Mr. 
Speaker, Roy Romanow when he was the minister . . . when he 
was the Leader of the Opposition said in this Assembly, the 
measure of a Premier is his ability to go to Ottawa and bring 
back assistance, bring back cash when there is a need. By any 
measure — by any measure — Mr. Speaker, this Premier is a 
miserable failure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Will the Premier of this province lay out for us 
today exactly what concrete proposals the Minister of 
Agriculture has taken on behalf of Saskatchewan farm families 
to the meetings in Whitehorse? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the rantings of the member 
opposite do not assist the farm families of Saskatchewan, I 
guarantee you that. The hollering on the benches of the 
opposition does not assist the farm families of Saskatchewan. 
The hiding in the bushes and sneaking about at night do not 
help the farm families of Saskatchewan. 
 
Our Minister of Agriculture is doing the work of this legislature 
in the Yukon, drawing to the attention not just of other 
provinces, but of the nation, the need of farm families — and 
not just in Saskatchewan, but across the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about long-term farm safety net 
programs. We’re talking about the need this year around some 
drought assistance. We’re talking about transportation issues. 
 
Now it’s interesting that the member from Kindersley, the 
major supporter of Mr. Stockwell Day, gets up and asks 
agriculture questions in this House. So who was it, Mr. Speaker, 
who was it that said there’s not to be any further support for 
family farmers in Saskatchewan, or Canada? The Leader of the 
Alliance Party, their federal cousin, that’s who. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Legislation to Protect Children in the Sex Trade 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Speaker, today the 
Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of 
Children Through the Sex Trade released its report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been a long process on an issue that I 
personally believe is of utmost importance to the children, and 
indeed all people of this province. 



2202 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2001 

 

The committee has been very thorough in its research, and this 
report reflects the depth of our concern our committee shares as 
a result of what we have heard throughout this process. The 
report makes several recommendations that we believe will 
crack down on the exploitation of children through the sex 
trade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister announce in this House today 
what day this session they will introduce legislation that follows 
through on these recommendations, particularly 
recommendation no. 3 referring to the seizure of vehicles 
modelled on Manitoba’s legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the 
outset, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member for her 
question and focusing attention on the needs of children in the 
province of Saskatchewan. I want to thank her colleagues for 
allowing her the time to do so in question period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are united in our belief that we should seek to 
eliminate the involvement of children in the sex trade in 
Saskatchewan. How we do that will be a matter of debate as 
obviously the report points out. 
 
We can say to the Legislative Assembly and to the people of 
Saskatchewan that now that we have the recommendations, that 
we seek to move on those recommendations as quickly as 
possible, even within hours, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the special committee held 
wide-ranging consultations with people from Saskatchewan and 
with people from other provinces who in some way have been 
affected by the exploitation and abuse of children in the sex 
trade. 
 
Their stories are heart-wrenching. Many spoke of abuse, of 
violence, of poverty, and of loss. And most still struggle with 
issues in their lives today as a result of their experiences. The 
recommendations in this report, Mr. Speaker, are based on the 
committee’s belief that the cost of allowing this exploitation to 
continue are too great. The province must act now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this government survives their confidence 
motion today then they must display the leadership and commit 
to the people of Saskatchewan. Stand by their word to 
immediately implement legislation as a result of the 
committee’s report. 
 
Will this government do that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I thank the 
member for her question. 
 
I would point out to the member and the Legislative Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker, that our approach over the course of the last four 

years has been to work with community partners, in 
communities in Saskatchewan, to provide those community 
partners with the resources and the legislative tools that they 
need to deal with the issues in their communities. 
 
We are encouraged by some of the success we are seeing in 
some communities, notably Prince Albert, where we get reports 
that there are far fewer children on the streets engaged in this 
type of activity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, additionally as a government, we have also taken 
the point of view that we need to deal with the root causes that 
the committee spoke about and therefore we have focused on an 
anti-poverty strategy in the province of Saskatchewan with no 
thanks to the members opposite. 
 
We have focused on programs such as Kids First so that kids 
can grow up in healthy families, Mr. Speaker. We seek to 
continue to do that and to move on other recommendations of 
this committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Priority of Debate 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I would like to 
make a statement. 
 
Today at 9:35 a.m. the Office of the Clerk received a request for 
priority of debate pursuant to rule 19 from the Government 
House Leader and subsequently notification to the Speaker, the 
Leader of the Opposition, Leader of the Third Party was made. 
 
In reviewing their request for priority of debate, I find that the 
Government House Leader has made sufficient case for priority 
of debate and that the requirements of rules 19(5) and 19(6) are 
met. 
 
I therefore call upon the Government House Leader to now 
proceed to make his remarks and to put his priority of debate 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Confidence in the Government 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to indicate on the outset that I intend to move at 
the end of my remarks a motion seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest: 
 

That the Assembly does not regard the vote of the 
Committee of Finance on June 26 in connection with 
estimates for the Department of Economic and 
Co-operative Development as a vote of non-confidence in 
the coalition government; and further that this Assembly 
express its confidence in the coalition government and 
urges the government to continue to provide progressive, 
effective government for the people of Saskatchewan. 



June 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2203 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Now, Mr. Speaker, in my remarks, 
I would like to give a bit of a history with respect to this session 
of the legislature and the involvement of members. 
 
We’ve gone through a number of votes, we’ve gone through 
days of question period, I believe this is day 67 if I’m right. 
And I want to say — 66, I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I was a day 
ahead of myself — and I want to say, Mr. Speaker, it’s been 
some very interesting debate. And I think there have been some 
issues put forth that the people of Saskatchewan wanted 
discussed. 
 
I think there might have been more time spent on health care. 
And I would have hoped that the opposition members would 
have willingly joined in hearing the committee that was 
established during this session to hear the people of 
Saskatchewan as it relates to health care in our province and the 
future of health care. But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I was 
somewhat disappointed that they first of all balked and refused 
to join the committee. 
 
And the member from Kindersley today — I found it quite 
interesting — is up asking a question on agriculture, which was 
another area that was sadly deficient with respect to discussion 
in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our Minister of Agriculture is busied 
himself with the other Ministers of Agriculture and working on 
some policies, some programs in urging the federal government 
to ensure that the Saskatchewan economy is aided by our 
national government — which is what it should be. 
 
We’re the largest agriculture-producing province in Canada and 
we are facing some severe pressure from subsidies outside of 
this province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, that member is where he rightly should 
be, meeting with those ministers in terms of putting forward the 
Saskatchewan position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we went through a process whereby we introduced 
the budget that continued tax reduction that introduced a 25 per 
cent decrease in small business tax and an increase in the 
threshold by, from $200,000 to $300,000. And I want to say, 
Mr. Speaker, there was a lot of work done. 
 
There are 59/60 Bills before this legislature which is a modest 
workload. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that most of those 
Bills are now either in adjourned debates or very close to it. 
 
And so I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that as we wind the session 
down, it’s not uncommon to take a day like yesterday — which 
is normally a day for private members to put forth resolutions 
and debate motions and to put their personal positions and 
government’s positions forward — and as the session draws to 
a conclusion, Mr. Speaker, we turn that to government business 
which means much more pressure on ministers who have to be 
here for debates and for putting their Bills and shepherding their 
Bills through the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The hours become longer. But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that 

it puts a lot of pressure on all of us. 
 
Normally opposition members will be in their places — the vast 
majority of them. But they do have much more freedom, of 
course, than government members, ministers who do a job 
outside of this legislature as well as looking after their 
constituencies. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And we don’t? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Oh the member says they don’t. 
Well you know what? I can under . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I just want to invite the minister to continue 
making his remarks to the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I can understand why 
that member says they don’t, because he’s never been on this 
side of the House to experience and he never will be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what they know is negative. What they know is 
negative. They understand negative very, very well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but you know what they don’t understand? They 
don’t understand governance. They don’t understand the 
importance of this place. 
 
They don’t understand that the people whose departments are 
hired by this place depend on this process so that they can feed 
their families and pay their mortgages and pay their car 
payments. And they don’t understand that operations like 
second parties . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Moosomin on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to 
members of this Assembly, I notice we have a group of students 
from the Grenfell High School who have joined us this 
afternoon. 
 
Actually, we have 28 grade 8 students from Grenfell High. 
They’re joined by their teachers, Mr. Neil Theisen, Mrs. Valerie 
Brennan, Mrs. Cheryl Schoenroth, and Mr. Barney Stopanski, 
and by chaperones Mr. Cameron Bonk and Mrs. Deanna Horn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we certainly want to extend a special invitation to 
the students who have joined us this afternoon and I look 
forward to meeting them in a few minutes for pictures and a bit 
of a discussion. 
 
I would like to invite the members or ask the members to join 
me in welcoming these students today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



2204 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2001 

 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Confidence in the Government 
(continued) 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. And I want 
to welcome our guests as well to the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I intend to keep my remarks brief because I think this motion 
speaks for itself. And I am totally convinced, as I was 
yesterday, that in this legislature there would be the ability to 
vote a motion of confidence. And I am convinced as well that 
this government will win that motion. 
 
But I tell you, what I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is last night I 
thought was a shameful display because it . . . And I want to tell 
you why, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, not because we lost the 
vote. Not because of that. Because that’s some difficulty for us 
and we understand that and perhaps we shouldn’t have. 
 
But you know what? It showed a lack of understanding of the 
impact of putting politics before governance and before doing 
your job and your role as a member of the legislature. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I said we have members out doing their jobs 
outside of this legislature, and they may not understand that 
because they only understand one thing, and whether it’s in 
their constituency or whether it’s in this building, it’s politics. 
 
It’s got nothing to do with developing this economy. It’s got 
nothing to do, what they do, with furthering the living standards 
of the people of this province. It has nothing to do with that, 
Mr. Speaker — nothing to do with that. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, they’re more interested in 
gamesmanship. We’re interested in governing; we’re interested 
in governance. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, their staff was trotting around 
the building today, wondering how we could get out of this 
circumstance where they took 60-some-million dollars out of 
the hands of third parties, REDAs, TISASK (Tourism Industry 
Association of Saskatchewan). I can go through the list but I 
won’t. And 200 families depended on that allocation, which is 
part of the budget, to support their families. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to dwell on this because I 
think, I think their actions speak for themselves. To sneak 
around, to sneak around, cowering around the Legislative 
Building, and then in the dark of night, at 10 after 10, coming 
out, coming out, Mr. Speaker — coming out, Mr. Speaker — 
out of the dark as it were, they snuck around the corner and 
down the corridor and they come through the back door of the 
legislature and they say, you know, by golly, I think we might 
get more votes tonight than they did. 
 
They go through a whole process of voting on subvotes on the 
same department that they voted for the main vote that would 
give the allocation to run the department. And they won, and 
whoop-de-do, Mr. Speaker, one of them says gee, I don’t think 
it’s a vote of confidence, but we sure tricked them and we sure 

made our point. And you know, Mr. Speaker, they did. 
 
But I tell you what — there are no tricks today because there 
are two things I’m asking them to do. This motion we’re putting 
forward, they should all vote against it; we will all vote for it 
and we’ll win. And I want to say that later this day I’m 
challenging them as well to allow for a motion to be put 
forward here that would ask us to return to those same votes so 
that we can ensure that the people who work in that department 
and who are funded by those programs can do the work that 
they’re set out to do. 
 
STEP (Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership Inc.) is an 
example, the Trade and Export Partnership. Fifty million dollars 
a day of exports from this province and they are largely 
responsible for it, and they would take that funding away with 
their actions. 
 
TISASK, goodness sakes, Mr. Speaker, a $1.1 billion industry 
in this province, and they would take away the opportunity for 
those people to do their work. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what I’m saying is that this is a government 
that understands nothing but this, a raw, unbridled desire — 
desire, Mr. Speaker — for power. It’s nothing more and it’s 
nothing less. 
 
They don’t understand the nature of this province and the fact 
that people understand that we’ve got a crisis in agriculture. Mr. 
Speaker, they don’t understand the impact that that has on this 
economy. And as we try to grow this economy and create a 
good place for people to raise their families and to invest in 
their businesses, they’re out creating an environment, by people 
who understand economics, an environment where people are 
afraid to invest in. That’s them. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you who’s on the other side of 
that coin — this government. And I want to tell you who else is 
supporting us — the business community. And I want to tell 
you who else is supporting us — the men and women who have 
small businesses in this province, of which I am one, Mr. 
Speaker, because they know that you’ve got to have consumer 
confidence in order to grow your growth. 
 
And they don’t want to hear this and I know that. And they can 
holler from their seats all they want. But I tell you what, Mr. 
Speaker, the facts are the facts and their actions are very clear. 
They’ve very transparent — selfish, political motives, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s all it’s about. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest: 
 

That this Assembly does not regard the vote in the 
Committee of Finance on June 26, 2001 in connection with 
the estimates for the Department of Economic and 
Co-operative Development as a vote of non-confidence in 
the coalition government; and further that this Assembly 
express its confidence in the coalition government and 
urges the government to continue to provide progressive, 
effective government for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 



June 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2205 

 

We’ll vote and we’ll see who wins. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order . . . 
Members, order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to stand 
today and second the motion with regard to confidence in this 
government. And I see this as confidence from the people of 
Saskatchewan as well as this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we talk about the people of Saskatchewan and what we 
have heard over the past three or four months with regard to this 
coalition government and the positives with regard to our 
budget, they are hallmarks throughout the land — urban and 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we talk about, for example, our approach to health care, 
no one expected that we would be increasing our health care 
budget by $200 million this year — no one expected it. 
 
No one expected that we would cover 100 per cent of the 
deficits in health boards but we did that by special warrant, Mr. 
Speaker. We covered their deficits and we added 200 million to 
health care. And you know what the people of Saskatchewan 
said? They said, this government is investing in health care. 
This government knows the problems. 
 
And now we have a Fyke report and an all-party committee 
listening on how we can make it better in the province of 
Saskatchewan. This government listens to the people; it has the 
confidence of the people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we talk about what their program would have been 
— the members opposite — who we’ve noticed the last few 
days, during the day there has been a dire dearth of presence on 
that side. In fact we can hear the echoes over there sometimes, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because you know what? They’re off doing other things, 
plotting and strategizing so that they can come en masse at 10 
o’clock in the evening to defeat a vote on estimates that are 
important to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. They 
need those dollars; they rely on those dollars to do the good 
work that they do for the people in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — So when we talk about our budget 
and the Throne Speech and the budget speech, and we talk 
about protocol and parliamentary tradition, we all know, 
everyone, all the members recognize that there are two 
occasions where a government can be defeated. 
 
And it can be defeated on the Throne Speech and it can be 
defeated on the budget speech. And guess what, Mr. Speaker? 
Both of those speeches are followed by a week of debate by the 
full Assembly and then there’s a vote. There’s no scurrying into 
committees to pull fast ones on the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. It is full debate for an entire week. It is full debate for 
an entire week, Mr. Speaker. There’s no shenanigans there, Mr. 
Speaker. 

And when we talk about committees and we talk about votes 
and subvotes. We’ve all seen the estimates here. We’ve all seen 
the 60 Bills that have come forward, Mr. Speaker. And there are 
sometimes 60 clauses and 60 votes. There are literally 
thousands of votes in this Assembly, and every one of them 
except one of these shenanigans has been passed by this 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And the members opposite . . . and 
the members opposite talk about what they would have done if 
they would have formed government. But we know what their 
platform says, Mr. Speaker. We know the way . . . The Way Up, 
what it talks about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m just going to talk a little bit about agriculture, because 
there was some questions on agriculture. And this was the 
platform on agriculture that all of the members opposite in their 
collective wisdom put forward, Mr. Speaker. And guess what? 
It amounted to zero. They do not have anything in their 
platform other than lobby the federal government; demand the 
federal Liberal government do this. And guess what? They 
provide no provincial initiatives in agriculture. 
 
And I had the opportunity . . . I had the opportunity to 
participate in the trek to Ottawa, when we went to Ottawa to 
talk to the federal government about providing subsidies . . . 
about how our producers were disadvantaged in this province 
because of European economic union policies and American 
subsidies. 
 
And we went to Ottawa and I had a chance to talk to the then 
Reform Party Leader, Preston Manning. I also had an 
opportunity to talk to the Prime Minister at that time about the 
issues on agriculture. 
 
And you know what? Mr. Hermanson was there, and he 
couldn’t get . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would remind the member 
that . . . Order. I would remind the member that in our debates 
we are not to refer to any sitting members by their first or 
second names, but to refer to them by their title or by their 
riding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The Leader of the Opposition went 
on that trek as well as the member from Kindersley. And you 
know what? They weren’t even . . . they couldn’t even get a 
meeting with the Prime Minister. 
 
They wanted to talk about what they would do for producers in 
this province and they couldn’t even get a connection with the 
federal Liberal government, not one connection. And they talk 
about how they would lobby the federal Liberal government, 
and demand from the federal Liberal government. 
 
Well the fact of the matter is that they can lobby and demand all 
they want. They would not get a single dime. They would not 
get a single recognition from those federal Liberals in Ottawa, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, when we talk about what this provincial 



2206 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2001 

 

government is doing for agriculture in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, let me just talk, let me just talk a little bit about what 
we’re doing. 
 
We still have in this province a clause known as a 331(1)(q). 
You know what that does? That exempts farm buildings from 
assessment on property tax, Mr. Speaker. And do you know that 
this year, we dropped the assessment from 70 per cent on 
cultivated land to 55 per cent and pasture land remains at 50 per 
cent. 
 
And again this year, we have full exposure to the 25 per cent 
rebate on education property tax on farmland, Mr. Speaker. And 
not only that but we’ve extended the date for producers to apply 
to the end of February 2002. 
 
We have completely eliminated farm fuel taxes in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. We have full participation in CFIP. We have full 
participation in CSAP (Canada-Saskatchewan Adjustment 
Program) too. And we have full implementation of grants in 
lieu this year. 
 
And as a property class compared to commercial, industrial, 
compared to business and residential, ag land provides the least 
amount of tax levy based on its assessment than any other 
jurisdiction. 
 
That’s what we’re doing for agriculture in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And I remind, I remind the members 
opposite in their platform — their four or five clauses — not 
one, not one mention of subsidies. And when their leader, their 
Leader of the Opposition was in Ottawa and he sat on the ag 
committee, he said, we don’t support subsidies for producers. 
We want to eliminate all subsidies. And they sit there all 
session, Mr. Speaker, and cry give more — more subsidies, 
more subsidies. And we give all that we could. We gave over 
300 million in our Ag budget this year, Mr. Speaker. The 
budget they voted against, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let’s just talk a little bit about education now, Mr. Speaker. 
When we talk about education . . . let’s just talk a little bit about 
education and what people are saying about education, Mr. 
Speaker. You know when we look at what the budget did for 
education this year, it was the largest increase on the foundation 
operating grant in 15 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know what people have been saying about our budget 
this year, Mr. Speaker? They have been saying positive things 
all across the piece, Mr. Speaker. When we talk about, for 
example, some, some of the things that school divisions have 
been saying, let me just give you an example here. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Wayne Steen, chairman of the Sask Rivers School Board, gave 
the province an A for its budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Cindy Gee, the chairwoman of the Prince Albert Catholic 
School Board, who was so pleased with the 2001 budget she 

gave it an A as well, Mr. Speaker. Not only that, she wrote me a 
personal letter thanking me specifically for the budget 
allocations as the best in 15 years. 
 
And what did the School Trustees Association say? They 
represent all of the school boards in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They gave it an A and said children benefit from 
budget from this coalition government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we look at . . . we look at what the Teachers’ 
Federation said. You know what the Teachers’ Federation say? 
Province’s teachers applaud education spending in budget and 
they gave it an A as well. 
 
And the members opposite voted against that budget, Mr. 
Speaker. They voted against it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So let’s talk a little bit about what the members opposite would 
have done for education, Mr. Speaker. And you know it really, 
it really troubles me to know that the members opposite — 
some of them were former Liberals who talked in glowing 
terms about what they would do for education in this province 
— but when it came down to what they did in their platform, 
what was their influence in the platform of the Sask Party? 
Zero, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because when they talked about education, what did they say? 
We would freeze spending on K to 12 education — we would 
freeze the spending — so there wouldn’t be any money. 
 
And guess what else they said? They said that we would be 
looking at privatizing our education system by introducing 
independent schools. So freeze and privatize; that’s what 
they’re talking about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we all know that their little ploy last night was basically 
designed to drum up some activities for a party that is falling 
like a stone in the polls, Mr. Speaker. We all know, we all know 
that recent polling, recent polling has shown that the coalition 
government is some 20 percentage points ahead of those 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we also know, we also know that their leader . . . We also 
know, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, 
the hon. member from Rosetown, is also trailing in his party’s 
support, his popularity, by some 7 percentage points. So we 
have a situation where not only do we have a party that’s 
dropping in the polls, but the party leader is dropping even 
faster, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you can see why they would want to develop shenanigans, 
why they would want to create this havoc at 10 o’clock at night, 
Mr. Speaker, why they would want to vote against Economic 
Development, Mr. Speaker — because they know full well that 
they needed to do something drastic to prop up their failing 
support in the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And before I, before I make some closing remarks, Mr. 
Speaker, let me just remind the members opposite that many 
times in this Assembly and many times out in the public those 
members opposite have stated that small business creates jobs 
in the province of Saskatchewan. And now they say to the 
government well, we’re going to defeat your economic plan 



June 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2207 

 

because, you know, it’s just not doing the job, even though 
they’ve recognized that small business . . . but what was 
actually, what actually was those budget estimates? What were 
they talking about there? 
 
When they voted against the estimates in Economic 
Development, they were voting against regional economic 
development authorities; that means that all REDA funding, 
many in their own communities, would have been cancelled, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Tourism Saskatchewan would have had no funding, Mr. 
Speaker. Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership would not 
be able to operate, Mr. Speaker, and the synchrotron project 
which is so important to research. In fact, it was here at the 
University of Saskatchewan this morning where the president 
talked about the importance of the synchrotron. Many of these 
projects would not proceed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we talk about Western Economic Partnership 
agreements, when we talk about the Duck Lake Interpretive 
Centre, none of these would proceed without that needed 
money, Mr. Speaker. And the Small Business Loans 
Association would not receive funding. The neighbourhood 
development organizations would not receive funding and 
would have to be shut down. 
 
And new projects would have to be put on hold, like the NATO 
(North Atlantic Treaty Organization) . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. Order. I’ve asked the members to just calm down 
a little bit so that we can hear the speakers one at a time. We 
have the whole afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, many valuable 
projects would have needed to have been put on hold; projects 
like the NATO flight training facility in Moose Jaw, the Staples 
Call Centre in Regina, and the Alberta garment manufacturing 
expansion in Saskatoon. All of these benefit from that important 
vote. 
 
So in terms of their political strategy, I think everyone 
recognizes now that they’ve bombed on their strategy, Mr. 
Speaker, because it was the wrong time to defeat an estimate. 
 
If you want to play shenanigans . . . and I recognize that the 
federal Liberal government had a vote that was defeated some 
two months ago, on a minor issue. Sure the opposition parties 
had a chance to make a point, you know, to embarrass the 
government, etc., but they did not choose valuable estimates, 
valuable dollars that help the people of Saskatchewan to make 
their shameless point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think the members opposite should be embarrassed by 
their actions and I will be supporting this government in its 
confidence because we know the people of Saskatchewan 
support this coalition government. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think what we just witnessed in the last few seconds 
in the House was the government members accepting the latest 
NDP recruit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest has clearly aligned every one of his duck 
in line with the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the vote last night was about democracy. It was 
about the exercise of democracy in this legislature and how 
democracy is exemplified across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1999 we held a vote in this province to make a 
determination as to who would be the government. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the popular vote in the 1999 provincial election was in 
favour, by a greater percentage, for the Saskatchewan Party. 
But, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — But, Mr. Speaker, because of the way 
our system is designed, because of the way our system is 
designed, Mr. Speaker, the government members won more 
seats. They won half of the seats, Mr. Speaker. The Liberals 
won three seats, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Even though the members of the Saskatchewan Party had won a 
greater popular vote, Mr. Speaker, we recognized that 
democracy has to be observed, Mr. Speaker, and that under our 
system it’s not the number of popular votes you get but the 
number of members that you elect that makes you the 
government, Mr. Speaker, or makes you the opposition, or 
makes you an independent in the House. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, last night’s vote was also about democracy. 
It was about those members, Mr. Speaker, that were elected in 
1999 exercising their rights on behalf of their constituents, Mr. 
Speaker. And last night the members of this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, voted against a government proposal in their budget, 
the Department of Economic and Co-operative Development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that vote last night was as much an exercise in 
democracy as was the 1999 vote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Now the government members, Mr. 
Speaker, want to say, oh no, we can’t possibly accept the vote 
of the people, Mr. Speaker. The rules of democracy must be 
suspended because we lost. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you didn’t hear the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, you didn’t hear the 
members of the Saskatchewan Party saying, oh no, we have to 
have a new election because we actually won the vote. No, Mr. 
Speaker, we recognized that under our rules, Mr. Speaker, that 
the government had won half of the seats and the Liberals had 



2208 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2001 

 

won three of the seats and they formed a coalition. 
 
We did not contest that, Mr. Speaker. We accepted that. Just as, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s incumbent on this House to accept last night’s 
vote that the people have no confidence in this government’s 
ability to provide economic development in this province. And 
the vote, Mr. Speaker, should stand as it was cast. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, if I look up the rules here in Beauchesne's 
dealing with those very kind of things, rule no. 558 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, not a copy of the constitution, a 
copy of Beauchesne’s, Mr. Speaker, No. 6. And it says: 
 

Decisions of the House 
 
(1) An old rule of Parliament reads: “That a question being 
once made and carried in the affirmative or (the) negative, 
cannot be questioned again but must stand as the judgment 
of the House.” 
 

Mr. Speaker, rule 558 says that if you hold a vote in the House, 
the decision being made is final. You don’t get to go back and 
say, let’s do the best two out of three, Mr. Speaker. You only 
get one vote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, listening to the Government House Leader today, 
he certainly seems like he wants to rewrite the history of last 
night. He wants to go back and say no, that vote never 
happened, let’s do it all over again; maybe this time I can get it 
right. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, he couldn’t get it right last night. He 
couldn’t count; his whip couldn’t count; his cabinet ministers 
weren’t prepared to support him; even his Premier wasn’t here 
to support him, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I’ll withdraw that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of the cabinet ministers were not 
prepared to vote and support that particular motion. Mr. 
Speaker, clearly they have no confidence in the Minister of 
Economic Development. Mr. Speaker, looking at the reactions 
from the other side, I suspect very strongly that they don’t have 
any confidence in the leadership in its entirety, over on that side 
of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the items though, Mr. Speaker, that we have seen as the 
testimonial to the NDP government for the last 10 years, Mr. 
Speaker, is their inability to accept any responsibility. It doesn’t 
matter how minute or how grand it may be, they simply cannot 
psychologically, pathologically, cannot accept any 
responsibility. 
 
 (15:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night the events that occurred rest solely on 
the government side. We have held many votes in this House 
over this session. We have held a significant number of 
recorded votes, Mr. Speaker. Every other vote, the government 
has maintained their numbers. And yes, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
heading towards the end of session, we’re heading into summer. 
And I understand why the government members can’t keep . . . 
the government can’t keep their members in the House. For one 
reason or another, they wish to disappear. 

The Premier says last night when questioned, well my 
Agriculture minister was in the Yukon. My Labour minister 
was in Saskatoon. Well, Mr. Speaker, what I have to say is that 
has to be the fastest Labour minister going. Because he was in 
Saskatoon, and voted. Now otherwise . . . otherwise, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s two of them, or there’s a Labour minister we 
don’t know about, but the minister for Labour was here and did 
vote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know why the Premier said well one 
of the reasons we lost the vote was because the Labour minister 
was in Saskatoon. Obviously the House Leader and the whip 
aren’t keeping the Premier informed on what’s going on. 
Although perhaps they don’t talk to the Premier at all, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard a lot of whining from the government 
members about who is in and who is out of the House. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, in the 10 years that I have been here, unfortunately 
sitting on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, I have watched 
the government members come and go a lot. And most of the 
time it’s go, Mr. Speaker. Very, very few of the government 
members over the last 10 years have remained in the House for 
its entire duration each day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re here when the votes happen. They’re here in such 
numbers as to ensure that they can win the votes, Mr. Speaker. 
Last night they even failed in that. 
 
You know the Government House Leader talked about in the 
dark of the night, Mr. Speaker. Well in the dark of last night, his 
members crawled away and didn’t vote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The only interest that the Government House Leader and the 
minister for Education have, Mr. Speaker, is not in fairness, is 
not in democracy, is not in governing well, Mr. Speaker. Their 
only interest and their only exercise that this motion has, and 
the future motions they will bring forward dealing with this 
issue, Mr. Speaker, is to retain power. Nothing else. The whole 
exercise, Mr. Speaker, is about retaining power. 
 
That’s why the coalition occurred. That’s why the Government 
House Leader was in such a tizzy today, because his power is 
being threatened, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this House voted no confidence last night in this 
government. The public, Mr. Speaker, voted no confidence in 
that party in the last general election. Mr. Speaker, polling 
shows that the people have no confidence in this government. 
It’s time, Mr. Speaker, for this government to resign; it’s time 
for the Lieutenant Governor to issue a writ of election. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It is a pleasure to enter into this debate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let me say right upfront that what we’re 
dealing with, obviously, to state the obvious, is a motion of 
confidence in the Government of Saskatchewan. And let me 
state without any qualification whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, that I 



June 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2209 

 

am proud to take my place in this House today and say that I 
stand firm in confidence in the performance and the plans and 
the execution of those plans of the Government of 
Saskatchewan and I will be voting for this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest 
to the words of the hon. member opposite when he talked about 
the principles of democracy. And that’s what this all about, Mr. 
Speaker. This is all about democracy. 
 
And what we have is some of the cut and thrust and the parry 
that goes on in the House as we engage in the combat for 
power, as the hon. member refers to. It’s not a negative thing, 
Mr. Speaker, to seek power. That’s what draws the hon. 
members to this place is to have combat, to battle with words 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . But not bullets. Words but not 
bullets, Mr. Speaker, as my hon. colleague from opposite points 
out. 
 
But I listened with interest, Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member 
opposite takes his place and he talks about democracy. And 
what is the first thing that is on his mind, Mr. Speaker? He’s not 
gotten over it yet. He goes straight back to the election of 1999 
and he claims that there was some kind of ethical right to 
govern on that side of the House when, as a matter of fact, you 
put together the percentage of representatives . . . representation 
of the vote on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, there was a 
clear majority of percentage of vote, a clear majority of the 
House in terms of numbers of seats. 
 
And I recall their words, I recall their words when we got on 
this subject the first time we came back here, Mr. Speaker, 
when they shouted across that the NDP had a near-death 
experience, they said. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I said then and I say again, I was in my 
home city back this morning and, Mr. Speaker, those I talked to, 
they are afraid. They wanted me to get back to this place today 
to vote, as I will, because, Mr. Speaker, one of the greatest fears 
of the people of Saskatchewan is that that party had a near-life 
experience. And that will not happen, Mr. Speaker. That will 
not happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Now, Mr. Speaker, what the hon. member 
accurately . . . what the hon. member accurately captures, he 
accurately captures that this is a combative place, it is a place of 
open debate, and so it should be. So it should be. 
 
But at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, we are all charged — no 
matter which side of the House and what party we come from 
— surely we are charged to take those responsibilities that have 
been dedicated to us as a result of winning an election in our 
home constituency to take this exercise of democracy and to use 
it responsibly. Surely, surely that is the highest of all ethic, Mr. 
Speaker, when we use our right to act in this House, to carry out 
our right to speak and to vote. And that, Mr. Speaker, to me is 
the essence of what this debate is all about. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, when I look at what’s going on, what we 

have here is a conflict, a conflict between the right to exercise 
in games of democracy and the responsibility to govern. And 
that’s what’s going on. That’s what this is all about. That’s the 
essence of it here. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a comment before 
addressing that point particularly, to go back to a point that the 
hon. member raises regarding the procedures of the House. And 
the hon. member accurately — accurately — refers to the 
precedent set in democratic conduct that a decision of the House 
taken cannot be reconsidered. Point well made. Point well 
taken. 
 
But I point out, Mr. Speaker, that the issue before us comes 
about as a result of a decision made by committee of the House 
and now we come today to the House itself. And what we are 
dealing with, as we stand in our places, is the importance of the 
supremacy of the Legislative Assembly. The importance of the 
supremacy of the Legislative Assembly and the obligation of 
this Assembly having been challenged in committee, a creature 
of this Assembly, having been challenged in the committee. 
 
The hon. member says that the committee motion . . . vote last 
night indicated a lack of confidence in the government and that 
the Lieutenant Governor should call an election. We heard the 
same theme being repeated by the Leader of the Opposition 
earlier today in question period. Nothing could be further from 
the truth. 
 
What we saw, we saw was a result of a vote and I’ll come to 
that. A significant result but, Mr. Speaker, not by any stretch of 
the imagination an indication of the confidence of this House 
and the government. That’s what we’re doing right now. Here 
we are, in the House, exercising the supremacy of the House 
and the conduct of our democratic responsibilities. 
 
So the hon. member says you can’t revisit the question in the 
House. Mr. Speaker, the decision was not . . . the question to 
which he refers was not made in the House. It was made in 
committee. And the House has the authority to receive the 
advice provided to it through its committee — Committee of 
Finance in this case — and then to do as it deems appropriate, 
carrying out the democratic responsibilities to conduct the 
affairs of government in the interest of the people who sent us, 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan. And that’s what 
this is all about. 
 
So he says there’s no confidence in the House. I don’t agree. 
And I’m here to make that point and at the end of the debate 
we’ll decide. The House will decide whether it has confidence 
in the Government of Saskatchewan or not. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a long-standing principle in 
parliamentary democracy that the Assembly must have the right 
to indicate its confidence in the Government of Saskatchewan, 
and that’s what we’re doing here right now today. 
 
Last night we had . . . we had an experience. Let’s just refer to 
that for a moment, Mr. Speaker. Last night a vote was taken and 
the opposition won the vote. It’s clear; it’s on the record. They 
won the vote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I point out when I look at significant votes that 



2210 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2001 

 

have been taken at recent times, if we want to take a 
measurement of the will of the people, then we can compare 
two votes taken last night in committee, won by the opposition, 
and compare that to two votes taken in recent months in the 
constituency of Elphinstone and Riversdale, won by the will of 
the people by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s another expression, Mr. Speaker, another expression of 
democratic decision making — both legitimate, both legitimate. 
So I ask . . . we all have to ask ourselves: which vote, which 
vote most accurately reflects the will of the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I say today, I say today it is all about . . . it 
is all about putting together and comparing the right to play 
political games in the pursuit of power, the right to carry out 
games with the right and the responsibility to govern. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we heard the . . . we heard the references of 
the media; their observations about the attendance of the 
members in the House over the last couple of days, apparently, 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know, only they will know, apparently 
setting up a situation to engage in trickery — in trickery. To 
establish a circumstance which would make it possible to win a 
vote. Stunts; there it is. 
 
Now what were they doing, Mr. Speaker? The media have 
observed, the media have observed that there was a whole lot of 
space between the seats that were being occupied over on the 
other side over the last couple of days. And what were they up 
to? 
 
I do not know, Mr. Speaker, but I would speculate that there 
may be some opposite who would find inspirational the words 
of Adlai Stevenson who said this. He said: 
 

Golf is a fine relief from the tensions of office but we are a 
little tired of holding the bag. 
 

Mr. Speaker, they may find that just a tad inspirational. 
 
But when we look at what happened here last night, Mr. 
Speaker, and we follow this through, we follow this through. I 
was here. I was here, Mr. Speaker. I was here and I was able to 
observe who was present and who was not and that it was a 
wonderful . . . it was a moment of inspiration that in the middle 
of the night, well after 10 o’clock last night, after having been 
unable for some apparent reason, or unapparent reason, to find 
their places into the seats, well here that all of the Sask Party 
members had this simultaneous moment of inspiration that 
found them dashing through the door to cast a vote. 
 
And I asked myself, Mr. Speaker, you have to wonder what was 
happening in the minutes and maybe the hours and the minutes 
before we found them coming through the door. And some 
would say, some have speculated that perhaps they were casting 
themselves about, skulking around in the dark in the bushes of 
the legislature outside around the building. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can almost . . . I can just . . . I can imagine 
. . . I could just imagine what’s going on in those bushes out 
there in the dark that are scattered around the Legislative 
Assembly. And there he is, Mr. Speaker. There he is, the Hon. 

Leader of the Opposition. He’s out there in the dark skulking in 
the bushes and he bumps into some total stranger doing 
whatever they do out there in the bushes, Mr. Speaker, after 
dark; I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. And a total stranger says to 
him: now you look kind of familiar; who are you? And he says, 
I’m the Leader of the Opposition. And he said: the Leader of 
the Opposition; what are you doing skulking around out here in 
the bushes? And he says, well I’m leading the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And he says, well aren’t you the guy that 
says that you’re the government in waiting? Aren’t you the guy 
and he says, yes I’m the guy that says I’m the government in 
waiting. And he says, well what are you doing out here in the 
dark in the bushes surrounding the legislature? And he says, I’m 
out here waiting. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker . . . then, Mr. Speaker, he says . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . so just a second here. In the building 
inside there’s a room in there where they’re talking about 
Economic Development and they’re talking about building the 
province for the people of Saskatchewan. Don’t you think that 
you should ought to be in there saying something about that? 
And he says, well no, no, not really. Well why not? Because 
we’ve only got one idea and the coalition government’s already 
doing it. Our definition is cut taxes and that coalition 
government got way out ahead and they have introduced the 
greatest tax reduction in the history of Saskatchewan right 
before our very eyes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And so he says to the Leader of the 
Opposition, he says, but surely there’s something else he can 
do. And the Leader of the Opposition says there is, there is, but 
we’re praying for rain, Mr. Speaker, that’s all we can . . . that’s 
our second . . . that’s plan B. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if that’s accurate or not, only 
the Leader of the Opposition can know. But you kind of got to 
wonder, when you got half the crew, half the crew is here for 
two days straight, and then after dark, after 10 o’clock at night, 
there comes this simultaneous moment of inspiration as they 
come charging through the door to cast the vote. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, is this the exercise of 
responsible use of the democratic authority or is this a political 
game? Well we’ll leave it to the people to decide. We’ll leave it 
to the people to decide. 
 
So when we ask ourselves well maybe, maybe, maybe there 
was really something serious going on in here. Maybe as a 
matter of fact the opposition, taking responsible use of their 
position in this House, was in here debating Economic 
Development, proposing alternatives. Maybe they were in here 
proposing amendments to the budget or voting against pieces of 
the budget because it just didn’t fit their plan about how you do 
this thing right, how you grow Saskatchewan. Maybe that was 
happening. 
 



June 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2211 

 

Was it happening, Mr. Speaker? Check the record. Check the 
record. Scant attendance. Some questions; responsible 
questions. Alternatives proposed? I don’t remember any. No. 
Objections to the votes, Mr. Speaker, for any of the subvotes of 
Economic Development and Co-operation? No, no, none of 
that. 
 
Until we got to the end and all of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, there 
came this simultaneous inspiration — some would say with a 
little bit of artificial perspiration mixed in, Mr. Speaker — this 
simultaneous inspiration as they charged into the House for the 
vote. So we had the vote. Some would say out of the bushes 
they came. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my hon. colleague, the member for Saskatoon, has 
talked about some of the consequences about political games, 
real life consequences, has referred to the impact to the REDA 
funding, and Tourism Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Trade 
and Export Partnership, the synchrotron project, some important 
research projects going on at the University of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, those are real life consequences, real life 
consequences. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, now we hear them chirping from the side, 
you know, and there will be opportunity when we get to go 
back and revisit this item, there will be opportunity and I will 
listen carefully for alternatives as to how you grow 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I stand confident in the 
performance, not only the Government of Saskatchewan, but in 
the plans of the Department of Economic and Co-operative 
Development — as released publicly with the attendance of 
some of the members opposite, with the great fanfare of the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — Partnership for 
Prosperity, Mr. Speaker. And I stand firmly in support of the 
targets as part of the plan. 
 
They say there’s no plan. Well I’ll tell you this government has 
got so doggone many targets for a government with no plan, it 
would make your head spin, Mr. Speaker. Let me just share 
some of those. 
 
This government with no apparent plan has got some targets for 
2005 for our first . . . our celebration of our centenary, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What are the targets? To increase the number of jobs by at least 
30,000, Mr. Speaker; to reduce provincial income tax by over 
25 per cent for an average Saskatchewan family between 1999 
and 2003; to increase the average personal disposable income 
by 20 per cent; to achieve net youth in-migration; to increase 
the proportion of working-age people with some post-secondary 
education by 15 per cent; to increase the number of businesses 
and families connected to the Internet by 40 per cent; to 
increase the employment rate of First Nations and Métis people 
by 20 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on. Should I go on? Mr. Speaker, I hate 
. . . it bothers me to be destroying the myth that they try to 
perpetuate that there’s no plan. Mr. Speaker, for a government 
with no plan, it has a whole lot of specificity to its no plan, Mr. 
Speaker. 

On it goes. It might come from comparable provinces and states 
Saskatchewan will be the most cost-competitive jurisdiction in 
which to do business in our key sector, Mr. Speaker; 7,500 
start-ups of new businesses and co-operatives annually; Mr. 
Speaker, increased non-traditional exports by 60 per cent; Mr. 
Speaker, become a world leader in research and development 
and it enhances our ability to benefit from our unique resources, 
infrastructure, and market interest. 
 
It goes on, Mr. Speaker. Do we go on and on? Well, people can 
get it, Mr. Speaker, they can read it for themselves. If they want 
the whole list, we’re happy to give it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I stand firmly in support of those targets and 
the proposals of the Department of Economic and Co-operative 
Development, which deserve to be supported by this Legislative 
Assembly in support of the people who sent us, the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this motion is about the authority, the 
authority of the government to do the business of the people of 
Saskatchewan, to continue to build and grow our Saskatchewan. 
 
To do that in support of the ones that sent us, Mr. Speaker, I am 
confident in the performance of the government. I am 
confidence in the plans of the government, and, Mr. Speaker, I 
express my confidence by standing firmly in support of the 
motion that is before you. And I thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, well, well, 
Mr. Speaker. Here we are debating today a motion regarding 
confidence, or the lack thereof, in the Government of 
Saskatchewan, because of something that happened last night 
— very, very historic; very, very unusual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rarely — rarely — does a minority government 
lose a vote on a budget issue in a Legislative Assembly, but it 
does happen from time to time. Almost never, Mr. Speaker, 
does a majority government lose a vote. 
 
One has to ask, why did that happen? Mr. Speaker, this 
government has been clinging on to power on life support for a 
long, long time. Mr. Speaker, in the 1999 election that 
government lost the popular vote; Mr. Speaker, the NDP came 
in second. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now have a Premier that was never elected in a 
general election as the Premier of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
we have a government that is haywired together; a coalition of 
two parts that cannot get along, cannot function, has not been 
working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only reason they’re still there is because they 
want to hang on to power. That’s the only, only issue, they’ve 
admitted it. They call it providing stable government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, have we had stable government over the 
past two, two and a half years, whatever it is since the 1999 
election? Mr. Speaker, we have not had stable government. We 
have had an economic disaster in this province. Mr. Speaker, 



2212 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2001 

 

hanging onto power for power’s sake alone is not a noble 
virtue, but it is the only principle to which the members 
opposite cling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happened last night, what happened last 
night? Well what happened was that the members opposite 
failed to show up. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand, 
they’re talking about the opposition not being here. The 
opposition was here; it was the members opposite that weren’t 
here. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, they can’t have it both ways. They can’t 
complain because we’re not here, and then complain because 
we are here. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the official opposition performed its 
functions and its duties at every step of the legislative agenda of 
this legislature. Everyday we’ve been here, everyday we’ve 
done our job. Too effectively, Mr. Speaker, for the opposition. 
We have provided such an excellent opposition that they are 
hanging onto power for power’s sake alone. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, had it been close — had the 
vote been close — had they lost by one vote, perhaps they could 
claim well a minister had a duty somewhere, Mr. Speaker. But 
the vote . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. I 
ask the member to stay in order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
from Regina South is screaming uncontrollably. He’s angry 
because they lost the vote and they lost it substantially, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t even close. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a very revealing object lesson. Mr. 
Speaker, the fact that they weren’t here for the vote last night is 
an illustration of a government that isn’t there for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, not only is this government 
incompetent and bungling at getting its members in the seats for 
a vote here in the legislature, but they have been bungling the 
important issues that affect Saskatchewan people on a daily 
basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is sloppy. This government is 
unable to meet its objectives. This government is arrogant. This 
government does not deserve to govern any longer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this vote, this vote that we’re going to have on this 
motion, arising from this emergency debate, will not change 
people’s minds about whether or not they magically now have 
confidence in the government should they get enough members 
in their seats for the upcoming vote to win the vote. That’s not 
going to convince the people of Saskatchewan that the Premier 
is competent, that his cabinet is competent, and that the 
members of his government are competent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a little time this afternoon to talk 
about the record of this government. Mr. Speaker, this is going 
to be Saskatchewan Tourism. We’re going to take a tour, Mr. 
Speaker, of the government benches and we’re going to start 
out in Finance. 
 

Mr. Speaker, why have the people of Saskatchewan lost 
confidence in this government? Well let’s start out with the 
Finance minister’s budget. Mr. Speaker, he is borrowing from 
windfall revenues to make government bigger while the tax 
base gets smaller. Think about that, Mr. Speaker. He is 
borrowing windfall revenues, today, to make government 
bigger, to make government more expensive while the tax base 
is shrinking. 
 
The tax base is shrinking because there’s 21,000 fewer jobs in 
Saskatchewan this year than there were last year. Mr. Speaker, 
the tax base is shrinking because 9,000 people left the province 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that’s why the people of 
Saskatchewan do not have confidence in this government. Mr. 
Speaker, they do not have confidence in the Finance minister. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what is even sadder is that during his budget 
debate, during the delivery of his budget, Mr. Speaker, in the 
face of people leaving Saskatchewan, in the face of jobs fleeing 
this province, the Finance minister had the nerve, had the 
audacity to point his finger to the air and say, now that’s 
progress. What a heartless, what a heartless statement. To tell 
the people of Saskatchewan, when their young people are 
leaving the province, this cataphasic statement — now that’s 
progress. 
 
Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, the mother, can you imagine the 
mother of the last child that left Saskatchewan watch the 
Finance minister proclaim from his seat, now that’s progress, as 
their son or their daughter had to leave Saskatchewan to find a 
job. Mr. Speaker, that’s why the people of Saskatchewan don’t 
have confidence in this government. 
 
Let’s move on to the minister for Economic Development and 
let’s look at his department because after all it was his budget 
that was defeated last night. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it was interesting watching the expressions 
on the faces opposite. I heard the member from Moose Jaw 
North say this is no big deal; you know, what the heck was 
basically his attitude, this is . . . That wasn’t the expression I 
saw on his face last night. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you think that the member from Moose 
Jaw North had an expression of shock on his face, you should 
have seen the member for Prince Albert, the Government House 
Leader, the minister for Economic Development. I thought he 
was going to need a blood transfusion on the spot, Mr. Speaker 
— he went so white. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this minister, this minister’s colleagues deserted 
him when his vote came up; when his estimate came to the 
House for the approval or the disapproval of this legislature, his 
colleague, his seatmates deserted him. No wonder he was a 
little pale last night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, they have this paper that they wave 
around in the legislature, this Partnership for Prosperity or 
whatever it’s called. There’s been so many versions — 
partnership for progress, Partnership for Prosperity. It doesn’t 
much matter what the title is, the fact is that it’s pure fiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan don’t have confidence 



June 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2213 

 

in this government because they can’t believe the government 
any longer. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the 1999 election the government said they 
were going to create 30,000 new jobs — 30,000 jobs. And then 
they come along with their Partnership for Prosperity or 
whatever it is, and they say they’re going to create 30,000 jobs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s no magic formula for creating jobs. 
You cannot have a plan for prosperity if it doesn’t meet the 
criteria that will generate economic growth. If it doesn’t have 
some substance and meet some teeth, it will not impact this 
province; and we’ve seen people of Saskatchewan lose 
confidence in plan after plan after plan that fizzles out, that 
comes to no effect. 
 
And so while the government is projecting that they’re going to 
create 30,000 jobs, what really has happened? Well Statistics 
Canada tells a different story than the members in the benches 
across the way. And quite frankly I believe Statistics Canada. 
They said we lost 21,000 jobs — is anybody awake over there? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we lost 21,000 jobs and they’re waving a paper 
around saying they’re going to create 30,000 jobs. They can say 
that day in and day out. Every time they say it they’re like the 
little boy that cries wolf. Nobody believes them any more, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well the budget delivered by the Finance minister predicts a 
very small economic growth. The minister’s own budget says 
that our growth in Saskatchewan’s going to be well below the 
national average. I think it was 59 per cent of the national 
average. What sense is there having this Partnership for 
Prosperity plan if the Finance minister is committed to low 
growth, to not creating jobs, and to substandard economy? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the economic development under this government 
is an abominable failure. Mr. Speaker, if it wasn’t so sad it 
would be funny. Mr. Speaker, people leaving the province — 
the best province in Canada. And people are leaving because of 
the economic policies of that government. And they expect us 
to support, they expect us to support a government that is 
driving people from the province. Not on your life, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Let’s move from that failure over to the Crown Investments 
Corporation. Well the Crown Investments Corporation — 
where do I begin? Mr. Speaker, this whole session has been 
filled with nightmarish stories about wild investments by the 
Crown Investments Corporation that have gone bad. Mr. 
Speaker, they have been purchasing private-sector businesses to 
compete with existing private-sector businesses in this 
province. Mr. Speaker, they are putting the taxpayers of this 
province at a distinct disadvantage, in competing against 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the policies of this government are wrong, they’re 
wrong-headed. The minister hasn’t taken responsibility for the 
department that he’s supposed to run. He says everything’s at 
arm’s-length and in fact he has a runaway department that is 
totally out of control and is damaging the economy of this 

province. 
 
How do we know it’s damaging the province? His economy? 
We know because we’ve lost 21,000 jobs over the last year and 
9,000 people have left the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister involved for the Crown Investment 
Corporation gleefully supports unreasonable rates in natural gas 
rates . . . unreasonable hikes to natural gas rates. Doesn’t lift a 
little finger to prevent it. When gas rates are going down this 
minister is busy raising the rates to the customers of 
SaskEnergy here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why the people of this province have lost 
confidence in the NDP-Liberal government because they’re 
doing the wrong things. They can wave their documents around, 
they can do their news conferences, they can send out press 
release after press release but the people of Saskatchewan are 
smart. They’re not fooled by this nonsense. They can see the 
writing on the wall, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s move on to the Department of Agriculture. I won’t spend 
a lot of time but I must say how disappointed the official 
opposition is that this government are using farm families as 
scapegoats for the failure of the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
You know, we talk about them blaming everybody but 
themselves. Well it’s fair perhaps in politics to point your finger 
at your political opponents and say oh, it’s the opposition’s 
fault. Perhaps you could justify that they point the finger at the 
federal government and say, it’s Ottawa’s fault for our dismal 
economic performance. 
 
But to start to attack one of the key industries in this province 
— the industry of agriculture — and say it’s because of farm 
families that we have an economic disaster is unconscionable, 
it’s shameful, and this government should apologize for those 
statements in the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, who has failed? Who has 
failed when it comes to agriculture? It’s this government that 
doesn’t get their minister to the negotiating table when AIDA 
was put together. AIDA doesn’t work for the province of 
Saskatchewan. I wonder why? It’s because we weren’t there. At 
least this government was not there when the plan was being 
put together. 
 
And we all recognize that taxpayers’ precious dollars — 
including the tax dollars of farm families — are wasted, are 
ineffective because those dollars are going into a support 
program that’s not working for the province of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, that is irresponsible government. That is why 
Saskatchewan people are losing confidence in the Government 
of Saskatchewan — the NDP-Liberal coalition government that 
has such a disastrous economic record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s the top-of-mind issue with many, many 
people in this province? It’s health care. Health care is 
extremely important. Well we’ve lost 21,000 jobs and 9,000 
people. A lot of those people are doctors, nurses, health care 
professionals. 



2214 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2001 

 

The NDP-Liberal coalition government are driving out health 
care workers from the province of Saskatchewan because of 
their disastrous economic policy. And what do they do, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Well we have the Fyke fiasco. All that money invested in a 
report that really doesn’t mean a whole lot because now we 
have to study the study. And then we find out that even if we 
study the study, there’s also a parallel study that’s happening 
that may be the real study. Mr. Speaker, what a shell game. It’s 
no wonder the people of Saskatchewan have lost confidence in 
this NDP-Liberal coalition government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while they’re playing games with study after study 
after study — the real ones, the imaginary ones, the past ones, 
and the future ones — Mr. Speaker, the waiting lists in 
Saskatchewan have become the longest in the entire country. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s where it gets so sad because waiting 
lists are not just numbers — waiting lists are people who are 
hurting. They’re seniors who need an operation and can’t get it. 
Mr. Speaker, they are working people that want to get back on 
the job but the health system has failed them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our failing health care system is part and parcel of 
the reason why our economic record is so dismal. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s move on to another department on this 
tour of why people in Saskatchewan have lost confidence in this 
NDP-Liberal coalition government. Let’s look at SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management). 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago, we had a water crisis in 
Saskatchewan. Now if that isn’t enough to shake people’s 
confidence, I don’t know what is, because when we pick up a 
glass of water, we want it to be safe. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the revelations from the minister’s own 
departments were shocking. Revelations of incompetence. 
Revelations of poor communication with municipalities over 
the quality of their water. Mr. Speaker, no interaction between 
SERM and Sask Health when a problem was uncovered. It was 
awful. 
 
And yet their communication strategy, Mr. Speaker, was to say 
everything is okay. SERM and Sask Health have our water 
quality under control. There’s absolutely no problem, don’t 
worry about it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when it’s revealed that our drinking water is 
unsafe, why wouldn’t the people of Saskatchewan lose 
confidence in that government? Of course they’re going to lose 
confidence in a government that does not tell them the truth 
about their quality of water and deliberately has a 
communication strategy that deceives people about the safety of 
their drinking water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was in northern Saskatchewan and I heard 
northern residents talk about how SERM was a barrier to 
economic development in their part of Saskatchewan. And it 
wasn’t just once or twice, Mr. Speaker. But community leader 
after community leader after community leader, business person 
after business person in Saskatchewan told me that the Minister 

of SERM doesn’t even come to the North any more. He’s 
forgotten the North once he entered the cabinet and they have 
lost confidence in their minister and they have lost confidence 
in this NDP-Liberal coalition government. Mr. Speaker, they 
feel that the minister has abandoned his constituents. 
 
Let’s go to the next spot on this tour of the government’s record 
of incompetence and mismanagement. Let’s go into the labour 
area, Mr. Speaker, where this government supports 
undemocratic practices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the watch of this government, and this new 
Premier I might add, we have seen senior public servants 
conscripted against their will into SGEU (Saskatchewan 
Government and General Employees’ Union). Mr. Speaker, 
that’s undemocratic; that’s wrong. It’s unproductive and it is 
very self-serving on a part of a government party whose 
finances are dependent upon the goodwill of unions who donate 
tens and perhaps hundreds of thousands of dollars into their 
financial accounts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, financial support for the NDP is more important to 
this government than people leaving the province of 
Saskatchewan. It’s more important that they get a few more 
senior public servants in SGEU than it is keeping 9,000 people 
from leaving Saskatchewan or 21,000 jobs from leaving the 
workforce. If that isn’t a reason to lose confidence in this 
government, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we could talk about Rural Revitalization. I think 
that’s the department, Mr. Speaker, that’s responsible to wind 
up the affairs of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people who are the most self-reliant people in 
the province of Saskatchewan have been slapped in the face by 
this government. They’ve been kicked in the shins. And what is 
the result — 21,000 fewer jobs in this province; 9,000 people 
leaving the province of Saskatchewan. What kind of a record is 
that when it comes to rural revitalization? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next stop on this tour of the benches opposite 
is the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority. Mr. Speaker, if ever there was a minister 
plagued by scandals, this is the minister. Mr. Speaker, if ever 
there was a minister that is a candidate for scrutiny under the 
principle of ministerial accountability, it is this minister. 
 
This minister has had problem after problem after problem after 
problem in her department. The problem goes back several 
years. The minister apparently was aware or at least her 
officials were aware of these problems and nothing was done, 
Mr. Speaker. If that isn’t a reason to lose confidence in this 
government, what is, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, so what does the minister responsible for 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming do? Well, Mr. Speaker, she 
punishes the whistle-blowers. She punishes the people that want 
to fix the mess. She fires them, whether they be an investigator 
like Joe Dosenberger or whether they be an employee like 
Bonnie Swan. They’re expendable as long as the minister and 
the senior officials in her department are spared embarrassment 
and spared the consequences of the actions that they have taken. 
 



June 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2215 

 

Mr. Speaker, people are going to lose confidence in a 
government that operates with two sets of rules, two sets of 
standards. There’s one set of standards in Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming for the service providers. They’re watched like a 
hawk. My gosh, they get one freebie bottle of booze, they’re 
booted out. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if it’s a minister or if it’s a senior person in 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming or SIGA (Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Authority) and they get a trip to the Bahamas, 
they’ll do whatever it takes to protect that person. Mr. Speaker, 
they will go to the wall for that person. 
 
But they don’t care. They don’t care a hill of beans about the 
service providers on the front line. They’re expendable, Mr. 
Speaker, as long as they save their own skins. That’s why the 
people of Saskatchewan have lost confidence in this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, let’s move over to Municipal 
Affairs. There is another disaster. We went from a crisis last 
year where they tried to force amalgamation on municipalities. 
Mr. Speaker. What a heavy-handed, top-down measure that 
was. The former minister who is now the Minister of 
Agriculture and the Deputy Premier was dogged and 
determined that he was going to force this amalgamation 
process come hell or high water. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it was due in large part to the 
effective work of the official opposition that that minister did 
not get his way. But we’ve gone from one disaster to the next. 
 
We now have a new minister responsible for Municipal Affairs 
and, Mr. Speaker, this minister, sitting at the cabinet table when 
the budget was determined, folded his hands, perhaps he went 
to sleep, I don’t know. We had the member for Moose Jaw 
North fabricating a story earlier. I don’t know whether this is a 
fabrication or not but I think perhaps the minister responsible 
for Municipal Affairs was asleep when the budget discussions 
were entertained around the cabinet table because he certainly 
didn’t come up with anything whatsoever for municipalities in 
this province. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, his colleagues were able to build a bigger 
government around him but he was asleep at the switch. He was 
asleep at the switch when revenue sharing was discussed. Mr. 
Speaker, he failed every municipality in Saskatchewan and now 
property ratepayers are paying the price in almost every 
municipality in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatoon saw a 4 per cent rate hike. 
Municipalities across this province have seen rate hikes as high 
as 90 per cent on their property taxes because the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs was sleeping at the cabinet table. If that isn’t 
reason to lose confidence in this government, Mr. Speaker, 
what is? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about Aboriginal Affairs. There’s 
another interesting fiasco. Mr. Speaker, the minister just the 

other day tabled something called The Métis Act. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan doesn’t have a Métis Act and it’s 
probably something that’s required. But the minister made a 
big, big bungle — a big, big booboo. She forgot to consult with 
the majority of Métis people before she introduced the Bill into 
the legislature. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Métis people of Saskatchewan found out 
what the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs was trying to do. And 
their leaders crowded the benches of this Assembly and 
watched the pathetic performance of their minister and this 
government, this NDP-Liberal coalition government, as they 
tried to foist a piece of legislation on Métis people in 
Saskatchewan that they didn’t even support. 
 
If that isn’t reason to lose confidence in this government again, 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education, he’s also the leader of 
the Liberals — I think he is anyways. It’s really tough to tell 
who the leader is; there’s more debate in this House between 
the Liberals on the different sides of the House than there is 
between the opposition and the government some days. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, how can the people of Saskatchewan have 
confidence in a government when the Minister of Education 
says, anything I say during an election campaign should just be 
considered as pure political rhetoric; you know, it doesn’t count 
after the election; I’ll say how terrible the NDP are before the 
election, but if I don’t win then I’ll join them because it was just 
political rhetoric, it doesn’t matter; the people of Saskatchewan 
don’t care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education said, we’ve got to cut 
staff in Executive Council. The Premier has too many staffers; 
ministers have too many staffers. Well nobody has been a 
bigger offender of that principle than the Minister of Education. 
And we’ve seen it under the new Premier’s government. 
 
We see them expanding the size of government and who do 
they start with. They start with a defeated NDP MP (Member of 
Parliament), Dennis Gruending. He was so important they had 
to get him on the payroll. And then they go to a defeated 
Liberal candidate, Ken Magnus and they’ve got to get him on 
the payroll. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when a minister and a co-leader of the 
coalition government says that the size of ministerial staff and 
the Premier’s staff has to be reduced, and then becomes a part 
of the problem rather than the solution, the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to lose confidence in the government. 
And that’s exactly what has happened. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, who is ultimately responsible? 
Who is ultimately responsible for the record of this 
government? Well, Mr. Speaker, the buck stops at the Premier’s 
desk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier was just out in the rotunda of the 
legislature, and we were together honouring people of the Three 
Century Club, people that were born in the 1800s and are still 
alive in the 21st century. And that’s a good thing to do. It was a 
plaque that was unveiled. 



2216 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2001 

 

But it was rather funny, Mr. Speaker, while we’re actually in 
here debating whether or not this government even deserves to 
exist, the Premier was on the piano playing a rendition of 
Somewhere Over the Rainbow. Mr. Speaker, that’s where this 
government’s head is. It’s somewhere over the rainbow, 
because they don’t have a clue when it comes to accountability, 
to economic development, and to providing good government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the ball is clearly in the government’s court. And the ball 
is clearly in the hands of the Premier. Mr. Speaker, that’s the 
way it should be, but the determination of whether we have a 
good Premier and a good government, or a bad Premier and a 
bad government, will depend on what the Premier does with the 
ball. It’ll depend on what he does in the next day or two. 
 
Well what we’ve seen so far, Mr. Speaker, is not encouraging. 
We’ve seen a Premier and his front bench that are angry. What 
are they angry about? They’re angry because the opposition 
showed up and voted. 
 
Can you imagine in a parliamentary democracy . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And right now I hear the Government House 
Leader, he’s still angry that we showed up to vote. Can you 
imagine, Mr. Speaker, that the government would be angry 
because the official opposition is doing its job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we are hearing from the public, what we are 
hearing from the people of Saskatchewan is, thank you for what 
you did. You held this government accountable, you pointed out 
the failure of their economic development record, and we’re 
with you a hundred per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has a choice to make. The Premier can 
look at his economic development record and he can stand up in 
this House, or he can go out in the scrum, talk to the media, and 
he can say we haven’t done so good. We’ve actually failed in 
economic development. We promised 30,000 jobs, and the 
opposition’s right; we’ve lost 21,000 jobs, 9,000 people have 
left the province. It’s serious. We’re going to roll up our sleeves 
and do something about it. 
 
The Premier could do that. The Premier could say, I take this 
matter so seriously, so seriously that I’m going to resign and 
I’m going to take this issue to the people of Saskatchewan; 
we’re going to come up with our vision for economic 
development; we realize we have to start afresh; we’ll let the 
opposition put forward their ideas for economic development; 
and we’ll give the people of Saskatchewan their rightful, their 
rightful opportunity to express their preference over who has 
the right vision for Saskatchewan and its economic 
development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier could do that. The reputation of the 
Premier would rise substantially if he admitted that his 
government has failed on economic development. Mr. Speaker, 
I guess he could probably take the wind right out of my sails, 
but up to this point we have not seen a Premier that’s moving in 
that direction. 
 
The other thing the Premier could do, Mr. Speaker — and what 
I think is more likely — is the Premier can initiate this 
emergency debate. He can marshal in his members to make sure 

that he wins this vote and he can say, let’s just pretend it never 
happened, folks; let’s just pretend that we still have the 
confidence of the people of Saskatchewan and let’s just go on 
governing like we always have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know what that decision would mean to the 
people of Saskatchewan? It means we will continue to report 
that thousands of people have left and are leaving this province. 
It means that Canada West’s prediction that 40 per cent of 
graduates will leave Saskatchewan upon completing their 
education in this province rather than staying and making a life 
for themselves here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier can make the decision to continue to 
drive people from this province and drive jobs from this 
province, or he can recognize that his plans are not working and 
he needs to do something different. Mr. Speaker, he has a 
chance to do the right thing. Because of the work of the official 
opposition he has time to reflect and to strike out in a new 
course in a new direction for this province. How fitting that 
would be at the beginning of a new century. How fitting that 
would be to provide hope, change, and chance of growth in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard the member from Moose Jaw North 
bragging about the NDP’s results in the last two by-elections. 
He conveniently mentioned two rather than three. But, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, those were, those were considered some 
of the safest ridings for the NDP and they saw their support go 
down; the Liberals saw their support vanish; and the 
Saskatchewan Party was able to attract strong candidates and 
they brought their support up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they are so confident, if they are so confident, 
why don’t they take this issue to the people of Saskatchewan 
and give them the chance to vote on it? Why don’t they have 
the courage? Why don’t they have the courage? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been clear on our 
record. We have been clear on our plan of action for the 
province of Saskatchewan. We have a plan to grow 
Saskatchewan. And we have a team, Mr. Speaker, that are 
committed to growing this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re tired of playing the silly games that the 
government will play, that everything is okay. That the Minister 
of Finance would point at the air and say now that’s progress, 
when 21,000 jobs are lost and 9,000 people leave 
Saskatchewan. That is cruel to the people of Saskatchewan. The 
Minister of Finance should apologize for spewing that kind of 
rubbish in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for change. It’s time for this government 
to take stock of its shortcomings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not support this charade. I will not support 
this charade of thinking that somehow if they magically win the 
next vote, suddenly people’s confidence will be instilled in the 
government once again. Therefore, I will not support the 
motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



June 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2217 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, it’s a 
real pleasure to get up in the House to speak today. I haven’t 
had as many opportunities to do this as I would have liked this 
session. 
 
And true to form, Mr. Speaker, again here we are — the Sask 
Party creates problems and the New Democratic Party fixes 
them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And today, we’re here fixing the latest 
problem. Now what is the nature of this problem, Mr. Speaker? 
The nature of this problem is a fascination with photo 
opportunities and media play. Now you’d think they would 
have learned a little something from Stockwell Day who had a 
big shortage of long-term thinking. All they think about is what 
is cute and clever today. 
 
And I think we’ve seen plenty of evidence of this short-term 
thinking, evidenced by their performance in question period 
over this session. It’s shown an absence of any plan, any 
strategy, any real understanding of the issues. We had very few 
questions on agriculture; one of the major challenges facing this 
province. We’ve even had very few questions on health care. 
And so, not only do they not have the answers, Mr. Speaker, 
they haven’t seemed to have had any of the questions either. 
 
And I’m going to go back to the ’80s. Now I know the 
opposition doesn’t like this, but for people who have had a long 
time involvement in politics, I ask them to pay attention 
because I’m going to mention a name, Mr. Speaker, that will 
probably cause them to sit up and take notice. Because this is a 
small town and people see people doing things that people 
might rather they didn’t see them doing. But they can wait for a 
minute to hear that name. They’ll notice it when they hear it. 
 
For people who’ve had a long time involvement in politics, the 
opposition has not been ready to recognize that some ideas 
come and go, some people come and go, but when you’ve been 
involved long enough, which someone who’s at the 
grandmother stage that I am, you learn to recognize certain 
trains as they’re coming down the track. 
 
And the train opposite, Mr. Speaker, is a train filled with those 
like the old Devine Tories, like the Alliance, and like the Sask 
Party. The people on this train, Mr. Speaker, have a superficial 
understanding and believe that there’s so much more that we 
can be. 
 
Well the fact of the matter, there is a small element of truth in 
that, Mr. Speaker. We can all do a little better than we’re doing 
and sometimes even a lot better. But the difference is when you 
have too much dependence on the slogan and not enough on the 
substance. 
 
The train opposite is the train of those who are all sizzle, Mr. 
Speaker, or maybe I should say attempted sizzle and no steak. 
Cheap political stunts to achieve what they can’t achieve by 
presenting clear alternatives and thoughtful debates. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, they are more games than solutions. 

And who else is on that train? There’s a large group of people 
who think they can have their cake and eat it too, Mr. Speaker. 
They think they can have large tax cuts, and large increases in 
spending, even though in their own election platform the 
members opposite advocated zero increases in health care and 
zero increases in education. 
 
I think the attitude was reflected last night when they thought 
they could play little games and have no real consequence 
resulting from that. And I want to speak just for a moment, Mr. 
Speaker, some of the impacts of their little charade last night. 
 
Because the Economic Development Department budget has 
not been approved, REDA (regional economic development 
authority) funding would be cancelled, which would have an 
impact on rural Saskatchewan. Tourism Saskatchewan will not 
have funding. The Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership 
would not be able to operate, playing a key role in exporting 
Saskatchewan products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the synchrotron project would be delayed, 
research projects would not proceed. We would find that 
projects under the Western Economic Partnership Agreement 
would be stalled, and that includes things like the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) Museum and tourist attractions like 
the Duck Lake Interpretive Centre. 
 
We would find that because of their actions last night 
small-business loans associations would not receive funding. 
Since 1994, the small-business loans associations have created 
8,342 jobs. 
 
We would find that because of their actions last night 
neighbourhood development organizations would be shut down, 
and the impact that they have on inner-city families and helping 
people get jobs. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that because of their actions last 
night any new projects might be put on hold, like the NATO 
flight training centre in Moose Jaw, the Staples Call Centre in 
Regina, and the Alberta Garment Manufacturing expansion in 
Saskatoon. But they didn’t think about any of that, Mr. Speaker, 
because these are short-term thinkers. 
 
Now on this particular tack of theirs, they also chose to pull this 
little stunt while the Agriculture minister is away trying to get 
support for farmers. And instead of supporting his efforts, they 
undermine his efforts by pulling a stunt at the legislature. 
Hiding in the bushes, not only undermining the Minister of 
Agriculture but undermining all the people who are working in 
Economic Development. 
 
But I’m going to return to my theme, Mr. Speaker. And the 
theme is that the Saskatchewan Party creates problems and the 
New Democratic government solves problems. 
 
Now this train that the Sask Party is on is a long train. It goes 
all the way back to 1980. It’s the same philosophy, same ideas, 
and many of the same people. I know that the members 
opposite suffer from short-term memory, but I remember 
because I was there then and I’m here now. So I want to 



2218 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2001 

 

provide a few facts. 
 
During the ’80s under the Devine Tories, the political relatives 
of our members opposite, we found that during the ’80s this 
opposition set many records. They set the record for the number 
of people who have ever left the province in almost every year 
they governed. 
 
They set the record for the amount of debt added to . . . and 
deficit added to the provincial budget in every single year that 
they governed. No other government has added a billion a year 
to the debt of the province. 
 
They set a record for the number of members found guilty of 
misuse of government funds. They set a record for the highest 
government debt per capita in Canada. 
 
Now you would think all this record setting might cause them to 
be a little more thoughtful about their positions on things. But 
what did they do instead? Well they did the equivalent of what 
they did last night. They hid in the bushes. They tried to hide 
under a new name. 
 
But see, we don’t tend to take this too seriously, Mr. Speaker. 
Because who were they seen with having lunch yesterday? 
Does anybody know? A certain Mr. Peter Whitmore. Now if 
anybody knows who Peter Whitmore was — he was with the 
firm of Lane and Whitmore. 
 
Now does anybody remember Mr. Lane? I bet the members 
opposite would know who Mr. Lane was, Mr. Gary Lane. 
 
Now I think it’s only a coincidence that you would just happen 
to be having a strategy dinner with Mr. Peter Whitmore on the 
day that you’re busy planning your stunt. But of course you 
don’t know any of those people because you’re a different 
group of people. So I’ll just let you cogitate on that one for a 
minute. 
 
And you can continue to hide in the bushes and hide behind a 
new name, but we know that you are with the same . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I would remind the 
member to address all of her remarks through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for reminding 
me because I do enjoy having a conversation with the Chair at 
any time. 
 
So I just say that here they are amongst the bushes and the 
brambles . . . you know there’s an old civil war song like that. 
You might have heard it. “They ran through the bushes and they 
ran through the brambles and they ran through the brier where 
the rabbit wouldn’t go.” Well that’s where they are. 
 
Meanwhile, while they were running through the brambles, the 
NDP and Liberal coalition government was busying fixing the 
problems that they and the likes of Mr. Lane and others created 
in their previous incarnation. 
 
Now what problems did we fix, Mr. Speaker? Because I don’t 
want you to just take my word for it. I want to point out some of 
the problems that we fixed. 

Eight consecutive balanced budgets, following nine $1 billion 
deficit budgets. We have in this year; the total debt has declined 
by 75 million between March 31, 2000 and March 31, 2002. 
 
We’ve had nine credit rating upgrades since 1995. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I may not know much about high finance, but I know 
that a credit rating is important and I know that a credit rating 
upgrade is important. And I know that investors pay attention to 
credit rating upgrades. 
 
We’ve made solid progress on reductions on government debt 
as a per cent of GDP. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what about economic development? What 
about the future? Well, we know that we had a reduction in the 
small business corporate income tax rate from 8 per cent to 6 
per cent effective July 1, 2001. We increased the annual amount 
of income to which small business income tax rate can be 
applied from 200,000 to 300,000. The extension of the right to 
incorporate for all regulated professionals in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I’d like the members opposite to tell me whether there’s a 
single one of those things they believe won’t help the economy? 
I want to hear the answer to whether there’s a single one of 
those things won’t help the economy? 
 
On personal tax reform we’ve doubled the education tax credit 
amount to $400 per month for full-time study and $120 per 
month of part-time study; increased disability and caregiver tax 
credit; increased senior supplements; child tax credit; reduced 
personal income tax rates. And I want the members opposite to 
tell me if they think reducing personal income tax rates is not 
going to help the economy. I’m not hearing anything, Mr. 
Speaker, from over there. They’ve gotten very quiet all of a 
sudden. 
 
On non-renewable resource initiatives, the 10 per cent tax credit 
for individuals on their purchase of flow-through shares of 
eligible mineral exploration, retroactive to October 18, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s incentives for enhanced oil recovery 
projects using CO2 effective midnight budget night. A new 
capital incentive to promote more efficient production 
technology in sodium sulphate. And I want to hear the members 
opposite tell me which one of those things don’t make the 
economy grow. Boy it’s quiet over there. They must be heading 
back out to the bushes for a mid-afternoon visit. 
 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, was full of support for economic 
development — CommunityNet, the synchrotron, energy and 
mines, enhanced geoscience, orphan wells program, wind 
energy, climate change, K to 12 education, highest budget ever, 
highways and transportation. 
 
I’d like the members opposite to go through this budget 
document piece by piece and tell me which of these things do 
not support growth of the economy. And I’d be pleased to send 
this document across to the members opposite because I’d like 
them to check off which of these things they don’t think help 
the economy to grow. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what are their proposals? They propose to hide 
in the bushes and pop out occasionally. And when they pop out, 



June 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2219 

 

what do they do? It’s not even that they pop out and do 
anything helpful. They pop out and they do damage. 
 
We know. We have a letter here to the editor from one of the 
economic development folks in Regina that is chastising the 
opposition for creating doubt amongst customers and business 
owners. And everybody knows that this is a very negative thing 
to do. Now these people working on economic development 
will not be able to function because of these folks voting against 
the budget. 
 
We have the highest rate of American tourists visiting 
Saskatchewan in our history. The number of visitors from other 
States had been increasing. The total number of US (United 
States) visitors who stayed overnight or longer increased from 
200,000 in 1999 to 218,000 in the year 2000. Travellers spend 
1.16 billion in the province annually. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, with their little vote last night, they scuttled 
the funding for the Tourism Authority. We have a new Web site 
in Saskatoon to boost city tourism. Are these people locked in 
the past, complaining and whining and hiding in bushes? No, 
they’re getting on with creating a Web site to promote tourism. 
 
We have ethanol development going on in this province called a 
pot of gold at the end of the rainbow. And the continued 
development of ethanol depends on the budget that these folks 
saw fit to play games with last night. 
 
PAMI, the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute, received 
provincial support to build a road test . . . (inaudible) . . . and I 
don’t think PAMI’s very thrilled that the opposition have 
caused their funding to disappear through their antics last night. 
 
We have co-operatives working to support small rural 
businesses, and the vote that we had last night undermines the 
work of our rural co-operatives. 
 
We have an OSB (oriented strand board) mill that was 
announced, a $200 million partnership creating jobs in the 
Meadow Lake area. And I tell you the member from Meadow 
Lake is not pleased that these folks have stopped this 
development through their antics last night. 
 
And we have a centre for entrepreneur success that has 
celebrated an opening recently. And likewise, these 
entrepreneurial centres are not going to receive funding if the 
opposition continues pulling the kind of tricks they did last 
night. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s no need to sit on the sidelines or hide 
in the bushes. These guys could come out and play a 
meaningful role in Saskatchewan’s development. There’s a 
whole bunch of other people who are doing that — like some 
students I met in Gravelbourg last weekend, Mr. Speaker. I was 
at the perspiration awards. And the perspiration means you 
actually put a little effort behind what you’re doing. It’s not just 
all inspiration, it’s more perspiration. 
 
And these young people were very excited about the 
opportunities in rural Saskatchewan. At least half of the group 
of 17 already had businesses that were up and functioning, and 
these were high school students, Mr. Speaker. They were under 

the motivation and tutelage of one Monica Coneys, who’s a 
motivational speaker, but she calls Saskatchewan 
entrepreneurial heaven. And she says the only thing preventing 
anyone from being successful in Saskatchewan is the absence of 
the decision to do it and a can of paint. 
 
So she feels there’s no reason to sit on . . . and all these young 
people, by the way, at this conference agreed with her. And 
they’re doing a wonderful job on revitalizing main street, 
setting up restaurants, theatre, mini malls. But unlike the 
opposition, they’re working hard at what they’re doing — 
they’re not hiding in the bushes. 
 
And with my new department, Mr. Speaker, everywhere I go — 
whether it’s in the sports community, the cultural community, 
youth, recreation — everybody’s excited about the 
opportunities of the work that we can do together. 
 
And I’m just going to have to go back to my theme again, Mr. 
Speaker. The Sask Party creates problems and the New 
Democratic government solves problems. 
 
And I want to close, Mr. Speaker, by saying that I have absolute 
confidence in the government and I want to just quote our 
Minister of Finance here, the Hon. Minister of Finance: 
 

With this eighth consecutive balanced budget this 
government reaffirms its commitment to effective public 
service, lower taxes, a declining ratio of debt to GDP. This 
commitment will support continued growth in our economy 
and ensure a high quality of life for Saskatchewan people. 

 
That kind of sums it up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know my history, I know my present, and I know my future, 
Mr. Speaker, and I have absolute confidence that on this side of 
the House sits the group of people that are going to keep 
moving Saskatchewan forward. And I put my support on the 
side of confidence in the government. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was surprised 
after the vote last night and again some of the comments we 
have heard today suggesting that it is somehow the opposition’s 
fault that the government lost a vote last night. 
 
Well the government it seems can’t count people leaving — 
9,000 in the last year. They can’t count the job losses — 21,000 
in the last year. And now apparently they can’t count the 
number of members they have in the House. 
 
The NDP’s failure to develop the Saskatchewan economy and 
provide employment opportunities is resulting in an exodus of 
our people. Between 1992 and 2001 Saskatchewan suffered a 
net loss of roughly 50,000 people. These are the best of our 
young people and with them we are losing our future taxpayers. 
 
Canada West Foundation has forecast that another 42,000 
young people will leave the province within five years. If that 
sad prediction comes true, that would be a loss of 90,000 wage 



2220 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2001 

 

earners. 
 
In effect we are paying the cost of educating our brightest and 
best only to export them to other jurisdictions to fuel their 
economic growth and prosperity. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, 90,000 income earners in Saskatchewan, if we 
were to calculate an average income level of 45,000, would 
result in an annual taxable income to Saskatchewan of $4 
billion. And of course we would also have to calculate the 
demand for goods and services that that 90,000 consumers and 
income earners would bring to this province. 
 
The government tells us that the opposition is spreading gloom 
and doom. Well it is Statistics Canada and Canada West and 
trends west that is telling the story of failure. 
 
With a declining population of one million, we will become 
increasingly reliant on things other than economic growth on 
the federal government. And with our accumulated backlog of 
infrastructure repairs and upgrades to roads, water and sewer 
repairs, schools, and hospitals and universities, Saskatchewan 
simply will not be able to have a competitive tax level and have 
the services, the public services and the infrastructure that a 
modern society requires. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I wish to emphasize that it is not my 
agenda to defeat the government in order that the Saskatchewan 
Party can come into office. I realize that what went on last night 
is that we had a government trying to cling to office and we 
have an opposition which wants to take office. I wish, I wish to 
enforce changes on this government which will benefit the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
All members know that I have taken a strong position against 
the foreign investments by our Crown corporations. I believe 
our Crown corporations are fundamentally on the wrong path. 
They are on the wrong path when they attempt to buy up 
companies for the purpose of competing with private 
corporations in this province for the simple reason that when 
you use the public dollar to compete with private companies, 
first of all it is unfair, but secondly it does not create new jobs. 
It does not build the economy. A transfer of jobs from the 
private sector to the public sector is not net growth for this 
province. 
 
And certainly when we invest in companies in Nashville and in 
Chicago and in Chile and in Charlottetown and in Toronto, 
nothing is built for this province. And specifically . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I hear the hon. members saying 
about pork-barrelling. 
 
In the case of Government House in Battleford, we have the 
most historic building in Western Canada, which is in danger of 
being lost. Think of the tourism that would be built in this 
province if it was restored. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the restoration of 
Government House would do far more to build the economy of 
Saskatchewan than buying an insurance company in Toronto, or 
a Web site in Ottawa, or a music mix company in Nashville, 

and I forget what it is we’re buying in Atlanta. 
So this is called pork-barrelling. Well who are they 
pork-barrelling — my question, Mr. Speaker — who are they 
trying to pork-barrel when they buy a company in Toronto? 
Well they’ve protected 20 jobs in Toronto that apparently were 
at risk. Are they hoping that those people will be grateful 
enough to vote for them? I don’t know. 
 
So by my saying that the emphasis should be on building 
Saskatchewan and doing things in Saskatchewan, they say I’m 
pork-barrelling. Instead of, according to them, what we should 
be doing is buying companies outside of the province and 
creating employment outside of the province. 
 
Well the figures are in, Mr. Speaker. When we use our wealth 
to generate income outside the province and jobs outside the 
province, we end up with a net loss of 21,000 jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been shocked the last few weeks to see that 
Premier Klein has been in Washington and in New York to talk 
about the importance of the new pipeline from the far North 
coming through his province of Alberta. Now we know that 
there is likely to be a very major project on the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Pursuant to rule 19(8) it is 
incumbent on me to now put the question. 
 
The division bells rang from 16:50 until 17:00. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 28 
 
Calvert Addley Hagel 
Lautermilch Atkinson Melenchuk 
Cline Sonntag Goulet 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Wartman 
Thomson Prebble Belanger 
Crofford Axworthy Nilson 
Hamilton Junor Harper 
Jones Kasperski Trew 
Osika Lorjé Yates 
McCall   
 

Nays — 25 
 
Hermanson Julé Krawetz 
Draude Boyd Gantefoer 
Toth Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken McMorris 
D’Autremont Weekes Bjornerud 
Kwiatkowski Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
Hillson   
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, leave to move a 
motion with respect to sitting hours. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



June 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2221 

 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(4) of the Rules and Procedures 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan that when this 
Assembly adjourns on Thursday, June 28, 2001, it do stand 
adjourned until Tuesday, July 3, 2001 at 1:30. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:05. 
 
 
 


