















































Hansard: April 05, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 389 
 April 5, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon to 
present a petition on behalf of the good people of Frontier, 
Saskatchewan in the extreme southwest part of my 
constituency. And the petition has as its main focus their 
concerns regarding the implications of the EMS (emergency 
medical services) report and recommendations contained within 
it. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of people in the Humboldt 
constituency who are concerned about the loss of their 
community-based ambulance services. And the petition reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of St. Benedict and Cudworth. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today also 
with a petition from citizens who are concerned about the EMS 
report. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Naicam. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with proposed 
weight restrictions to Highway 43. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the economic harm its plan to close Highway 43 
to heavy traffic will do to south-central Saskatchewan and 
instead devote necessary funds to upgrade Highway 43 in 
order to preserve jobs and economic development in the 
area. 

 
And the petition is signed by individuals from the community 
of Glenbain. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people in Swift Current and across Saskatchewan concerned 
about the regional hospital in Swift Current. 
 
And the prayer on the petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new regional hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, today these petitions are signed by residents 
of Swift Current, Val Marie, Lumsden, Moose Jaw, Hodgeville, 
Morse, Kyle, and Shaunavon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 
concerned about their ambulance service. And the petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 

And this is signed by residents of Gladmar, Radville, and 
Minton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I again rise 
with a petition from concerned citizens in southern 
Saskatchewan with reference to the cuts at Assiniboia Pioneer 
Lodge. 
 
And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



390 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2001 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from quite a wide 
area of southern Saskatchewan including Assiniboia, Mazenod, 
Killdeer, Limerick, Wood Mountain. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province petitioning the 
Assembly on the matters of: 
 

The centralization of ambulance services; 
 
A request for a new hospital in Swift Current; 
 
Reversion of highways to gravel; 
 
And the level of services at the Pioneer Lodge in 
Assiniboia. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Special Committee on Tobacco Control 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Kowalsky, Chair of the 
committee, presents the final report of the Special Committee 
on Tobacco Control, which is hereby tabled. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
pleasure that I take this opportunity to present the final report of 
the Tobacco Control Committee. It was a tremendous 
experience to work on this committee, a committee that was 
composed of members both of government and opposition. The 
work that was done on this committee — I think the 
commitment of all the members who were involved was very 
high. 
 
And I also want to say, as we’re tabling this report, the response 
from the community, the community groups, was absolutely 
tremendous. From the health district boards; from the 
coalitions; from the SWAT (Students Working Against 
Tobacco); from the restaurateurs and hoteliers; from the 
hospitality organizations — tremendous commitment. We had 
some people, Mr. Speaker, as you well know who were with us 
almost through the entire course of the hearings; listening, 
making notes, trying to give their best response to the issues. 
 
I think many of us were moved to a deeper understanding of the 
harmful effects of tobacco. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that I found very 
impressive about working on this committee was that, though 
we have many differing opinions, that with one small exception, 
this was a unanimous report. And it took a lot of hard work, it 
took struggling, it took giving some things. But I was very 
impressed with the work of all committee members and with, if 
I may, the Speaker’s chairmanship of this committee. 
 

It was a good experience and it is my hope that, down the road, 
we will have very good legislation that will help us to deal with 
this devastating problem of tobacco use and the illness and the 
pain and suffering it causes. 
 
So with those words, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move this . . . 
I move, seconded by the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow: 
 

The final report of the Special Committee on Tobacco 
Control be now concurred in. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
just like to take a few moments to explain why the committee 
members on this side of the Assembly included the reservation 
in this report. 
 
While we all realize the effects of smoking and second-hand 
smoke, we believe the restaurant and bar owners have some 
very legitimate concerns. We had contact with many in the 
hospitality industry and they stated that this specific clause is a 
financial impossibility for them. In fact, it would force them to 
close their doors. Many also expressed that they are having an 
extremely difficult time keeping their doors open now with the 
increased energy and high . . . other high operating costs. 
 
Those from smaller communities said that they have already 
lost their grain elevators and if this particular recommendation 
is acted upon, they would close their doors and the town would 
become a ghost town. 
 
In the larger centres of Regina and Saskatoon, some also 
expressed grave concerns. Many stated that if the local people 
overwhelmingly supported a smoke-free establishment, they 
would make it that. But this would be because it makes good 
business sense to do so, not because it was dictated to them. 
 
Certainly for those restaurants and bar owners who may be 
looking at renovations or updates, we encourage them to take 
the report’s recommendation into consideration if it is feasible 
and affordable. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the members from Saltcoats 
and Weyburn-Big Muddy, I would like to thank the member 
from Prince Albert Carlton who chaired the committee; the 
members from Saskatoon Wakamow, Regina Qu’Appelle . . . or 
pardon me, Moose Jaw Wakamow, Regina Qu'Appelle, and 
Saskatoon Sutherland for their time and dedication to this 
committee; as well as a thank you to all the presenters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would also be remiss of me if I did not thank the 
Clerks and the legislative staff for all their hard work and 
commitment to this very worthwhile project. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 18 ask the government the 



April 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 391 

 

following question: 
 

To the Minister of Social Services: what is the total amount 
of dollars that the Department of Social Services has put 
into the Head Start program to date? 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 18 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Sask Water: how much 
municipal and school taxes does Sask. Valley Potato 
Corporation pay on their potato storage facilities to the RM 
of Rudy and to the town of Broderick; were there any 
grants in lieu of taxes paid and what is that amount? 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 18 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what is the complete 
methodology used in the gambling problem prevalent 
survey being conducted for the provincial government; how 
does this telephone survey differ from other telephone 
surveys conducted for the provincial government on a 
regular basis on a variety of issues by marketing research 
firms in terms of methodology, analysis and cost; what is 
the complete breakdown of cost to the provincial 
government relating to this survey? 
 

Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 18 ask the government the following question: 
 

What was the Department of Health’s definition of the 
following terms as they were applied and used within the 
health care system in 1993: acute care; long-term care; 
respite care; home care; health facility; hospital; urgent; 
and emergent? 
 

And while I’m on my feet I have a second question, Mr. 
Speaker. I give notice that I shall on day no. 18 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

What is the Department of Health’s definition of the 
following terms as they are applied and used within the 
current health care system: acute care; long-term care; 
respite care; home care; health facility; hospital; urgent; 
and emergent? 
 

I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 18 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how many forms have been 
received under the Saskatchewan farmland property tax 
rebate program to date; and of those forms received how 
many have been processed and how much has been paid 
out? 

 

(13:45) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, I 
would first of all like to introduce eight special guests of the 
legislature. They are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They’re 
eight legislative interns, young people from the Ontario 
legislative internship program. It’s of special interest to us of 
course because this legislature is in the process of developing 
our own internship program. 
 
The Ontario program hires recent university graduates to intern 
with members of the Ontario legislature. Each intern spends 
half of their internship working for a government member and 
half working for an opposition member. 
 
They are here to experience political life in our province and are 
meeting with a number of members of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
I ask them to rise one by one as I call their name. They are: 
Amy Dickieson, Ted Flett, Rebecca Gosevitz, Tyler Langlois, 
Michelle MacDonald, Daniel Malik, Nanda Purandare, and 
Rachel Sheer. 
 
I ask all members to welcome them to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would 
like to welcome our eight visitors from Ontario. These political 
science graduates are here to observe and hopefully learn from 
the proceedings here in our legislature. But we think it’s a good 
place to come because I think the opposition would agree that 
this is one of the most exciting legislatures in Canada. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will have the pleasure of meeting with our 
guests later this afternoon. And as Minister for Culture, Youth 
and Recreation, I am looking forward to getting their 
perspectives on the challenges they foresee for their generation. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition, I too would like to welcome the interns 
from Ontario to our legislature. We had the opportunity this 
morning to meet with them and they are indeed very astute in 
their questioning. They will make good politicians some day. 
 
And we would like to welcome them here and hope that 
everyone would join us in doing so, and that they enjoy their 
visit to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
introduce to you and through you to the other members of the 
Assembly a visitor from the province of Manitoba, seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have with us today 
Mr. Lloyd Schreyer. He’s secretary to the compensation 



392 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2001 

 

committee of treasury board for the province of Manitoba. 
 
This committee of cabinet in Manitoba is similar to our own 
cabinet committee on public sector compensation. And Mr. 
Schreyer holds a position similar to the one we call executive 
director of the personnel policy secretariat. 
 
Mr. Schreyer is in Saskatchewan this week to observe the 
operations of Saskatchewan’s human resources compensation 
development processes. I would ask all members to join me in 
extending a warm welcome to Mr. Schreyer and to wish him 
well in his visit here. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the House my constituency assistant, Shelley McCrea, who 
having only been with my office for 10 months, this afternoon 
will have her first opportunity to view the proceedings today in 
their entirety, and I trust that she will enjoy them. 
 
Shelley has a business operations degree from DeVry in 
Calgary. Her and her husband Al McCrea farm in the Carrot 
River area. They have two sons, Brycen is three years and 
Cameron, 16 months, and I would ask everyone to join me in 
welcoming Shelley today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the legislature, seven 
members of the nursing profession who are here today. 
 
The first person — and I’d ask them to stand as I introduce 
them — is Carla Bolen, who is the president of the Registered 
Psychiatric Nurses Association of Saskatchewan and she’s a 
member of the working group on magnet environments; Cindy 
Smith, who is a nursing manager at the Regina Health District 
and a member of the working group on casualization; Lisa 
Horning, who is involved with human resources at the Regina 
Health District and a member of the working group on 
casualization; Susan Smith-Brazill, acting director of policy and 
communications with the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association; Pat Stewart, an employment relations officer for 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses — she’s attending today, as all 
elected SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) representatives 
are in their annual general meeting — and she is a member of 
the preceptorship working group; and Mary MacDonald who is 
from the College of Nursing, the University of Saskatchewan. 
She’s is a member of the preceptorship working group. And 
they’re all accompanied by Marlene Smadu from the 
Department of Health who is the principal nursing adviser. 
 
Welcome to all of you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
through you to the members, I would like to join with the 
minister and in welcoming the various representatives of the 

nursing profession, and to congratulate them on the important 
work they’re doing on the projects as a result of the Nursing 
Council’s initiatives. 
 
Certainly your work is very much appreciated. Your profession 
is undergoing a great deal of stress, and we appreciate your 
commitment and dedication to it. Thanks, and welcome here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to my 
legislative colleagues, 28 grade 5 students seated in the west 
gallery. They’re from Ruth M. Buck School, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s always a pleasure to have students from Ruth Buck. That 
school just celebrated its 25th anniversary this past fall and I 
was out there for some of the activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. 
Friesen, Mrs. Lusick, and Mr. Weir; and parent volunteers Mrs. 
Rasmussen, Mrs. Larson, and Mrs. Hughs. And I’m looking 
forward to meeting with the group a little later this afternoon. 
 
Please join me, Mr. Speaker, and colleagues, in welcoming 
these grade 5 students from my constituency. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
Assembly, Mr. Lloyd Petersen of Hodgeville. Mr. Petersen is a 
councillor in the RM (rural municipality) of Glen Bain and a 
very successful farmer south of Hodgeville. Mr. Petersen is one 
of the councillors in that area that is very concerned with the 
economic damage that lowering weight restrictions on Highway 
43 will cause in their area. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the House, 
in addition to the representatives of the nursing profession that 
the Minister of Health has already introduced, representatives of 
people that are concerned about tobacco and wanted to be here 
while we tabled the Tobacco Committee report. 
 
Some of the individuals are the Canadian Cancer Society, 
Saskatchewan Division; Health Canada; the Regina Health 
District; Regina Heart Healthy Partners; Saskatchewan Lung 
Association; and the Canadian Institute of Public Health 
Inspectors, Saskatchewan Branch; and in particular SWAT — 
Students Working Against Tobacco, and in particular Shane 
Peters and Elisha Kapell. 
 
We’ve met a whole bunch of new friends in the last year while 
we toured the province. So would all members please welcome 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce through you to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, someone that I’ve had the pleasure of introducing a 



April 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 393 

 

number of times over the years and needs no introduction. But 
that never stops us before and it won’t stop me today from 
asking members to join me in welcoming John MacLeod who’s 
with the Saskatchewan Building Trades Association. I ask all 
members to join me in giving John MacLeod a welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I would love to introduce to you 
and through you to members of this Assembly a former 
constituent but still a very good friend from Moose Jaw, Mr. 
Lorne Hill, sitting in your west gallery. 
 
When Lorne left Moose Jaw — and I have to inform people, not 
to move west but to move into northern Saskatchewan to pursue 
opportunities there — he was sorely missed in Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. But it’s very nice to see you here today and 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Municipal Revenue Sharing Grants 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party continues to receive letter after letter from 
cities, towns, villages, and RMs opposed to the government’s 
plan to freeze municipal revenue sharing grants and drive 
property taxes up again. 
 
In fact since the minister of Municipal Government sent his 
letter out yesterday to municipalities defending the NDP’s 
(New Democratic Party) plan to grow the size of government 
instead of providing property tax relief to municipalities, the 
Saskatchewan Party has received another 50 letters of support. 
We certainly appreciate the free advertising, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At the same time as the Minister of Municipal Affairs tells 
municipalities to keep doing more with less, the provincial 
government does just the opposite and continues to grow larger 
and more expensive. 
 
Just a few examples, Mr. Speaker, of letters of support we’re 
getting. From the town of Canora, and I quote: 
 

Over the years, urban municipalities have borne more than 
their fair share of pain to help eliminate provincial deficits. 
It’s time for some relief. 
 

From the mayor of Yorkton, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I, like several of my fellow City Mayors, was very 
disappointed to learn that we’re not even recognized in last 
week’s budget. 

 
And from the RM of Lake Alma: 
 

. . . it becomes more difficult to operate without increasing 
more tax to rural Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter — large cities, small town, or 
rural municipality — all are asking for this government and this 

minister to recognize that the last thing this province needs is 
the province-wide property tax increase courtesy of the NDP 
and Liberals. 
 
I table these letters, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members, during members’ statements, I do 
believe that the public and certainly the visiting gallery would 
like to hear what you’re saying. I would ask that members do 
cheering and they do continue with their heckling, but they 
distinguish that from braying and yelling. 
 

Royal Bank Bullish on Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan regarding the budget, Mr. Speaker. We knew our 
budget was strong, Mr. Speaker, and now the Royal Bank and 
the Toronto Dominion Bank are proving us right. 
 
The Royal Bank has forecast a 3 per cent economic growth rate 
this year and next, buoyed by the energy and livestock sectors. 
The TD’s (Toronto Dominion) forecasted growth rate was 
similar at 2.5 per cent growth in 2001, and 3.1 per cent in 2002. 
 
Saskatchewan’s energy sector will fuel the GDP (gross 
domestic product) growth of two and a half per cent this year, 
outpacing the national average of only 2.2 per cent. As well, 
Mr. Speaker, only two provinces will outperform 
Saskatchewan’s growth rate over the 2001-2002 period. 
 
For many industries it’s going to be a very hard year, Mr. 
Speaker, due to the effects from the US (United States) 
economic slowdown, but with our fiscally sound, accountable 
budget, this stress on these industries will be alleviated. 
 
I’m proud of this budget, Mr. Speaker, and apparently so are the 
banks. Our government is on the path to a prosperous future, 
Mr. Speaker, but we will not be satisfied until we reach our 
destination. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to Constable Jocelyn Schriemer 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to rise today to tell all members of the Legislative 
Assembly about an outstanding police officer in Saskatoon, Ms. 
Jocelyn Schriemer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Constable Schriemer has just received the 
Educator of Distinction Award from the Saskatoon Preschool 
Foundation. She currently works in core neighbourhood 
community schools as a school liaison officer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1999, working in partnership with Westmount 
Community Association, Constable Schriemer initiated, 
coordinated, and formed the absentee assessment team 
wraparound project — a collaborative, community-based, 
interagency project. The success of the collaborative approach 



394 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2001 

 

has attracted provincial attention and serves as a model for other 
communities and for the province. 
 
Constable Schriemer has devoted countless volunteer hours 
writing proposals to secure funding for this project. She is an 
advocate for children, and has spoken to a variety of 
foundations, service organizations, and school divisions to 
address the issues of children that are sexually exploited. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jocelyn is truly deserving of this distinguished 
honour. She is an educator, teaching others about families and 
children; she lives by the philosophy: it takes a community to 
raise a child. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of the Assembly join me in 
congratulating Constable Schriemer on all of her hard work and 
her dedication to the children of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 

Unity Team Wins Hockey Championship 
 

Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Unity Midget 
Laser hockey team has just won the Provincial A 
Championship. They, in their first round, played against 
Spiritwood; in Meadow Lake in the second series; the 
semifinals were against Shellbrook; and in the final series they 
defeated Watson. 
 
I’d like to congratulate the coach, Stan Weber; the assistant 
coach, Kevin Cey; the manager, Larry Wagner. These young 
hockey players were from Unity, Macklin, Wilkie, Denzil, and 
Maidstone, and I’d like to congratulate them all. Thank you. 
 

Provincial Environmental Initiatives 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to have the opportunity today to highlight 
some important environmental initiatives in this provincial 
budget. 
 
The one I’m most excited about is our decision to move forward 
on wind power. Our government will purchase a minimum of 
10 gigawatt hours of wind power from Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation for each of the next 10 years. This will allow 
SaskPower to proceed with construction of 10 wind-generating 
turbines. A tender process is underway, Mr. Speaker, and we 
are rolling forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s an extra $1 million for forest industry 
environmental sustainability. This takes the total budget for that 
item up to $1.7 million. This will ensure proper monitoring and 
compliance with our new forestry Act, and will let us expand 
forest ecosystem classification work. It will also put the staff on 
the ground to work with all users of the forest on land use 
planning. 
 
Our government has recently created a 1 kilometre special 
management zone around Dore and Smoothstone lakes area and 
it’ll put the staff in place to manage that as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 

There is $1.2 million of new funding to improve monitoring and 
compliance with respect to safe drinking water, and $2 million 
for an environmental cleanup campaign. That’s a pretty nice 
environmental package, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Eston Hockey Team Wins Bantam Championship 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
offer congratulation to the Eston Bantam Hurricanes on 
winning the SHA (Saskatchewan Hockey Association) Bantam 
B Girls Provincial Championship recently. They defeated rep 
teams from Swift Current, Regina, Saskatoon on their way to 
the championship. 
 
The team is coached by Perry Robinson and managed by Larry 
Thome. I would ask all members to join with me with in 
congratulating the Eston Bantam Hurricane Girls Bantam B 
championship team. 
 

International Special Librarians’ Day 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, every 
session at this time we take 90 seconds to recognize the 
absolutely invaluable year-round work of a group of very 
special people. So special in fact that the word is incorporated 
into their title. 
 
April 5 is International Special Librarians’ Day, the 10th year 
this day has been celebrated as part of National Library Week. 
 
Special librarians, I remind you, Mr. Speaker, are those who 
work in libraries providing services to specific professions — 
medical libraries, science libraries, in our case, the Legislative 
Library. 
 
Their theme this year is “A world of information within your 
reach.” And that is exactly what our friends at our Legislative 
Library provide us — accurate information almost immediately, 
Mr. Speaker. Although they are special librarians, they are in 
the best sense of the word, generalists. They can find 
information on any subject under the dome, and they do it 
cheerfully. 
 
Yesterday I needed information on Hollywood — never mind 
why, Mr. Speaker. The week before on World War II, 
Saskatchewan MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly). 
Before that, on the 18th century British lexicographer, Samuel 
Johnson. And I got it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Marian Powell and her staff in the building here 
— Tim, Joelle, Michele, Jane, Leslie, Maria, and Kim — make 
our life easier, our work more productive, our time more 
efficient, and our information more accurate. They are also 
without exception a pleasant group to be around and I wish 
them the best on their day and throughout the year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Spirit of Community Partnership Award 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Several times this 



April 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

 

session members on this side of the House have commented on 
the contributions our Crown corporations make to community 
life in Saskatchewan. Yesterday it was SaskPower, the day 
before, SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), making life 
better by being good corporate citizens. 
 
It’s interesting I think, Mr. Speaker, that we seldom read about 
Sprint Canada making a gift to rural schools. And I don’t 
remember ever hearing of Rogers AT&T sponsoring a group of 
school kids on a field trip. We do hear about them wanting our 
business as urban citizens, but nothing about them giving 
anything in return. 
 
I am proud to report then that SaskEnergy and the United Way 
of Regina have recently been recognized by the Canadian 
Centre for Philanthropy for their combined efforts in the Share 
the Warmth sweater recycling campaign. 
 
The award called the New Spirit of Community Partnership 
Award is given to celebrate, and I quote: 
 

Corporate social responsibility alliances between Canadian 
businesses and charities that are making a difference in the 
community. 
 

Since 1994, Mr. Speaker, over 300,000 sweaters and other 
items of warm clothing have been collected and distributed by 
SaskEnergy volunteers working with United Way. 
 
President Clark, of SaskEnergy, said it is appropriate that this 
award be given on the International Year of the Volunteer. 
 
I would like to congratulate SaskEnergy and their employees, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Population Decline in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more evidence that the NDP is driving people out 
of Saskatchewan. Disturbing new figures from StatsCanada 
show that Saskatchewan’s population dropped by over 4,100 
people last year. In fact, the year 2000 was the worst year for 
population loss in Saskatchewan since 1990. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
a direct result of the NDP’s failure to create a positive economic 
climate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question for the Premier is straightforward. 
Why? Why is this happening? Everyday in the House we watch 
the NDP pat themselves on the back and spin tales of what a 
great job they’re doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP is doing such a great job, then why are 
more and more people leaving this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to say that we certainly recognize that in this 
province there are fluctuations in terms of migration — 
in-migration, out-migration. I want to say and I want to share 
with members opposite a little history of this province. Our 
population has increased in the past 10 years by more than 
20,000 people. And I want to compare that, Mr. Speaker, to the 
depopulation in ’87 to ’91 of 30,000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what are we doing the member opposite 
asks. I’ll tell him what we’re doing. We’re balancing our 
budgets; we’re introducing personal tax reduction; we’re 
introducing small-business tax relief — 25 per cent this year; 
we’re introducing tax credits for individuals who invest in 
mineral exploration; and, Mr. Speaker, all the time we’re 
spending more money on health and education. And that’s good 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I would say to the minister 
that our population is not fluctuating, it’s dropping at a steeper 
and steeper curve, Mr. Speaker. And you know what, Mr. 
Speaker? Do you know where Saskatchewan stacks up against 
other provinces? Saskatchewan is dead last. How humiliating. 
 
Saskatchewan’s population fell by over 4,100 people in the last 
year. That is the worst population loss of any province in 
Canada. 
 
In fact 8 out of 10 provinces in Canada saw their population 
grow. Alberta grew by nearly 50,000 people. Manitoba grew by 
nearly 4,200 people. Meanwhile, Saskatchewan’s population 
dropped by nearly 4,200 people. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
thanks to this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this happening? Why is the NDP driving so 
many people out of our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. In case the member opposite has forgot, Mr. Speaker, 
let me describe some of the employment statistics that have 
happened in this province. 
 
But I want to begin again by reminding this member that in the 
last 10 years our population has increased by 20,000. 
 
I want to say that he knows full well that the job loss in 
agriculture has been 10,400 jobs last year. But he also knows 
that we’ve increased non-ag employment by some 5,400 jobs. 
Now no one will deny that we’ve got an agricultural community 
that’s in trouble and no one can deny that there are changes that 
are happening in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, this province is more than just 
about numbers. This province and this economy is about 
attitude and it’s about job creation and it’s about hard-working 
people. And it’s about a strong economy with growth year over 
year over year. That’s what this is about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



396 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2001 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yes, we have an agricultural economy, but so does Prince 
Edward Island. They’ve got a potato disaster. Even Prince 
Edward Island’s population is growing, while ours goes down. 
 
The bottom line is that the NDP is driving more and more 
people out of the province. Saskatchewan suffered a net 
interprovincial out-migration last year of over 8,400 people — 
8,400 more people moved out of Saskatchewan than moved into 
our province. That’s an entire small city in our province that 
simply packed up and left. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we realize that not every person born in 
Saskatchewan is going to stay here. But if government is doing 
its job, there will be more people moving into Saskatchewan 
than there will be people moving out of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — It’s very clear that the NDP government is 
failing — 8,400 more people moved out than moved in. That’s 
a direct result of their economic policies. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP is doing such a great job 
of building this province as they would lead us to believe, why 
did 8,400 people leave the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that a very big part of growing this province 
and growing this economy is about Saskatchewan pride. And I 
want to say that members of this side of the House have a lot of 
pride in our businesses. We have a lot of pride in the working 
people of this province who are creating more jobs year over 
year over year. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that member consistently talks 
about young people leaving this province in spite of the fact that 
the numbers are right there in front of his face — 90 per cent of 
the people that graduate from SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) campuses in this province get 
jobs right here in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Instead, Mr. Speaker, of spewing 
gloom and doom, why don’t they get onside with the business 
community, with the working men and women of this province, 
and with the government of this province who see some very 
positive signs that our economy is growing? Our economy will 
grow in spite of the rhetoric that they spew every day, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I would say to the NDP, I’m proud of this province too 
and that’s why those numbers are unacceptable to us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, these are not just Statistics 

Canada numbers; these are real people. These are our kids. 
These are our neighbours. And more and more of these real 
people are leaving Saskatchewan and they’re taking their 
families, their hopes, and their dreams out of our province. And, 
Mr. Speaker, that is a real tragedy. 
 
What’s the NDP doing about it? Well, Mr. Speaker, absolutely 
nothing. These are also real taxpayers and their leaving means 
that our tax base is getting smaller and smaller. Yes, this is a 
recipe for disaster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has laid out a clear plan to grow the 
government. Where is their plan to grow the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want members of 
this House to know how happy I am to answer that question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this member stands in his place and talks about his 
compassion for families, both urban and rural, and just short 
days ago he refers to the 10,000 people who work in this 
government as skunks and deadwood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to say — I wouldn’t say it — but 
something smells and it ain’t coming from this side of the 
House; it’s from over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 

Ainsworth Lumber 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, Ainsworth Lumber is leaving 
Saskatchewan because it’s just too difficult to do business with 
this NDP government. Now it turns out the problem isn’t just 
NDP’s anti-business attitude. According to Ainsworth Lumber, 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP led them to believe the cost of providing 
power to their new sawmill would be covered. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in today’s newspaper SaskPower spokesman 
Larry Christie says that’s exactly what happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Economic and Co-operative 
Development admit the NDP gave inaccurate information to 
Ainsworth Lumber by promising to Ainsworth that there would 
be no extra cost for a power line into the new sawmill before 
the 1999 election and then broke their promise by sending 
Ainsworth a bill for $3 million after the election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I will say to the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers that there has been no 
promise broken. When an infrastructure is being planned and 
there are upgrades that are required, would that member expect 
SaskPower to absorb the cost of building infrastructure? Of 
course he wouldn’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a matter of doing an analysis of what the cost of roads, what 
the cost of electricity is. You develop an amortization plan to 



April 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 397 

 

pay the cost of the infrastructure. And you negotiate an 
agreement whether it’s Ainsworth or whether it’s Weyerhaeuser 
or whether it’s Toco or whether it’s Big River sawmill. That’s 
how it’s done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that member is a little sour because of the dozens 
of jobs in his constituency that have been created as a result of 
this government and a proactive and a pro-business forestry 
policy. That’s what he’s sour about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, as usual the minister doesn’t 
appear to understand the question. 
 
We’re not asking whether the NDP misled Ainsworth before the 
election. We’re not doing that. SaskPower’s already admitted 
that’s exactly what happened. Mr. Speaker, we’re asking the 
minister why the NDP promised Ainsworth Lumber one thing 
before the election and then reneged on their promise after the 
election. 
 
Now Ainsworth Lumber is pulling out of Saskatchewan. No 
new sawmill. No new $200 million investment. No new jobs for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Economic Development admit 
the NDP’s 1999 election promise of 25,000 new forestry jobs 
was as phoney as the broken NDP promise that is chasing 
Ainsworth Lumber right out of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
help that member with his memory. I think the figure was 
10,000 jobs to be created in forestry over a period of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having said that, I want to say it is unfortunate that 
Ainsworth has decided to withdraw from these ventures. And I 
think the province had a good working relationship with both 
Ainsworth and Peter Ballantyne. 
 
But I want to remind the member — and the member knows 
that Ainsworth has sold off properties in British Columbia — 
and I want to tell that member that in February 2001 
correspondence Ainsworth cited weak financial markets as a 
reason for withdrawing from the project in the Green Lake area. 
 
In the same correspondence, Mr. Speaker, Ainsworth stated 
their desire to remain involved in Saskatchewan forest 
developments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is going to be creating those 
forestry jobs in spite of the fact that these people are trying to 
create a negative, a negative business climate and a negative 
attitude about this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday the Minister of 
Labour said the Workers’ Compensation Board was at arm’s 

length from the government. 
 
Yet yesterday he admitted that he made one phone call to the 
board and the $7,000 farewell party planned for the former 
chairperson of the board was suddenly cancelled. But the fact of 
the matter is that the WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) 
was planning to spend $7,000 on this party. 
 
Businesses who fund the WCB are wondering what is going on 
over there. They are firing top managers, spending thousands on 
a farewell party, the former chairperson left with a golden 
handshake, and the WCB is refusing to explain anything. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, will he explain to Saskatchewan 
businesses and workers why the WCB is refusing to be 
accountable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, a luncheon that is . . . that 
closes offices at the Compensation Board solely for a farewell 
is wrong. I communicated that with the board not once, but 
twice yesterday, and that luncheon is not going to happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) radio spoke to the WCB’s communications 
director yesterday and she says the $7,000 farewell party will 
still be going ahead, just not at this time. She says, and I quote: 
 

It would attract attention that was inappropriate for the 
event, so we’ve chosen just to not hold it at this time. 

 
She also said she doubts most business owners will have a 
problem with giving the Board’s Chair a proper goodbye. 
 
We disagree, Mr. Speaker. Businesses certainly do not think 
their premiums should go to pay for a party for the former 
chairperson. And this message directly contradicts the 
minister’s statements yesterday, that holding this party during 
office hours was inappropriate. 
 
Does the minister have any control over there at all? Mr. 
Speaker, why is the WCB not only ignoring their stakeholders 
but also the minister who is directly responsible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the minister didn’t 
hear the answer I just gave respecting the lunch. The answer for 
the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, is that the luncheon that 
closes the Workers’ Compensation Board is inappropriate. I 
communicated that, not once but twice, with members of the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. The dinner is cancelled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Chronic Wasting Disease 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is speculation today that a mule deer in the 
wild has tested positive for chronic wasting disease — a disease 



398 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2001 

 

that the domestic elk industry in this province has been dealing 
with. I understand one test on this animal in Saskatoon has been 
positive but other tests out-of-province are being conducted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the minister received the results of these 
out-of-province tests? And what steps will his department take, 
and be taking, to control this disease in our wild cervid 
population if these tests are confirmed positive? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can confirm 
to the Assembly that just moments ago we received final 
confirmation from the labs examining this particular matter and 
we do in fact have a confirmed case of chronic wasting disease 
in the wild in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ll be making a statement to the media at 3 o’clock today to 
provide additional details. And information on CWD (chronic 
wasting disease) and our action plan will also be provided to all 
members of the Assembly at 3 o’clock on this very important 
issue. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the media is quoting the former NDP minister of Environment, 
Lorne Scott, as saying that: 
 

. . . any case of CWD in a wild animal would potentially be 
a “severe blow” to the province’s big-game industry. 

 
He also said, and I quote: 
 

There would be virtually no chance of eradicating it if it’s 
in the wild. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we are concerned about these comments. 
 
To the minister: what is SERM’s (Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management) official position on the effect this 
disease will have on the province’s cervid population and the 
domestic game-farm industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course it’s 
a very serious matter. And SERM has taken a very proactive 
position on this particular challenge that we all face as a 
province. 
 
What I want to point out is that SERM undertook a number of 
tests over a number of years and the exact heads, roughly over a 
thousand heads of some of the deer that the hunters collected 
over the years have been examined. We still have a number of 
heads that we also have to examine. And of the thousand-plus 
heads that have been examined so far, one came back positive. 
 
And we want to make sure that we see the extent of the 
infection, if it is great — and we’re certainly hoping that it’s not 
— but in the event that there are other positive tests, we’re 
going to be very proactive because this is a very serious matter. 
And we’re asking all the people out there, from the Wildlife 

Federation to hunters and to the SERM folks, to work very, 
very closely together to make sure we face this challenge 
together as a province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Investment Corporations’ Investments 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, since session began, I have 
been asking the government whether, as stated, the government 
has plans to invest $500 million — $100 million a year, that’s 
half a billion dollars — in out-of-province investments through 
our Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Minister of Crown Investments refuses to 
answer that question. Departmental officials say we don’t have 
nearly half a billion invested out of the province at present. 
What the plans are, they will say nothing. 
 
Last week, the budget revealed that the Crown debt is scheduled 
to rise by 300 million in what is described as the medium term. 
Where is that 300 million? What is it going for? Is it going to 
drive private businesses . . . compete with private businesses in 
this province and drive them out of the province or is it going to 
be invested around the globe? Why the 300 million in increased 
debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well contrary 
to what the member said last week, that we had plans to invest 
$500 million in foreign investments by the Crown corporations, 
there are no plans to do that whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Right now, as I reported . . . And the member says I didn’t 
answer the question. Right now, as I reported publicly, we have 
invested $20 million in total outside of Saskatchewan, that 
includes investments in Canada which others have described as 
foreign investments, but that’s outside of Saskatchewan 
boundaries. 
 
I’ve always said, Mr. Speaker, and our government holds this 
position, that the Crown Investments Corporation and our 
utilities need to remain strong and viable and in an environment 
that is deregulated. Clearly we will have to earn revenues 
outside of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, last week we saw a clear 
repudiation by this government of the Romanow legacy. 
Premier Romanow tried to get this province out of debt after the 
Devine debacle. Now this government says Crown debt, the 
debt of this province, will rise by $300 million. 
 
The minister won’t tell us why $300 million in increased debt, 
that’s all . . . (inaudible) . . . in the budget. No explanation. This 
is a repudiation of Premier Romanow’s legacy who tried to get 
us out of debt, now they’re going to get us back in. Where is the 
money going? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want 
to say to the member opposite and to the House, Mr. Speaker, 
that what this budget does is build on the legacy of Premier 
Romanow. 



April 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That legacy, Mr. Speaker, was to leave this 
province in good financial shape. And that legacy enables us, in 
this budget, Mr. Speaker, to fix the roads. The people of 
Saskatchewan will want to know whether that member and the 
opposition are in favour of that. I think they’re against it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the budget will mean that we’ll invest in education, Mr. 
Speaker. And the people of Saskatchewan want to know 
whether that opposition and that member are in favour of 
investing in education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we say, Mr. Speaker, that people are in favour of fixing the 
roads; the people are in favour of investing in education. These 
people are not. And in the next election, Mr. Speaker, these 
people will find out that the people support this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Conversion of Roads to Gravel 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 
hon. member for Cumberland for his concern for my health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many rural residents are apprehensive about 
government plans for parallel haul routes, and turning surface 
highways back into gravel. My own hometown of Briercrest is 
on Highway 339, which is one of the roads mentioned for 
conversion to gravel. The idea to turn pavement into gravel 
could appropriately be known as the Saskatchewan 
highways-in-transition program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Highways has told us how many 
kilometres of thin membrane surface will be upgraded. Will she 
now tell us how many kilometres will be downgraded to gravel? 
How many kilometres will be turned into parallel haul routes? 
How many kilometres will be turned back to gravel? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, 
obviously the member wasn’t paying attention to the budget 
that was delivered last Friday, where we announced record 
spending in Highways and Transportation. And in this year, Mr. 
Speaker, we are going to upgrade, resurface, and twin over 900 
kilometres of highways in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we have a tremendous 
increase in our Highways spending budget, and in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to be fixing roads, rural roads, all across 
Saskatchewan this spring and summer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I find so absolutely absurd, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
are increasing the numbers of highways workers for the 
Department of Highways — which is supported, by the way, by 
mayors in this province — and what does the opposition do? 
They want us to cancel those 88 positions, and they don’t 
support fixing the roads in this province. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investor Confidence in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, the former premier, Roy 
Romanow, used a figure of 25,000 new forestry jobs when 
talking about expansion of the forest industry in Saskatchewan. 
A $200 million investment has already been lost from 
Ainsworth Lumber. The private sector see this lost opportunity 
as a clear signal, Mr. Speaker, that private investment is not 
welcome in Saskatchewan. This NDP government clearly has 
no vision for Saskatchewan jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier clearly tell us what has gone 
wrong with investor confidence in this NDP-governed 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, nothing has gone 
wrong with investor confidence with this province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to explain to the member opposite why I say 
that. 
 
This is the only province in Canada that’s building sawmills 
and expanding. This is the only province where the industry has 
doubled since 1999. And I want to give him some examples: the 
Wapawekka sawmill recently completed; the Big River 
sawmill; the OSB (oriented strand board) Hudson Bay plant — 
the largest mill in Canada that just came on-line in November; 
the Prince Albert tree nursery has grown from two and a half 
million trees to 15 million trees annually — that’s in his riding, 
Mr. Speaker; a $1 million treatment plant for fence posts in 
Glaslyn was constructed in 1999; Zelensky La Ronge mill has 
doubled in size in the partnership and they’re now into tree 
planting. 
 
We’re in the midst of $800 million expansion, Mr. Speaker, and 
in spite of them, we’re going to make it happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Funding for New Initiatives in Health Care 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve very pleased to rise today to tell the members of the 
Legislative Assembly about an important new initiative that 
Saskatchewan Health is funding. It will help to retain nurses in 
our province and recruit new nurses to the profession. Mr. 
Speaker, I am referring to the work of the Provincial Nursing 
Council. 
 
The council is an organization that was formed by the Health 
department a year ago. It consists of nursing students, nursing 
educators, employers, and representatives of our three nursing 
regulatory bodies, as well as the unions representing the nursing 
professions. 
 
The council’s work represents a unique collaboration among 
people who share a collective responsibility for educating, 
hiring, and retaining nurses. They believe health care 



400 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2001 

 

workplaces must offer supportive environments and rewarding 
career opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, three groups working under the auspices of the 
council have identified new initiatives that reflect this important 
philosophy. Today, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to announce 
a total of $700,000 in funding for three new initiatives. 
 
I’m announcing $400,000 to fund a pilot project in the Moose 
Jaw-Thunder Creek Health District, working with the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association to create what is 
called magnet work environments. Mr. Speaker, a magnet 
environment attracts and retains health providers through 
initiatives that create a healthy work environment. The working 
group will assess the workplace, and when that is completed 
will recommend priorities to be addressed and necessary actions 
to be taken. 
 
Secondly, I am announcing $150,000 in funding to the Regina 
Health District. It will undertake a pilot project to research the 
issues around the casual workforce in the health care system 
and develop strategies to meet the needs of health care 
providers in the workplace. We know, Mr. Speaker, that health 
care providers have differing employment needs. For instance, 
new graduates may want full-time positions, while nurses 
nearing the end of their careers may want less than full-time 
work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to better understand the factors affecting 
those health care providers who work casual hours. In this 
project, data such as sick time, hiring practices, and overtime 
costs will be analyzed. Mr. Speaker, once we have a better 
understanding of those factors, then together we can develop 
innovative solutions that will result in work environments that 
respect both the needs of nurses and their employers. 
 
Thirdly, I’m also announcing $150,000 to the Saskatoon Health 
District for a project that will assist senior nurses who mentor 
nursing students doing clinical assignments. This project will 
enable workshops to be prepared, provide backup coverage for 
staff who attend workshops, and workload relief for the 
mentoring nurse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, attracting and keeping health care providers is a 
top priority of this government. Nurses have told us that they 
want supportive, high-quality work environments. Many have 
told us they would prefer more full-time, permanent 
employment. They have also told us that they want 
opportunities for career advancement and enhancement. 
 
That is why, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to announce these 
three new Provincial Nursing Council projects today. As we all 
know, there’s a worldwide shortage of nurses. It’s not unique to 
Saskatchewan. However, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to advise 
this Assembly that these products . . . projects are uniquely 
Saskatchewan solutions to a broader problem. 
 
This government is proud to say that we’re listening to what 
nurses are telling us. The Provincial Nursing Council members 
will work together with us to build these solutions from the 
ground up. The project proposals did not come from the top 
down. We will continue to work together to find more solutions 
to our common challenges. 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I’ve just returned from attending the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses convention. I was pleased to be 
asked to speak about the challenges we all face in managing 
change in the health care system and respond to many questions 
and comments about . . . from the membership about our health 
care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week we introduced new legislation that will 
expand the role for primary care nurses. Today is the second 
time in as many weeks that I’ve announced new policies and 
programs that are having positive outcomes for nurses and, by 
extension, our health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must continually work toward recruiting and 
retaining health care workers. Today’s initiatives are not the 
final solution but they are very good steps. They are significant 
incentives for nurses to choose Saskatchewan as a great place to 
work and live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I want to publicly thank the working 
groups of the Provincial Nursing Council who have provided 
suggestions for proposals for the projects I am announcing 
today, and also those health care professionals who are in the 
Speaker’s gallery today in support of this announcement. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I ask leave to respond to the ministerial 
statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, over 
a year ago nurse professionals in this province, recognizing the 
lack of a provincial plan for the nursing profession, suggested to 
the Department of Health that they work together as a Nursing 
Council to identify around the table the issues that were 
priorities for nurse professionals across this province. And I’m 
very, very pleased that the Department of Health agreed that 
this was a worthwhile exercise, and today’s announcement of 
three projects are a result of the work that has been done by 
these health professionals of identifying challenges and 
priorities for the nursing profession in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the project that was announced in Moose Jaw of 
looking at and creating magnet environments is indeed a very 
important issue that’s facing the nursing profession today. Just, 
I believe, yesterday Saskatchewan Union of Nurses president, 
Rosalee Longmoore, was quoted as saying that one of the big 
disappointments they still have as nurse professionals in this 
province is not to do so much with the wages they receive but 
the workplace environment that they’re forced to work in day 
after day. 
 
And certainly this project, which I believe is a model that was 
first identified by members of the nursing profession from the 
United States, is indeed worth looking at and worth exploring. 
And I certainly do support the fact that this project is going 
forward. 
 
The project announced for the city of Regina and the Regina 



April 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

 

Health District about the whole issue surrounding the casual 
positions for nurses is an issue that’s been identified by nurse 
professionals for a long time. Graduating nurses coming out of 
the system are frustrated and disappointed when the best they 
can receive is casual, part-time positions. And they spend their 
time worrying about how they’re going to pay their expenses 
and student loans while they wait at the whim of a telephone 
call to see if they’re going to have any shifts in any given week 
or not. And certainly it’s high time that this issue be understood 
and identified. 
 
The issue in Saskatoon, the project about dealing with the 
whole issue of the mentoring of graduate nurses from programs 
is also an important one, Mr. Speaker, because quite frankly, 
because we’re so desperately short in many instances, nurse 
graduates are forced in a very short time to be right into the 
hustle and bustle of very busy environments, and we think that 
mentoring is a very important initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we certainly are very supportive of the work 
of the Nurses Council and these three initiatives, I also want to 
say that the minister asked last week for some help and 
direction. And I would offer the fact that unless he starts 
dealing with the woeful shortage of funding for the College of 
Nursing at the University of Saskatchewan, unless he deals with 
the issues about the College of Medicine in a positive way — 
and it certainly was absolutely missing in this budget — we’re 
going to have to rely on advice from nurse professionals and 
medical professionals and the official opposition to make sure 
this government keeps trying to do the right thing on our 
insistence. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for an opportunity to address this 
statement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move that 
Bill No. 10, The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 
2001 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 11, 
The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Amendment Act, 
2001 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
unfortunately didn’t quite have enough time to finish what I had 
to say yesterday, so I’m glad to stand today. And I’m not sure 
whether I’ll have enough time today but will try and squeeze it 
in, in the time that I have left, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I talked yesterday quite a bit about the provincial 
budget that was introduced last Friday, and I had some good 
things to say about that provincial budget. And I still agree with 
what I said. 
 
There is some things that the provincial budget talked about that 
I would have no problem agreeing with. But the problem that I 
have with the provincial budget, and why I cannot support the 
provincial budget, is fundamentally I cannot support increasing 
government. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we saw it today, through question period, some 
new statistics released through StatsCanada, Mr. Speaker. 
StatsCanada introduced some new statistics, and I’d named a 
couple of numbers yesterday. I didn’t have the most current, 
which I have today. And the net out-migration of this province 
was 4,800 people last year. Forty-eight hundred . . . 8,400 
people, I stand corrected, 8,400 people left the province last 
year — 8,400 fewer people in this province. And so what is our 
government’s response, is to increase civil service. And I really 
question that, and just fundamentally it doesn’t make sense. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t make sense to people on this 
side of the House who really, truly believe in less government 
and smaller government. But, Mr. Speaker, even more 
importantly, there’s a couple of members on that side of the 
House that don’t believe in bigger government either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last provincial election there were two 
parties that talked about reducing the size of government. One 
is on this side and two-thirds of the second party is on that side. 
Fortunately one of the members realized that he couldn’t stand 
that and he moved back over to this side. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party in the last provincial 
election talked about reducing. And if I could quote the Leader 
of the Liberal Party, during the election he said we need to 
reduce hacks and flacks by 300. And he used the number of 
roughly of about $24 million that was going to save. Mr. 
Speaker, they say about twenty-four hundred million dollars by 
reducing those 300 hacks and flacks. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to add up the difference. You 
know, if you take away the 300 that the Liberal Party talked 
about and you add the 570 that the NDP government coalition 



402 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2001 

 

are talking about, it’s a difference of 870 people in the civil 
service that those two members on the other side are going to 
have to try and justify. And if they stand and support this 
budget, are going to have to justify when they get back to their 
constituencies and justify at the next Liberal convention. 
 
That was a Liberal policy that said they were going to reduce it 
by 300; now they’re supporting an increase by 570. The dollar 
value is roughly about $70 million difference from what they 
promised, to what they’re going to support. That is significant, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, we have put forward an amendment to 
the budget, an amendment to the budget that talks about helping 
out municipal governments, that talks about giving more money 
to the municipal governments. And we’ve found where you 
could take that out of the last budget. We found that by not 
hiring the amount of employees that this government is talking 
about, that money could have been converted and transferred 
over into municipal government, and help the municipal 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s going to be very interesting, because I have no problem 
supporting the amendment put forward by our deputy or our 
Finance critic, the member for Canora-Pelly. And it’s an 
amendment that I really am going to find it very interesting if 
the two members opposite, the Liberal members that 
campaigned on the very, very thing that we’re putting forward 
in this budget, if they support what we said, it doesn’t affect, it 
doesn’t defeat the government. 
 
They still can have their cabinet minister positions, they can 
still have their CVA (Central Vehicle Agency) vehicles, they 
can have everything that the went there for. But not only that — 
is they’ll have their scruples and principles of what they stood 
for in the last provincial election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I will not be supporting the budget. Even though there is 
some good stuff, I fundamentally cannot support bigger 
government, as most every member on this side and a couple of 
members on that side. And so I won’t be supporting the budget 
but I will be supporting the amendment, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It certainly is a 
pleasure for me to be able to join into the budget debate. And 
let me take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate you 
for taking over the role as the Speaker of this Assembly. Having 
been, I should say, your former seatmate last time, I was 
disappointed to lose you as a seatmate, but I congratulate 
nonetheless. 
 
I also want to congratulate, Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, 
the member from Regina Sherwood. And I also want to take the 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate the new members of 
this Assembly — first of all, of course, the member from 
Regina Elphinstone and then our Premier, now the new member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
But also if I could be permitted a little bit of latitude here, I 
want to briefly speak about the leadership process that I went 

through and connect it back to the budget speech by saying that 
it actually, in many ways, renewed my sincere belief in the 
democratic process. 
 
And I want to publicly, for anyone who would have had any 
doubt at all, reaffirm my support for our new Premier. The 
seven candidates that were involved, Mr. Speaker, were all 
wonderful candidates, but I certainly respect the decision made 
by the membership of our party in electing the new Premier, the 
member now from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
And I do also want to take a moment to acknowledge our 
former premier, Premier Romanow, who played a critical role, 
as was described by many, in bringing our province back from 
the brink of bankruptcy. He deserves a tremendous amount of 
credit for that and I certainly want to acknowledge him for that. 
 
I’ve missed the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, over the last several 
years to actually respond to either the Throne Speech or the 
budget speech. And I want to take the opportunity again to 
acknowledge the support that many of us receive from families 
and friends. And I would like to again thank the support that 
I’ve received, Mr. Speaker, from my family, including my 
parents, John and Dorothy Sonntag, but also from my wife 
Virginia and our son Mayson. 
 
It was interesting, just over the lunch hour I had the opportunity 
to speak briefly to the member in hallway, from Cannington, 
and we just had a quick discussion about the toll that public life 
sometimes takes on members in public office, and the 
tremendous support that is required from family members. 
 
So I want to acknowledge the support that I’ve received from 
my family. It’s been wonderful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well I can hardly believe that 10 years have 
gone by almost, since I was first elected in 1991 to this 
legislature, and it has been a thrill and an honour to have 
represented the constituency of Meadow Lake. And as I say, it’s 
hard to believe that 10 years has gone by. 
 
And I’ve had the opportunity to represent, Mr. Speaker, such 
wonderful communities like Pierceland; my home community 
of Goodsoil; St. Walburg; Paradise Hill; Makwa; Dorintosh. Six 
different First Nations, Mr. Speaker — Flying Dust; Waterhen 
First Nation; Joseph Bighead First Nation; Makwa-Sahgaihcan 
First Nation; the Ministikwan First Nation; and of course the 
Onion Lake First Nation located just north of Lloydminster. All 
of them great places to represent. And time has flown by so 
very quickly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well I want to say that having been elected over 
those 10 years, it’s been a thrill as well to be a part of a 
government that has delivered wonderful budgets, I think, over 
the years, and this one as well fits into that category. 
 
You know, I did a quick little calculation over the last . . . a few 
minutes before I came into the Assembly today. In the last 20 
years, Mr. Speaker, in the last 20 years — so that goes back to 
1981; also I’ll have to count the budget of ’81 under former 
premier, Allan Blakeney — the score for our side of the House 
is nine balanced budgets. The score for their side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, is nothing. So the score is nine to nothing for this 



April 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 403 

 

side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to, if I could, Mr. Speaker, just talk about a few of the 
highlights of our provincial budget. First of all again, Mr. 
Speaker, people in this province will now pay $317 million less 
in provincial income tax than they did before the tax reform was 
implemented by our government. And of all the provinces, Mr. 
Speaker, in the country, in this great country of Canada that 
charge provincial sales tax, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the 
lowest provincial sales tax in all of Canada. I think that’s 
something that goes unnoticed by a lot of people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year we will spend $2.2 billion on health care. 
That’s a 39 per cent . . . that represents, I should say, 39 per 
cent of our total budget and an 11.6 per cent increase over last 
year. 
 
We’re investing, as well, $1.1 billion in education, and included 
in this funding to . . . included, I should say, in this is funding to 
double the number of community schools, which affects many 
of the communities that I represent and extends the program to 
secondary and rural schools. School operating grants get an 
increase of 9.6 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the business side, the small-business corporate income tax 
rate will be reduced by 25 per cent, Mr. Speaker, from 8 per 
cent to 6 per cent. That’s something that small businesses have 
long been calling on and I think certainly will do very well for 
them. 
 
That amount and also, I should say, the amount that they can 
earn and still qualify for the small-business tax rate will be 
increased from 200,000 up to 300,000, again something that 
they’ve all called for. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve committed 95 million additional new 
dollars for income support in our agricultural portfolio, and 
much credit to the Minister of Agriculture for that. And, Mr. 
Speaker, our government is committed to supporting 
Saskatchewan’s farmers. 
 
We will make as well, Mr. Speaker, the largest single-year 
investment ever in Saskatchewan’s history in highways — 
something that I’m particularly proud of, having just left that 
portfolio. That amount, Mr. Speaker, brings the total up this 
year to $312 million. Included in this will be upgrading of our 
thin membrane surfaced roads, Mr. Speaker. This budget 
launches a historic three-year record amount of spending — 
$950 million will be invested in our roads and highways. This 
will create hundreds of new jobs across our province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to respond briefly if I could, Mr. Speaker, to the issue 
that’s been raised in this House in the last several days about 
the issue of bigger government. I say, Mr. Speaker, that the 
people that we’ve hired to provide, that we have hired . . . Mr. 
Speaker, the people that we’ve hired — let me try again — are 
qualified, highly qualified civil servants that will improve 
services and conditions, many of those in rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it strikes me, Mr. Speaker, this question . . . and I want to 
ask this question of the opposition. Why is it that in the private 

sector, when the private sector hires more people, somehow 
that’s a good thing. And I agree; it is a good thing. It means 
more jobs in the private sector. That’s good. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, when government hires more people to 
deliver goods and services to the people of Saskatchewan, when 
they hire more people and the economy’s doing better, 
somehow that’s a bad thing. There’s a logic that makes no sense 
there, Mr. Speaker, whatsoever. Absolutely none at all. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan, contrary to what 
the opposition would have us believe, Saskatchewan provides 
the lowest cost of government on a per capita basis of any 
province in Canada — the lowest cost, Mr. Speaker, of any 
province in Canada. Again I think a fact that goes unnoticed by 
many people, and especially the opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I wanted to speak briefly if I could about a couple of the 
portfolios that I represent, Mr. Speaker, and reference it to the 
issue of the job numbers that I just talked about. 
 
In Energy and Mines, Mr. Speaker, through countless meetings 
that I’ve had with the energy sector in the short time that I’ve 
had this portfolio, one of the things that the oil and gas and 
mines sector says to me is the department, first of all, provides 
wonderful service to them. We have some, in Energy and 
Mines, have probably some of the most highly qualified 
department people in fact in all of Canada. And that’s affirmed 
by many of the oil companies from out of our province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
My department, in Energy and Mines, actually will receive 26 
new people. And it was applauded, Mr. Speaker, on budget day 
by many of the people that I’ve just described. And I want to 
tell you where some of those new people will be placed. 
 
Seventeen of the full-time equivalents will go to supporting 
increased activity of the oil and gas industry here in 
Saskatchewan, with nine of those positions associated with the 
oil and gas well and facility orphan program, which is 
something that the oil sector has asked for. 
 
Eight of those positions will go to additional petroleum 
geoscience research and underground mapping of potential oil 
and gas deposits. Again, wonderful things for the oil and gas 
and mining sectors. 
 
Seven full-time equivalents will go to additional geoscience 
research in northern Saskatchewan, largely focused on mining, 
Mr. Speaker. Again, something that will generate more revenue 
for our province, Mr. Speaker. A good thing, in my estimation. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, two full-time equivalents will go to 
provide policy analysis as we gear up, Mr. Speaker — hear the 
words, gear up — to respond to climate change issues and 
implications for Saskatchewan people and communities in our 
economy. 
 
All of these positions, Mr. Speaker, are in direct response to the 
oil, gas, and mining sectors who have requested that we provide 
more people within the departments. And I think also a sign 
towards geared-up activity. 
 



404 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2001 

 

And this proof, Mr. Speaker, is in a headline that I’ve just read 
here on March 29 from The Leader-Post. The headline is, Mr. 
Speaker, “Energy to fuel Sask. Economy.” They say that: 
 

Saskatchewan’s energy sector will fuel GDP growth of 2.5 
per cent this year, (and they’ve just been reporting, others 
have been reporting 3 per cent this year) outpacing the 
national average (Mr. Speaker) of 2.2 per cent, TD 
Economics reported in its provincial forecast Wednesday. 
 

And that’s exactly what we’re doing by hiring 26 more people, 
Mr. Speaker — gearing up, Mr. Speaker. We’re gearing up for 
activity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — If I could as well, I’d like to speak 
briefly about my role as the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation because there have been some 
questions and criticisms of late of the Crown Investments 
Corporation, which I think are entirely inappropriate, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’d like to talk about the vital role that they play. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Crown corporations do a great job of 
providing safe, reliable utility services in all parts of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, at rates, Mr. Speaker, at rates that 
are amongst the lowest, the lowest, in all of Canada. 
 
We don’t have power shortages and energy bills that double in 
less than a year like they do in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. We don’t 
have rolling blackouts like they do in California. We don’t have 
unaffordable car insurance rates for families with young drivers, 
as they do in many provinces, Mr. Speaker. We don’t have our 
rural communities bypassed by information highways, as is 
happening just about everywhere else in the country. Because 
we own our utility companies in Saskatchewan, we can provide 
the lowest natural gas and vehicle insurance rates in all of 
Canada. 
 
We can be sure that when we flip the light switches that the 
lights will go on. We have a way to ensure that people who live 
outside of our major cities will benefit from the latest 
improvements in information technology, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was announced in the Throne Speech that communities, 
schools, and other public institutions throughout Saskatchewan 
will get the benefits of high-speed internet service over the next 
three years. Without our telecommunications company, that 
would not be possible, Mr. Speaker. The big national and 
international companies that compete with SaskTel have no 
interest in providing these services outside of the larger 
communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It would be a source of pride to all members of this Assembly 
that our homegrown telecommunications company can compete 
successfully with global giants while remaining true to the 
mandate of Crown corporations — to provide good quality 
service at affordable rates to everyone here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have achieved a lot over the last decade in 
paying off $2 billion of Devine debt and restoring financial 

health to our public enterprise sector in expanding service while 
keeping rates as low as possible and in improving the 
management and governance of the publicly owned utilities. 
 
These improvements we have made in Crown governance over 
the last few years and have received national recognition, Mr. 
Speaker. The Conference Board of Canada says that the 
government practices of our Crown boards are amongst the best 
in Canada, public or private, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The best in Canada. The Institute of Public Administration of 
Canada Governor General’s Award for excellence in public 
service recently went to CIC’s Crown services division in the 
recognition of the governance, strategic planning, and 
performance management system that we have developed in our 
Crown sector, Mr. Speaker. I think . . . something that we 
should all be very proud of. 
 
We are receiving international recognition as well. A senior 
official of the World Bank was in Saskatchewan last July to 
study how SaskTel delivers services to rural Saskatchewan. 
Here’s what he concluded in a letter he wrote after his visit, Mr. 
Speaker. He said, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

I was looking for that silver bullet that would help me 
understand how SaskTel undertook rural telecoms so well. 
The only significant aspect that I could find that sets 
SaskTel apart from other telecommunication operators is 
the following: SaskTel staff, down to the last person I met, 
takes the social obligations and universal service 
requirements far more seriously than any other telecom 
company I have ever known. 
 
Other companies often pay lip service to these points but 
SaskTel is the only company I have come across that really 
takes these points to heart and makes the social obligations 
a cornerstone of its business and a point of pride among the 
staff (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Mr. Speaker, I hear someone from across the way and, you 
know, it brings an excellent point. Says why don’t we have cell 
coverage. Well, Mr. Speaker, I love to answer that question, 
Mr. Speaker. Because I’ll tell you what my response to that is: 
why are there no private utilities who offer cellular service? 
Why are they . . . if this is such a wonderful thing, why aren’t 
they out in rural Saskatchewan providing that service right now, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
These members over here continually say to us, Mr. Speaker, 
that SaskTel needs to provide more services. And they are, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I ask the question, if that member wants to know why isn’t 
there cell service in rural parts of Saskatchewan, my question is: 
why aren’t private utilities who offer cellular service, why 
aren’t they out there offering that service, Mr. Speaker? It’s 
because SaskTel goes beyond the bottom line, Mr. Speaker. 
SaskTel delivers services that no other private utility would 
deliver in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The contribution, Mr. Speaker, that the Crown sector makes to 
the development of Saskatchewan’s economy, can be summed 
up in a few numbers. It accounts for 17 per cent of our gross 



April 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 405 

 

domestic product. Crowns employ about 9,000 people in head 
offices and communities throughout our province. They 
purchase well over a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, a billion 
dollars in goods and services from Saskatchewan suppliers each 
year, supporting about 5,000 businesses, Mr. Speaker. Crowns 
spend over $400 million every year expanding and improving 
their services, creating thousands of construction jobs. Very few 
private sector utilities would be able to, I think, compete with 
those numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look to the future with confidence that our 
Crown corporations will continue to serve Saskatchewan people 
well. SaskTel, as I’ve alluded to, has been in competition for 
long distance and other services for more than a decade and 
now is doing an extremely good job. 
 
SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, is fully open to competition in 
commercial and residential markets. SaskPower will be opening 
its system to the transmission of wholesale power in a few 
months. SGI CANADA, Mr. Speaker, continues to thrive in a 
highly competitive general insurance industry and has moved 
successfully beyond the borders of Saskatchewan. 
 
Our publicly owned utility companies give us the tools to 
control our destiny that other provinces do not have, Mr. 
Speaker. Canadians often find themselves at the mercy of the 
same global market forces that make it difficult for many 
people to build a better life throughout the world. Here in 
Saskatchewan, because we do it for ourselves, we can continue 
to provide safe, reliable, and affordable utility services to 
everyone, whether they live in the city or in rural Saskatchewan 
as I do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m getting close to the end here, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 
just focus, for just a minute if I could, on what I think is really 
the absolute highlight — I know we’ve got many highlights in 
the budget, but what I think is really the highlight of this budget 
— and that is really around the piece on education. 
 
In this budget, as I’ve said, we’re investing $1.1 billion in 
education and skills training, the largest amount ever, Mr. 
Speaker, which will go to establishing 42 new community 
schools in both rural and urban Saskatchewan. 
 
We will also provide, as I’ve talked about in SaskTel and using 
SaskTel as a vehicle, we’ll also provide high-speed Internet 
access to schools across Saskatchewan. We will create, Mr. 
Speaker, a virtual Saskatchewan campus connecting young and 
adult learners in a world of opportunity. 
 
We will offer improved interest relief and debt reduction for 
student loans and increased tax credits for post-secondary 
students. We will launch the new centennial scholarship 
program for post-secondary students. And we will train more 
health care providers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will increase the operating grants to 
schools by $41 million. This represents a 10 per cent increase 
over last year’s budget and it will bump the province’s share for 
the total cost of education from 40 per cent up to 42 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, I want to say a budget is a document 

that puts a vision into action . . . puts vision into action by 
backing it up with dollars, Mr. Speaker. My vision and our 
Premier’s vision is for a prosperous Saskatchewan where all 
people will enjoy a good quality of life. 
 
This is a good news budget, Mr. Speaker. It’s about connecting 
to a future filled with prosperity, confidence, and innovation. 
This is the true spirit of Saskatchewan and we are going to 
make it happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in the words of our wonderful, wonderful Minister of 
Finance, Mr. Speaker, that is progress, Mr. Speaker. That is 
progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I will close by saying that 
I will be voting against the amendment, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be 
voting against the amendment and supporting the main motion 
on the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And thank you for the brief opportunity to speak to the budget 
today. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise to be able to participate in this debate. Before I give my 
comments on the present budget, I’d like to spend a moment 
reviewing the first budget of the new province of Saskatchewan 
in 1905. I think it gives us some interesting information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at that time, total revenue was $658,000. The 
major revenue source was transfers from the federal 
government of 562,000. Some things don’t change. 
 
Health and Social Services costs totalled $425.74. Some things 
do change. The Health budget included $40.75 for what was 
described as the care of incurables, and $271 for supplies for 
quarantine. 
 
The Hudson’s Bay Company and the Northwest Mounted 
Police were given, respectively, $40 and $14.50 for the support 
of indigenes. Administration of justice cost 15,000 and this 
included 11,000 for what was described in the public accounts 
of the province as the care of the lunatics. 
 
Legal costs also included a $15 bill for legal fees from the law 
firm of a Mr. Noel. Education that year cost $27,000. There 
were no grants to school districts. Electricity for Government 
House cost $38.60. The premier was paid $229 but he received 
an additional $313 for travel expenses. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
budget was balanced. 
 
Well what about 2001? Did the government get it right? 
 
Let me say at the outset that there are a number of things in the 
budget of which I approve. The government, however, tells us 
that out of expenditures of over 6 billion, that we have a 
balanced budget. Of course the truth is that we are spending 
over 200 million more than current revenues and the budget is 
balanced by drawing on reserves. 
 



406 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year the Minister of Finance was arguing that 
one-time resource revenues should not be spent in such a way 
as to increase the base budget. He said that it would be wrong to 
increase base expenses. He argued that windfall revenues in the 
resource sector should go to paying off deficit or on one-time 
expenditures on infrastructure. That’s what the Minister of 
Finance told us last fall. Well now he seems to have ignored his 
own advice, and it is my concern that he has added to the base 
budget by this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unless we can build our economy and broaden our 
tax base and increase the number of working tax-paying 
citizens, this budget is not sustainable. Mr. Speaker, I appreciate 
the dedicated individuals who serve our province in the public 
service. My experiences while I was in government increased 
my respect for them. Nonetheless we know that you do not 
build an economy by increasing the public sector. 
 
The economy is built by increasing investment, increasing 
business, increasing oil exploration, agricultural diversification, 
and forestry. We know that Alberta projects $40 billion in 
energy exploration during the next few years. Think what even 
a fraction of that would do for the economy of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yet this government thinks that it is more important to increase 
the public sector than to partner and strengthen other groups 
and people to build this province. An example of this is the fact 
that in a budget, which is increasing expenditures on almost 
every department and priority, municipalities were left out. This 
government has oftentimes been accused of showing little 
respect for local government and this was borne out again last 
Friday. I am relieved that I am not the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this province was faced with a horrendous 
deficit, cutbacks in services and programs were unavoidable. 
Municipal grants were one of the casualties, however, the 
provincial government at that time could legitimately say to the 
municipalities of this province that they were not being treated 
any different than anyone else. Everyone was required to share 
the pain and take cutbacks. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Today the provincial government is dramatically increasing 
spending — Health, an additional 12 per cent or $330 million. 
Education, an additional 22 million. Highways, an extra 36 
million. But local government remains frozen. Inevitably, this 
will lead to property tax increases. 
 
The provincial government no doubt hopes that when 
Saskatchewan homeowners get their property tax notices this 
year, they will blame city hall rather than put the blame where it 
truly belongs. It is little wonder that the mayors of our cities, 
including the mayor of North Battleford, have joined together to 
denounce this budget, and have called for increased support of 
revenue sharing for municipalities. It is one of the few priorities 
in the entire provincial government that did not get increased 
funding this year. 
 
I do, however, want to say that I appreciate that the government 
is finally committed to fixing the roads. The Liberal Party has 

been committed to spending fuel tax revenues on the province’s 
highways. This year we will come close to that figure. The fuel 
tax will bring in about $326 million, I understand. And of that 
we will spend all but about 15 million on our highway and road 
system. This is a positive start in reinvesting in a highway 
system that has been sorely neglected the past decade. 
 
Hopefully, this investment in our roads will stop the conversion 
from pavement to gravel, and end the bizarre talk of parallel 
heavy haul routes between thin membrane surface and gravel 
roads. Mr. Speaker this talk of turning our highways back into 
gravel is what, I think, will become popularly known by the 
acronym Saskatchewan highways in transition. 
 
On the negative side of the budget, we have the Department of 
Rural Revitalization. Mr. Speaker, this new department is a 
classic example of NDP thinking that the problems of the world 
can be solved by a new government department. It was once 
said of Premier Blakeney that he never met a government 
program he didn’t like, and we certainly see that philosophy 
coming through here. 
 
We have a department that will rent some space in Regina and 
hire some people in Regina, but what it will do for rural 
Saskatchewan is far from clear. There is no budget for 
programming, and no indication as to what programming this 
department would do if it had a budget for programming, which 
it doesn’t. The department has no expressed mandate or vision, 
except in the fuzziest of terms. It is a government department 
for the sake of having a government department. Why it exists 
and what it will do is something to be figured out later. 
 
A positive of the budget is the large increase in the number of 
community schools. I consider the community schools program 
to be a positive one. The truancy rate in this province, and 
particularly in North Battleford, is unacceptably high. Young 
people not regularly attending school inevitably fall behind in 
their classes. As they become disengaged from school and other 
positive activities, they almost inevitably fall into negative 
activities such as youth crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province has the highest young offenders’ rate 
of all the provinces. This rate will only be brought down if we 
do a better job of keeping young people in school and involving 
them in wholesome activities. The community school program 
is an attempt to do just that. 
 
I have spoken at length, Mr. Speaker, about the question of our 
Crown corporations. I have asked repeatedly for the 
government to confirm what plans it has for out-of-province 
investment. Do they plan to invest 500 million over the next 
five years out-of-province? The minister says that investing 
out-of-province is a legitimate activity for our Crown 
corporations; he won’t tell us how much he plans to invest 
out-of-province. 
 
The minister won’t tell the people of Saskatchewan — the 
shareholders of these corporations — what activities are 
planned. If the government really views the people of this 
province as the shareholders, why then can’t they be let in on 
the plans of the companies they own? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the plot thickened on budget day when the 



April 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 407 

 

minister revealed that Crown debt is scheduled to rise by $300 
billion over what is described as the medium term. What is this 
300 billion for? Is it going to be used for clean coal research 
and generation in Saskatchewan? Is it going to be used for wind 
power research? Is it going to be spent on the biotech industry 
that will be greatly enhanced by our synchrotron project? I 
doubt it. 
 
Is the money, I ask, going to be invested by government in 
businesses that will attempt to run private business out of this 
province by competing with private . . . using tax dollars to 
compete with private business? 
 
Or will the new, borrowed money be invested in Chile, Prince 
Edward Island, Uruguay, the Philippines, Australia, New 
Zealand, El Salvador, and yes, Mr. Speaker, even that province 
all good New Democrats love to hate — Alberta — where we 
are presently taking advantage of a deregulated power supply 
while we keep our own regulated, and refuse to allow in private 
companies to invest and work here, but we take advantage of 
the fact we can build out of province. So we’re taking 
advantage . . . we’re taking advantage of open tendering in 
Alberta, but we deny it for our province. That is contradictory, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have a problem with the NDP saying it is appropriate to use 
tax money to invest in schemes around the globe. Mr. Speaker, 
government has a different role in society than an investment 
broker, and I can imagine most taxpayers of this province 
would say, if they had the choice, that they will make their own 
investment decisions rather than leaving that up to the Minister 
of Crown Investments. 
 
The proposal to incur a further $300 million in debt is a clear 
repudiation of the Romanow legacy, Mr. Speaker. Premier 
Romanow wanted to get this province out of debt. Now this 
government, in addition to spending 200 more on current 
expenses over revenue, is planning to put the province a further 
300 million in debt through the Crown corporations. Roy 
Romanow would not have done this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A few years ago the NDP wanted to invest in Guyana. Guyana 
is the western hemisphere’s second-poorest country. Being poor 
and politically unstable was seen by the NDP to be its greatest 
asset as a place to invest. That was because Guyana was so 
unattractive as a place to invest that SaskPower intended to 
extract huge returns from that impoverished, little country. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How did they make out? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — They said they were going to get a 27 per cent 
return on investment from the hemisphere’s second-poorest 
nation. The resulting furor caused the cancellation of the 
program, but most people involved in that purported investment 
still continued to believe that international investments of that 
sort are the way to build Saskatchewan. I do not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I’m pleased that the 
Saskatchewan Party appears to be moving away from its earlier 
position of selling off the Crowns. A fire sale of our Crown 
corporations would almost certainly mean that research and 
development would leave the province, along with the head 
offices, the regional offices, and the employees. 

If we need to modernize the Crowns, and if we need to go 
outside of Saskatchewan for them to grow and expand, then 
perhaps the time has come, however, to look at other ownership 
models. Partnering with other established companies may be the 
way for us to have an international presence and preserve 
Saskatchewan jobs without putting Saskatchewan taxpayers at 
risk in high-flying global adventures. 
 
Putting Saskatchewan residents in debt for the $300 million is a 
clear repudiation of the Romanow legacy. Premier Romanow 
after years of sacrifice would never have agreed to put this 
province a further 300 million in debt to pursue investments in 
countries that would send most of the residents of this province 
scurrying to their atlases to find out where it is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we need to invest massively to modernize forest 
fire suppression, then perhaps we should partner with private 
business to have a state-of-the-art mobile force that, as well as 
being used in Saskatchewan during our brief forest fire season, 
could be used in the southern US, South America, and 
elsewhere, outside of our forest fire season, and could become a 
year-round mobile fire suppression service. 
 
If we need 86 new staff in fire suppression and expensive new 
equipment, why not partner and make use of these new 
professionals and equipment year round, and have a year-round 
service that could make money for this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, a budget which spends 200 million more on 
current expenses than revenue and projects 300 million 
increased debt, is not sustainable. Most provinces and the 
federal government are predicting declining revenues for the 
coming year in the wake of fears of a recession. The present 
trade dispute with the United States does not augur well for our 
forest industry. 
 
That raises the question: is this an election budget? I believe it 
may be, Mr. Speaker. I believe the NDP will be doing intensive 
polling over the next few months, and if the results are positive, 
there may well be a snap election later this year. 
 
In order to fight that election, the Liberal Party must be able to 
explain to voters how its vision of the province differs from that 
of other parties. Everyday that passes is a lost opportunity to 
draft a program and present an image that defines us and our 
vision for Saskatchewan. We must present to the people of this 
province an alternative, not an echo. If we cannot say how we 
differ from the government or where we disagree with NDP 
philosophy and approach, there will simply be no reason to vote 
for us. 
 
In the recent NDP leadership campaign, when the candidates 
were first asked their views on the coalition, their universal 
response was in effect that the coalition was a disagreeable 
necessity to be tolerated only so long as necessary for NDP 
purposes. The coalition and the Liberals would be tolerated 
only so long as essential. I took no offence at that, Mr. Speaker, 
I expected nothing less. 
 
I was amused that when I began to say that perhaps the Liberals 
should withdraw from the coalition, the leadership candidates 
immediately dramatically switched lines. Even Nettie Wiebe, 
who at first declared that she had never talked to a Liberal and 



408 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2001 

 

wasn’t particularly interested in doing so, declared that Liberals 
are reasonable people and as reasonable people she was 
confident we would agree with her view of the world. 
 
The Premier said last week that the coalition did well in the 
Elphinstone by-election. Well, Mr. Speaker, with people like 
the Premier cheering on the Liberal Party we certainly don’t 
need any more detractors. 
 
Before concluding, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the 
Prime Minister on the appointment of Roy Romanow to head 
up a one-person commission on health care. Mr. Speaker, it is 
nearly 40 years since the historic Hall Commission set the stage 
for publicly funded health care in this country. We need to take 
a look how we can modernize that system to ensure that 
Canadians will continue to have the benefit of this most 
important of all of our social programs. 
 
(15:30) 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we need to deal with escalating 
health care costs. While it has often been observed that without 
our health nothing else matters, nonetheless we cannot as 
legislators allow health expenditures to crowd out other 
important public priorities. The task obviously is to modernize 
and have a viable health care service to our people while 
sticking within a sustainable, financially sound budget. I wish 
our former premier well in undertaking this important, and I 
believe, historic, task. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I see much good in this budget. The 
reinvestment in our roads is long overdue. The investment in 
our children’s education at least from K to 12 is 
forward-looking. 
 
However, the continued lack of respect for municipal 
government is troubling. The unexplained large increase in 
Crown debt — $300 million increase in Crown debt — is not 
acceptable. The member for Cumberland says where would I 
get the money from? I don’t know. That’s my question to them: 
where do they get the money from to put our Crown 
corporations $300 million in debt? 
 
Maybe we can turn it over to him, Mr. Speaker, and it will be 
his turn to speak. Maybe he can tell us where the $300 million 
is going to come from. I don’t know the answer to that question. 
That’s why I’m troubled by this budget. 
 
It bothers me, it bothers me that the Saskatchewan Party says 
the government should slash taxes rather than increase 
spending. But they refuse to tell us, they refuse to tell us just 
exactly what spending they would forego. 
 
The future of our province lies in educating our young people, 
bringing the Aboriginal population into full and active 
participation in the economy, and by encouraging investment 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The business of government does not lie in running casinos or 
in scoping out investments around the globe. The business of 
government is to encourage a healthy economic and social 
climate to make sure our municipalities have the resources to 
supply residents with a safe, clean water supply, and the other 

amenities and infrastructure of a modern society. 
 
I see some moves in that direction in this budget, and I see 
some moves away from it. I have enormous problems with both 
the budget and the amendment — both fall short of the mark. 
The NDP budget is not sustainable. The new Department of 
Rural Revitalization is a hollow and expensive shell. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party amendment is typically mean-spirited 
towards public servants and fails to identify which employees 
and programs are surplus to our needs. 
 
Therefore, I will take the only reasonable and responsible 
position, Mr. Speaker, and vote against both the amendment 
and the budget. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And may 
I say that it’s a pleasure to rise in this House today to join the 
debate on the coalition government’s budget and the 
amendment brought forward by the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the budget brought forward today by the 
coalition government . . . or recently brought forward by the 
coalition government, is without a doubt a good budget for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it definitely and very clearly shows what can be 
done for this province if we only believe in Saskatchewan and 
Saskatchewan people and all our communities. This budget also 
shows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a coalition government can 
and does work. 
 
It shows also the important influence that Liberals have had on 
the coalition, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Above all, it shows that all 
people in the province regardless of their politics or place of 
residence can work together to give Saskatchewan an even 
more prosperous and promising future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite try and suggest that 
Liberals had no influence on this budget and on the coalition 
government as a whole. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nothing 
could be further from the truth. And I’m pleased to say that 
there are people throughout the province that do in fact 
recognize the influence that Liberals have had and the stability 
that this coalition government has given governance to this 
great province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the last election the Liberal Party 
promised to make highways a major priority. Thanks to the 
efforts of our leader, the Minister of Education, and the member 
from North Battleford, highways were a major priority in this 
coalition government. The budget before us launches a historic, 
a historic investment. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve heard 
this said time and time again, but there’s a definite need for 
repetition because this is great news for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And it should be told over and over and over, 
this good news. 
 
The budget provides for a historic investment of $950 million 



April 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

 

over a period of three years. With this money the coalition 
government will upgrade 800 kilometres of Saskatchewan’s 
thin membrane highway to pavement. It will also speed up 
twinning of the western portion of the Trans-Canada Highway 
by 2004. Finally, it will allow Saskatchewan to identify and 
improve major trade corridors. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, aside from creating many, many jobs that 
the members opposite do not want to see created in this 
province for whatever reason, this will be a long-lasting 
investment into the economic well-being of this great province 
and all of its communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In 1999 the Liberal caucus promised to make education a 
spending priority, a very high priority, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 
believed that the province should increase its share of K to 12 
education spending. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, last year 
Liberal influence within the coalition resulted in a rebate for 
farm landowners to help them better handle the cost of 
education during some very tough times on the farm, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We promised it in 1999 and it was delivered 
upon last year. 
 
This year we are pleased to build on this by delivering the 
largest investment ever in education and post-secondary 
education, training and skills, 1.1 billion — $1.1 billon, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. This includes an increase of over $40 million 
in school operating grants to attract and retain some of the best 
teachers. 
 
In my constituency alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the foundation 
operating grant for school divisions has increased as follows: in 
the Melville Comprehensive, by 19.26 per cent. For Melville 
School District, 20.33 per cent. Scenic Valley, 18.48 per cent. 
St. Henry’s, 12.69 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now if that’s not good news for those folks, I don’t know what 
is. And I don’t know how the members opposite can speak out 
against something that’s so good for our students, for our 
communities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Liberals promised and we’ve delivered 
with our coalition partners for the betterment of our youth and 
all Saskatchewan people. In addition to those efforts in 
education, we are pleased to join our coalition colleagues in 
connecting more schools to high-speed Internet access and to 
expand the number of community schools. 
 
Those schools, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will help foster closer 
collaboration between schools and other human service 
providers, like Health and Social Services. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the 1999 election Liberals also 
promised tax relief for Saskatchewan people. Last year we were 
able to deliver on that promise with our coalition colleagues. By 
January of this year we were able to eliminate the flat tax, the 
debt-reduction surtax, and the high-income surtax. As a result 
of our accomplishments last year, 55,000 low-income people 
will no longer pay provincial income tax in this province. 
That’s good news, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Today, I am pleased to support this budget which is going one 
step further by reducing the corporate income tax rate for small 

business, from 8 per cent to 6 per cent. That is a 25 per cent 
reduction, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we’re very proud to be able 
to bring this to our small businesses and the people of this great 
province of ours. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Liberals promised to work for our farmers 
in the last election, and I am pleased that my coalition partners 
and we are working towards that goal. We promised to get a 
representative at the world trade talks, and we delivered. We 
promised to remove the fuel tax on farm fuels, and we 
delivered. We promised to get the Prime Minister to take more 
responsibility for the farm crisis; in this budget, we are offering 
$95 million in farm income support, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
recently in this House, all MLAs joined together to call on the 
federal government for yet more help. A call which I’m sure we 
all hope will be heard in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1999 our caucus said that health care 
was a major priority. I am pleased, extremely pleased, as we 
should all be, that in this year’s budget it provides increases in 
funding for health districts, a new air ambulance, and additional 
funding to recruit and retain skilled health care providers. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, Liberals said health care was a priority, and we 
will continue to make it one within this coalition government. 
 
Today there was yet another example that coalition 
governments can work for both partners. Prior to the last 
election, my Liberal colleagues and I called on this government 
for a study into problem gambling in this province. Well I’m 
pleased to see that the coalition government will, in fact, be 
conducting such a study. It’s proof, it’s proof that we are 
working together to make this a better province and a great 
place to live. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Saltcoats has repeatedly 
expressed his discontent about the budget because of funding 
for our municipalities. And his colleague, the member from 
Canora-Pelly, has even proposed an amendment to the budget 
to not hire new firefighters, health and social service providers, 
highway workers that were added this year to meet the priorities 
of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do not support the amendment of the 
members opposite, which would see these positions eliminated, 
as is the alternative the Saskatchewan Party is proposing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the opposition’s call to not hire these new 
health providers, highway workers, and firefighters in the 
communities across Saskatchewan to help reduce local taxes 
was described in our local paper as reckless, borderline 
irresponsible and unfair. And need I say more, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am extremely concerned, I’m extremely 
concerned that the opposition has not provided all of the 
information to municipalities when they asked them to support 
their motion to amend the budget. It’s appalling, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
From what I understand, the opposition did not inform 
municipalities that in order to provide the additional $30 million 
to municipalities, they want this coalition government to cancel 
570 positions in the budget — 570 positions — which will 



410 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2001 

 

contribute to all those municipalities for firefighting, for health 
care, for education. 
 
I am disappointed . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. I 
understand that all hon. members are trying to engage in the 
debate at the same time. Unfortunately the floor belongs to the 
hon. member from Melville. I’d ask all hon. members to give 
the floor to Melville. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I do 
express sincere disappointment in the opposition for not giving 
those municipalities, the mayors and councils, all the 
information. 
 
I have received letters as well expressing, expressing and 
suggesting, that it was borderline illegal the manner in which 
they misinformed those municipalities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(15:45) 
 
I think the people of this province want these important 
services, and this coalition government supports what we have 
in the budget to make sure these people work for all the people 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite what the opposition suggests, Municipal 
Affairs and Housing budget has in fact increased by 12 per cent 
or $18 million. And with this increase we can continue to 
enable communities to provide local governance, public 
protection, housing, and library services, and in order to 
preserve Saskatchewan’s heritage. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the municipal sector, like many publicly 
funded sectors, has been required to accept less in provincial 
revenue-sharing transfers in the last decade. The total amount of 
funding we provide today is less than what the province 
provided the sector in 1990. And thanks mainly to the shameful 
legacy left by the predecessors of the members opposite — the 
Devine Tories. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, contrary to what they are suggesting we 
are, in fact, making some progress in the right direction. The 
coalition government has increased its commitment to 
supporting Saskatchewan urban communities, rural areas, and 
the North with targeted programs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our support for revenue sharing has 
remained stable at $55.1 million over the last few years. Our 
support for the transit for disabled program has also been steady 
at about $2.2 million. Aside from the revenue sharing and 
transit for the disabled, our department has been moving in the 
right direction through such programs or such things as grants 
in lieu of taxes. 
 
As you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the provincial government, 
like the federal government, is exempt from paying property 
taxes to municipal governments. Four years ago, however, this 
province made a policy decision to make a financial 
contribution for local services where government- or SPMC- 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) owned 
buildings are located. This year marks the fourth year that this 

program has been in place. 
 
This year local governments, including municipalities, school 
boards, and libraries, will receive $3.725 million increase 
bringing the annual total amount to $13.1 million. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, two years ago other targeted funding was 
introduced by placing $10 million in the provincial municipal 
infrastructure program. One year ago the coalition government 
introduced $5 million for infrastructure through the Centenary 
Fund. This year we are pleased that the federal government is 
joining these efforts and providing $12 million injection to our 
budget to support a tripartite program to help rebuild our 
municipal infrastructure. 
 
This demonstrates, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a steady progress in a 
positive direction. There are no programs cut. The combined 
total at the low point to municipalities was $68 million, and that 
was in 1998-99. It is $97 million for this fiscal year, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. If we were to add our support to SAMA, the 
Assessment Management Agency, and the four urban parks, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the total support to the municipal system 
would be in excess of $104 million. 
 
With increased support to the municipal sector through targeted 
programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will continue to evaluate 
our ability to increase our support in future years relative to the 
fiscal capacity and other provincial priorities. 
 
In the coming months, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our department 
will seek to engage the municipal sector in discussion about the 
goals and objectives and criteria that will serve the broad public 
interest in providing funding to municipalities. This will be a 
review of existing programs and existing funding levels with a 
view to making those programs better to serve the public 
interest. 
 
I mentioned the Centenary Fund a few moments ago, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We established this fund last year to invest in 
capital projects and strengthen all of our communities into the 
21st century. The fund includes a $120 million allocation over a 
four-year period in six core areas which include heritage in part, 
social housing, and municipal infrastructure. We will allocate 
$5 million per year in each of these areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
A couple of the projects that will be made possible through that 
kind of funding include $2.5 million over the remaining three 
years of the fund to replace 15 paratransit vehicles annually in 
Saskatchewan communities. That’s been told to me to be 
welcome news, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is in addition to the 
$2.2 million that the province has historically budgeted under 
the transit for disabled program for operating and capital 
replacement. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the Premier mentioned at the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
convention, $1.7 million is being provided to help clean up 
abandoned fuel storage tanks under the environment portion of 
the Centenary Fund. 
 
Finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the number of housing projects 
that we have previously announced are currently under way in 
Regina, Saskatoon, and Yorkton. Mr. Deputy Speaker, there 



April 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 411 

 

will soon be further announcement regarding allocations of 
funding available for heritage property, parks, municipal 
infrastructure, and, once again, social housing. 
 
In addition to the incremental funding provided by the 
Centenary Fund, the province’s funding for housing has 
remained stable this fiscal year at $36 million. And the federal 
government will also continue to provide approximately $62 
million to support our existing housing portfolio — something 
that’s extremely important to families throughout this province 
that need that kind of assistance. 
 
These funds enable the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation to 
partner with municipalities and meet the needs of more than 
60,000 low-income people throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the coalition government is making other 
advances in our department. This year we are adding $1.5 
million for the provincial disaster assistance program. You may 
recall that in recognition of the problems experienced with 
flooding in Vanguard and natural disasters in other areas of the 
province, our coalition government tripled — tripled, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — the maximum payments people can receive 
when uninsurable items are damaged by natural causes. 
 
Prior to this fiscal year, the province did not budget for this 
program, but managed the expenses during the year as a special 
circumstance. By starting to budget for this disaster program, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the province is increasing the reliability of 
its budget plan and its ability to make timely payments to 
disaster victims. 
 
This fiscal year there will also be an increase of $1 million for 
the Saskatchewan Archives Board to address a serious backlog 
in its important role — in its important role — in preserving 
historical records for our future generations. 
 
The Regina Public Library will receive a $45,000 increase from 
the province in the second year of a three-year phase-in to 
support its efforts to help people by sharing resources with 
residents of other communities. 
 
And funding for the Royal Saskatchewan Museum, the Western 
Development Museum, Wanuskewin Heritage Park, the 
Saskatchewan Science Centre, and the Saskatchewan Heritage 
Foundation will continue to remain stable. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, despite the historic investments this 
budget makes in highways, and the support that it provides for 
education, health, and connecting our youth in rural areas to the 
information age, the opposition members continue to trash talk 
Saskatchewan. This is a great shame, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The members opposite continue to suffer from Alberta envy and 
tell us how everything is so much better next door. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the coalition government believes in 
Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan people. And the members 
opposite, however, continue to trash talk this great province of 
ours. 
 
Strangely still, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite want 
the people of Saskatchewan to believe that they can run this 
province. And they can get out there and convince everyone 

else that Saskatchewan is a great place to live. Yet, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they are the people who trash talk Saskatchewan and 
they talk like they don’t believe in this province and don’t 
believe in Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are proud of 
this province. There are many people in this province who 
believe in its future, and contrary to what members opposite 
say, they are planning to stay here and continue to build 
Saskatchewan. Some, Mr. Speaker, are returning here and 
bringing their entrepreneurial skills to do great things in this 
province. 
 
Before me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have the “Community Pride” 
edition of the Moose Jaw Times-Herald. In it are many good 
news stories, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that people like the 
government and are investing in this province because they do 
believe in Saskatchewan and in the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
This whole . . . this entire paper is filled with businesses that are 
celebrating either just starting up business — having been five 
years, two years, three years, again five years, and it goes on, 
six, nine, ten years, twelve years, sixteen years. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it goes on and on — 19 years, 23 years. These are 
businesses that continue to believe in this great province, are 
happy to be here, are building their communities — 28 years, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker; 38 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They are 
still here in this province because they believe in this province 
and they speak highly of this province. They don’t tell their 
customers and their friends that this is a bad province to live in 
because of a bad governance. They say this is a great province 
because of the great coalition government. 
 
Forty-seven years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 48 years, 64 years, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, 91 years, 95 years, 96 years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — these are good news stories from great business 
people who invested in their province through their businesses, 
believe in their communities, and continue to contribute to this 
great province of ours, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that same community has recently seen 
investments — investments, new investments by the province, 
the community, and the federal government. These have 
resulted in the construction of the spa, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Everyone’s heard of the great spa in Moose Jaw. 
 
This was followed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the development of 
the tunnels and the attraction of an out-of-province business like 
Bombardier to run their air base. Since then, Moose Jaw has 
adopted an attitude that they can accomplish anything right here 
in Saskatchewan. And I’m sure that my colleagues, the member 
from Moose Jaw Wakamow and Moose Jaw North, would 
agree. 
 
I’d like to share a few of those good news items as well. While 
the members opposite say businesses are leaving and everything 
is gloom and doom, the “Community Pride”, once again, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, tells it all. It lists many of the businesses that I 
just mentioned that have been here for years and years and plan 
on remaining here. 
 
Now aside from those businesses proudly advertising how long 
they’ve been here, let’s just go to a story here about the tunnels. 



412 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2001 

 

Let’s read something about these tunnels, “Underground 
Economy Thriving.” And I quote from this newspaper, a former 
. . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, the folks over there aren’t going to 
like to hear this, they’re not going to like to hear this because 
they believe the people leave here and never want to come back 
because it’s a bad place to live. 
 
Well I want to quote: 
 

A former Moose Jaw resident from Vancouver visiting the 
tunnels in the summer of 1999 put a new face on the whole 
project. Danny Guillaume, who grew up in the Marquis 
district, saw the potential for much greater development of 
tourism potential. A successful developer of a video store 
chain and a big box pet food retailer that sold for $30 
million, the 37-year-old envisioned a world-class tourism 
destination built around the tunnels. 
 

(16:00) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, right here in Moose Jaw, in this great 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Look at the good news stories: “More Senior’s Homes Being 
Built in the City”, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are good news 
stories throughout the . . . wheat, the top crop for Moose Jaw 
area farmers. The chicken crop holds potential as the next 
Cinderella crop . . . chickpea crop . . . sorry not chicken crop, I 
got the member for Melfort all excited. It’s the chickpea crop 
holds potential as the next Cinderella crop, especially on lighter 
soils in the South. 
 
There are a lot of good news stories in this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Moose Jaw is a city on the grow, being one of 
the fastest growing cities of its size in Canada. Moose Jaw 
problems, other critics wish for . . . that’s other people wish for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The mayor, Mr. Deputy Speaker, credits 
developments of the spa with changing attitudes in Moose Jaw 
and turning the economy around. That’s what we need, a 
change in attitude. The change in attitude gave investors 
confidence to develop the tunnels and other tourism operations. 
 
It used to be that young people said they had to get the heck out 
of the city, says Mayor Schwinghamer. That’s changed. Now 
the young people are saying I can stay here or I want to come 
back. 
 
Those are the good news stories, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that do 
exist in this province. Those are the stories of people in this 
province that believe . . . they believe in the coalition 
government, they believe in the stability of this government . . . 
governance, and they will continue to invest in their 
communities, because they believe in themselves, and this great 
province of ours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to close by reminding the members what 
this budget represents as our province approaches its 
millennium celebrations in a few years. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
Saskatchewan in the last 10 years has faced, and conquered, one 
of its greatest crises. My coalition colleagues and former 

Premier, Roy Romanow, successfully overcame the deficit 
legacy of the predecessors of the members opposite. 
 
While Liberals did not always agree with the former premier, he 
deserves credit for restoring this great province to a position 
where it could finally look forward to the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — In this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and in 
this House, the members of this coalition government and the 
people of this province have yet another legacy of the members 
opposite to overcome. And that we will overcome. And that’s 
the attitude. 
 
The members opposite, and their Tory predecessors, left this 
province a legacy of scandal. And left people thinking that 
Saskatchewan is a place you leave from and not a place you go 
to to live and fulfill your dreams with a good quality of life. 
Each day, in the trash-talking we hear, we continue to hear the 
promotion of that legacy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a good province. This is a great province. 
We believe in this province. We believe it has a bright future 
and we will make sure we reverse the negative attitude and the 
legacy. We will reverse the negative attitude so that people will 
believe, as do the people that live and support our communities, 
as they do believe. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
take this opportunity to speak about the budget brought down 
by the Minister of Finance on March 30 and explain to the 
Minister of Finance how disappointed the people of Redberry 
Lake are concerning the direction of the budget and the 
direction of the NDP Liberal coalition government. 
 
The people of Redberry Lake and the people of Saskatchewan 
were looking for tax relief, but what did they get? Zero tax 
relief. No cut to PST (provincial sales tax). No cut to the gas 
tax. No cut to property tax. No new cuts to income tax. No new 
tax relief for Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This, 
from a government that took in over $500 million in windfall 
revenues. The government is sitting on a $500 million slush 
fund, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the expanded PST that was announced in last 
year’s budget is hurting businesses in Saskatchewan, hurting the 
economic performance of this province and, in particular, 
hurting the businesses and people on the west side of the 
province who unfortunately are losing sales and losing 
businesses and people to Alberta because of the costs of the 
expanded PST. 
 
And even in the city of North Battleford, it’s affecting the 
economy there drastically. You only have to talk to any 
accountant in North Battleford and they will tell you that the 
expanded PST has hurt them directly as a business, and hurt 
their customers. 
 
Also property tax, no reduction in property tax; possibly an 
increase in property tax, which I’ll discuss later. It’s hurting the 



April 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 413 

 

businesses and farmers of Redberry Lake and Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d just like to quote from The 
Leader-Post, Regina, Thursday, April 5. The headline reads, 
“Not much help.” 
 
Sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one more here. “Urban centres said 
shut out.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saturday, March 31: 
 

Saskatoon Mayor Jim Maddin clutched a copy of Friday’s 
budget address to his chest and said he was guarding it 
jealously. 
 
“It’s the only thing the province gave to me today,” he 
joked. 
 

He goes on to say: 
 

“Municipalities are completely shut of this budget, and it 
hurts.” 
 
Regina Mayor Pat Fiacco said, “There isn’t one new dollar 
going to municipalities, not one . . . the urban centres have 
been absolutely blanked,” (Mr. Deputy Speaker). 

 
The president of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association (SUMA) criticized the province’s reporting of 
federal money within the province’s budget figures. “That’s 
just flow-through money and I think it is somewhat 
misleading and, actually, almost deceiving,” Mike Badham 
said. 

 
It goes on to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

“People did share in the pain, and municipalities in 
particular,” Badham said. “Now, there’s the 
acknowledgement that things are getting better, but there’s 
no acknowledgement of any further transfers to 
municipalities.” 

 
The mayor of Regina says there’s a likelihood we could be 
looking at property tax increases unless the municipalities are 
able to do things differently, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
People of Saskatchewan were looking for a reduction in income 
tax in this budget and again they were disappointed, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. No decreases in income tax were announced. And 
again, that makes the province and the businesses 
uncompetitive in this province in relationship to our trading 
neighbours both east, west, north, and south, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s not just to Alberta that we’re losing businesses, 
but we’re also losing businesses and jobs to the United States. 
 
What little tax relief the budget did give was far too much . . . 
far too little, Mr. Speaker. It was only a reduction in the 
small-business tax by 2 per cent, which only cost the 
Government of Saskatchewan $8 million. And there’s no 
long-term plan in order to phase out the small-business tax. The 
businesses of Saskatchewan were looking for this business tax 
to be phased out, and they were very disappointed that this has 
not happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We do see higher energy rates starting to impact the bottom line 
of the NDP Crown. So what does the government do? The 
government raises SaskEnergy rates, raises SaskPower rates, 
and more rate hikes planned for later. 
 
What did they do to protect the family from the effects of the 
high energy prices? They gave a measly $25 back to the 
families of this province. The government’s sitting on $500 
million in windfall in oil and gas revenues and the government 
only gives back $25 for Saskatchewan families, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. The Government of Saskatchewan gave a rebate but 
the rebate is gone and so is the tax cuts from last year’s budget, 
Mr. Speaker. Net cut to personal taxes in 2001 from the 2000 
budget documents was $106.9 million. 
 
The current rate hikes: SaskEnergy rate hike was 88.8 million; 
SaskPower rate hike, 14 million; and energy rebate was a 
merely $10 million. A total rate hikes of $92.8 million, which 
totally took away any tax relief that the government gave in last 
year’s budget. 
 
And this year we’re looking at more. SaskEnergy rate hikes at 
least another $88.8 million. And who knows how much more 
SaskPower rates? And further energy rebates were 
unfortunately zero. At least another $88.8 million in rate 
increases without any tax relief whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The difference between the Saskatchewan Party and the NDP is 
clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The NDP believe tax dollars belong 
to them. The Saskatchewan Party believes tax dollars belong to 
the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party believes government should be doing 
everything it can to reduce the tax burden and to leave more 
money in the hands of the Saskatchewan taxpayers. The NDP 
believe they can spend your money better than you can. 
 
They believe in making bigger government. Incredibly the NDP 
has added 570 new government employees. Yes, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, another 570 new government bureaucrats at a time 
when employment in Saskatchewan is down. Last year figures: 
13,000 jobs in one year lost. New Statistics Canada reports 
another 4,800 people net migration and 8,400 people leaving 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and what does the NDP 
do? Nothing for the province of Saskatchewan whatsoever. 
 
It’s incredible, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but it seems that the only 
people that the government has pleased were the union leaders. 
Again it seems to be a pay-off to the union leaders like Barb 
Byers, who wanted more and bigger government so they’d have 
more union members, and in turn more union support for the 
NDP, all at taxpayers’ expense, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But there is one union that isn’t quite happy with the 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to quote from an 
article Friday, March 30. “Union blasts raise for community 
workers.” Unfortunately, the government has forgot about 
community-based organizations in this budget. 
 
The member from Cumberland speaks about respect for 
workers. Well I’d like to know what he thinks about respect for 
these workers in the community-based organizations. 
 



414 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2001 

 

I’d just like to read a bit from the article, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

Union officials who represent community-based workers 
had harsh words for the government after it announced 
Thursday that it will give a $6-million wage increase to the 
province’s community-based organizations (CBOs). 
 
“This government is perpetuating the past reliance on these 
workers’ silence and invisibility and on the silence and 
invisibility of the clients for whom they care” said . . . 
CUPE national representative. “They think they can get 
away with giving us crumbs.” 
 

The member also goes on to say that: 
 

The $6 million wage increase does not bring workers closer 
to their goal of wage equity, but if it had been the first year 
of a multi-year strategy, the workers would have been 
happy. 
 
The three unions, which represent 3,000 of the 10,000 
community-based workers employed in areas such as child 
care crisis intervention, group homes and women’s shelters, 
haven’t ruled out the possibility of strike action to back 
their demands (Mr. Deputy Speaker). 
 

So that’s what they think of the budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What does the University of Saskatchewan think of the budget, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? It says “Budget — a let-down at U of S. 
Students face tuition hike, MacKinnon warns.” 
 
I’d like to just quote from the article: 
 

The provincial government’s commitment clearly ends 
when it comes to universities, University of Saskatchewan 
president Peter MacKinnon said Friday. 
 
Although university funding will rise by 3.5 per cent, that’s 
not enough to cover inflationary higher salaries and (the) 
increased utility costs. 
 
That means students will face higher tuition, MacKinnon 
said. 
 
“This falls well short of the kind of investment we require,” 
a discouraged MacKinnon said in an interview. 
 
“Clearly I haven’t been successful in conveying the 
message that investing in the future requires a major 
investment in the universities (Mr. Deputy Speaker). 

 
He goes on to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

“What we heard today will have an effect on tuition . . . We 
will require more revenue from tuition and I would expect 
that will mean substantial increases in tuition.” 

 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government announces a rural 
vitalization office and unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
where do they put it? They put it in Regina. It would have been 

a good sign to rural Saskatchewan if they had placed this office 
out in the rural areas where it’s supposed to serve, but 
unfortunately it has been put in Regina again. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government looks like a government 
that has been run behind closed doors by former premier, Allan 
Blakeney — more bureaucrats, more Crowns, more and bigger 
government departments. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Redberry Lake have been 
working hard. The Redberry Lake Biosphere Committee has 
been holding public meetings, working on any advantage they 
can find in their area to promote economic growth and 
economic renewal. It’s unfortunate but they run up against the 
same roadblocks year after year. 
 
They need, in order to encourage investment in the Redberry 
Lake area, they need a proper infrastructure. The roads and 
highways are in a disastrous situation and desperately need to 
be upgraded. They need assurances that the hospital in Hafford 
will remain there as a viable hospital for the citizens of that 
area. They need simple things like a proper cellphone service. 
How are they to have tourism in the area without proper 
cellphone service, Mr. Deputy Speaker? And the list goes on 
and on. 
 
And of course, farming is a very important part of Redberry 
Lake constituency and unfortunately the government has let 
them down in that area as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’d like to quote from The Leader-Post, Regina, Thursday, 
April 5, “Not much help”: 
 

The Canadian Farm Income Program is turning into a 
horrible April Fool’s joke for many Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
First, the good news: $200 million is available under the 
program for our farmers this year. 
 
Now, the not-so-good news: Thousands of producers who 
suffered plummeting incomes in the 1990s won’t get a 
dime. That’s because only those farmers who did really 
badly and suffered a major income drop in 2000 — a single 
year — (will) qualify. 
 
Now the punch line (Mr. Deputy Speaker): All of that $200 
million is unlikely to be used up because not enough 
farmers will qualify. But there sure aren’t any giggles down 
on the farm in Saskatchewan. 
 
University of Saskatchewan professor Ken Rosaasen 
summed it up . . . this week: “In my view, the program will 
pay farmers between very little and not very much.” 
 

He estimates there’ll be an average cheque of about $3,700. 
 

Canada is unwilling to match the agricultural subsidies of 
Europe and the U.S., but . . . (unfortunately) Farmers are 
going broke and quitting the land in droves in 
Saskatchewan . . . (Mr. Deputy Speaker). 
 

And again the provincial government has been promising a 
long-term safety net since 1995 when they tore up the GRIP 



April 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 415 

 

(gross revenue insurance program) program. And unfortunately 
the farmers of this province are very disappointed that they 
have not received any assurance of a long-term safety net. 
 
Again the question is asked, what would a Saskatchewan Party 
government do? Well a Saskatchewan Party government would 
lower taxes, have a smaller government. 
 
In the budget, the government is collecting over $500 million in 
windfall and oil and gas revenues, despite the fact that the 
government now has over $500 million sitting in its Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. There was no, absolutely no increase to 
municipal revenue sharing. 
 
Given increased operating costs such as the dramatic increases 
to SaskEnergy, SaskPower rates, most municipalities will have 
no choice but to increase property taxes as a result of the 
government’s inaction in revenue sharing. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party estimates that a $300 million increase 
to urban and rural sharing would . . . revenue sharing would 
allow municipal governments to hold the line on property tax 
hikes. It is worth noting that three . . . $30 million is about the 
figure the provincial government will spend this year on hiring 
570 new government employees, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to quote from some letters I have 
from communities in Redberry Lake concerning the 
Saskatchewan Party’s amendment to the budget. The RM of 
Leask, 464, supports the proposed amendment to the 2001 
budget to provide an additional $30 million in revenue sharing 
for municipalities. 
 
The village of Leask also supports the amendment to provide 
$30 million in revenue-sharing funds for the municipalities. 
 
The village of Marcelin, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . I’d like to 
read it into the record — it’s rather lengthy — about their 
concerns about the budget and the support of our amendment. It 
says: 
 

Please be informed that the council for the village of 
Marcelin supports your call for an additional $30 million in 
revenue-sharing grants. 

 
And some of the reasons for the support are: in 1993, the 
revenue-sharing grant for the village was $13,299; for the year 
2000, it was $6,765, for a total decrease of $6,534, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The assessment in revenue decreases from 1998 to 2000 were 
as follows: assessment decreased by 26.35 per cent; tax 
revenue, 18.7 per cent; total municipal revenue decreased by 
11.3 per cent. The assessment for the year 2001 is $1,169,380, 
which is an additional 2,670 decrease over the last year, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Marcelin council were required to increase their mill rate by 2 
mills, increase the minimum tax by $150 per property, and 
increase the basic water and sewer rates by $30 per year per 
house. 
 
Expenditures in the village of Marcelin: utilities have increased 

from $16,333 in 1998 to an anticipated $18,951 for the year 
2001, for a total revenue of $2,618 — 2.2 mills, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Net policing costs after grants from $111 in 1999 to an 
anticipated cost of $3,000 this year — 2.56 mills. 
 
The PST tax imposed by the provincial government on repair 
services, equipment, maintenance, professional services, and 
used equipment also meant additional expenditures for the 
village. And also due to the budget restraints, our municipal 
employees did not receive an increase in their salaries since 
1997, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The village is in need of a grass mower for this year. They will 
be required to deplete their capital trust fund of $6,000 and 
finance the remaining $4,500 from general operating revenue. 
 
The council are finding it extremely difficult to properly 
maintain their sidewalks and streets. It appears that each year 
there’s a further deterioration due to lack of funds for proper 
repair and maintenance. 
 
It goes on to say these are just a few difficulties that the 
Marcelin council are experiencing due to the lack of provincial 
government funding, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The government should not be telling municipalities and the 
ratepayers to once tighten their belts while expanding the size 
of the provincial civil service. 
 
I will be . . . I will not be supporting the budget but will support 
the Saskatchewan Party amendment urging the provincial 
government to cancel its plans to expand the civil service by 
570 positions and instead use the money to provide $30 million 
to municipal governments to allow them to hold the line on 
property taxes. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure today 
to provide a reply to the budget speech that was given by our 
Minister of Finance on March 30. I want to commend the 
Finance minister on his budget that sees a significant 
investment in education, highways and transportation, and in 
technology. It’s a budget that gives people in our province the 
tools that they need in order to succeed. 
 
I also want to wish . . . I also wish to congratulate our new 
Speaker upon his election. And also my congratulations to you, 
as the member for Regina Sherwood, as you assume your new 
duties as the Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to thank the previous Speaker of the House, the member 
for Melville, for his contribution to the legislative process in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I also want to congratulate two new members of the legislature 
— the member from Regina Elphinstone and the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. They had a tremendous opportunity to 
speak to citizens in both Saskatoon and Regina as they 



416 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2001 

 

campaigned for their seats in the legislature, and I know that 
both of these members will make excellent contributions to the 
legislature in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to say thank you to my constituency 
assistant, Judy Gossen, who works in my MLA office in 
Saskatoon. Judy had a three-month medical leave from her 
duties as she underwent a very serious treatment for a medical 
condition, and she is now back in the office as of Monday, 
April 2. And I know that people who live in our constituency 
have sent many good wishes to her and she has made full 
recovery. 
 
To the young people who filled in for Judy, Sheila Cameron 
and Janine Rafoss, I want to thank them for their work in the 
constituency over the past several weeks. 
 
Before I get into the budget, I want to make a few comments 
about the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. As you know, Mr. 
Speaker, whenever one talks about their own constituency, they 
risk launching a debate amongst various members of the 
legislature about their constituencies. But I want to say 
something about the people who live in Nutana. In many ways 
our constituency is the centre of Saskatoon. It’s the very heart 
and soul of our great city. 
 
The constituents in Saskatoon Nutana represent a real 
cross-section of the community of Saskatoon and of our society 
in general. Mr. Speaker, the constituents of Saskatoon Nutana 
are proud citizens of our province and they are proud citizens of 
our city. They’re level-headed people. They know a good 
budget when they see it. And they do believe this is a good 
budget, Mr. Speaker, a very good budget. 
 
People in my constituency are in agreement with most people 
all across the province that we delivered an excellent budget on 
behalf of the people of our province last Friday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they see this as a balanced budget. It’s balanced in 
the accounting sense but, just as important, it’s balanced in its 
approach. 
 
They know that this budget provides for increased investments 
in our citizens and the services that they need. They know that 
we will see increased operating grants to the three school 
divisions in our city — the public, Catholic, and the 
francophone school division. And they know that our city and 
our community will see significant direct benefits as a result of 
the increased investment in funding and health care and 
education in our cultural and community sectors and all of the 
services that are provided to the people of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be here today to tell you more 
about our good news budget for the province of Saskatchewan. 
As the Minister of Finance indicated last Friday, under the 
leadership of our former premier, Roy Romanow, and through 
the many, many sacrifices borne by our citizens, we’ve been 
able together to restore our province’s financial health and 
we’ve taken Saskatchewan back from the brink. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re now in a position to fulfill the vision of our 
new Premier, a vision for a Saskatchewan where all people 
enjoy prosperity and a good quality of life. Mr. Speaker, 

contrary to the doom and gloom preached daily by the 
opposition, our government is moving in an exciting new 
direction. 
 
As an educator as a profession, I’m especially happy that we’re 
connecting our citizens to the future by making the biggest 
investment ever in education and training so that young people 
have the tools that they need in order to succeed right here at 
home in our province. Mr. Speaker, in this budget, we’re 
investing $1.1 billion in education and skills training — the 
largest amount ever spent in our province’s history. 
 
We’re also going to use some of that new money to establish 42 
new community schools in both rural and urban Saskatchewan, 
nearly doubling the number of community schools in our 
province. 
 
We’re going to provide new training initiatives and 
opportunities in the skilled trades through the Aboriginal 
apprenticeship program. And this is extremely important 
because we have a young Aboriginal population that wants to 
access post-secondary education and skills training, and that’s 
what this initiative will do. 
 
We’re going to increase the number of early learning programs 
for at-risk children in high-needs communities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re taking the action needed to provide 
students the opportunity to participate in our province, to 
communicate with each other and compete in a global 
economy. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re making good on our promise to shift the 
cost of education away from the local property tax base and 
bump up the province’s share for the total cost of education 
from 40 per cent of cost of education to 42 per cent by 
increasing the property . . . or the operating grants to school 
divisions by $41 million. That’s a 10 per cent increase over last 
year’s budget. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know the opposition over there doesn’t 
really know where they sit on the need for a high-speed Internet 
in our province, particularly in our rural communities when it 
comes to Saskatchewan businesses and Saskatchewan citizens. 
And I note the member from Kindersley says in the March 21, 
2001 issue of Hansard and I quote: 
 

The new Minister . . . (of) Rural Revitalization said, and we 
were talking about this this morning in caucus, some of the 
things that they’ve been putting forward. The moment that 
. . . it is almost laughable some of the things, Madam 
Minister, and, Mr. Speaker, that they have put forward in 
terms of this thing. They are saying that one of the 
problems in rural Saskatchewan is the fact that we don’t 
have (a) high-speed Internet. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, he was laughing about the need for a 
high-speed Internet in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, we have the member from Arm River 
and what does he say regarding the high-speed Internet in 



April 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 417 

 

Hansard on March 29, 2001? He says and I quote: 
 

Now another one is . . . high-speed Internet, Mr. Speaker. I 
had a business just . . . (the other) morning from Outlook 
saying that he could hire two additional staff if he had 
high-speed Internet in Outlook. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, contrary to the confused and confusing 
statements coming from . . . as the member from . . . our Deputy 
Premier said, flip and flop — because they seem to be flipping 
and flopping all over the place on that side of the House — we 
know, we know that high-speed Internet is important to rural 
business and rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And if the Sask Party happened to visit their own Web site, they 
would see that one of the resolutions that they passed at their 
convention, I believe last fall — actually a resolution from the 
constituency of Kindersley — the member from Kindersley 
who’s opposed to high-speed Internet. What did that resolution 
say? They said that they wanted access to Internet in order to 
promote agricultural business in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So we have a member who stands up in the House. He’s 
opposed to his own party policy. He says his caucus laughs 
about their own party policy. And then we see the member from 
Arm River saying that a business in Outlook could hire a couple 
of other people if they had access to high-speed Internet in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this budget delivers high-speed Internet to 
rural communities in our province and that’s good news for 
economic development in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re also connecting Saskatchewan people to 
one another and to the world by investing in another 
information highway to create a growing and diversified 
economy. Mr. Speaker, in the April 3, 2001 Leader-Post under 
the headline “Internet upgrade called boost to province,” Larry 
Symes the board Chair of the Saskatchewan Research Network 
speaks about our commitment to provide enhanced Internet 
service for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Symes says: 
 

This is significant . . . (and) This will permit us to develop 
national centres of excellence (so that) We can compete 
with scientists (across) the globe. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I ask you: does this sound laughable to you? 
The member from Kindersley thinks so, but we don’t think so, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a few minutes to talk about our 
government’s commitment to health care. People in our 
province see health care as a top priority, and we do too, as their 
representatives on the government side. This year we’ll spend 
$2.2 billion on health — an increase of 11.6 per cent over last 
year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our province that introduced medicare. And 
we will continue to provide a system that is sustainable, stable, 
and effective into the future. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, our 
health care system is the envy of North America. Its resources 

are being stretched to the limit and it’s undergoing radical 
change, but when has this not been the case? 
 
It bends, Mr. Speaker, but it does not break. And those people 
who have direct experience with the system are pleased with the 
services that they receive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people recognize that we have to 
make changes to assure that we can sustain our health system 
into the future. And I might add, Mr. Speaker, they don’t want a 
system that is privatized or offers private medicine in the way 
that we are seeing creeping privatization in Alberta, and 
certainly they don’t want a US system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last year at the request of the former premier of Saskatchewan, 
the Commission on Medicare was launched to identify pressing 
issues and recommend actions on change required for a stable 
and effective health system. The Fyke Commission report will 
soon be delivered to our new Premier and we will review the 
recommendations and we will obviously want to receive 
feedback, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we’re going to continue to place Saskatchewan’s health 
care interests on the national agenda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re also connecting to the future by investing 
records amount of money in our roads and highways to support 
economic growth and development in our province. If people in 
this province are to prosper, we have to connect people to 
markets around the world. And to do that, Mr. Speaker, we need 
to have a strong physical infrastructure. In this budget, we will 
make the largest single investment in Saskatchewan’s highway 
and transportation system ever seen in our province’s history. 
 
In 1997 we announced our decision to spend $2.5 billion over 
the next 10 years on improving transportation in our province. 
And with this year’s budget commitment, we’re easily 
surpassing the spending level needed to meet that $2.5 billion 
target. We’re going to invest $311.6 million in transportation. 
That’s a 25 per cent increase over last year’s budget. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about another commitment 
that we’re exceeding in this year’s budget, and I’m referring 
specifically to our twinning initiative on Saskatchewan’s 
national highway system. 
 
In 1997, our government promised to twin all of the No. 1, the 
Trans-Canada Highway, from the Alberta border to the 
Manitoba border, and to twin Highway No. 16, the Yellowhead 
Highway, from the Battlefords to the Alberta border. We’re 
going to complete the twinning of the section between the 
Alberta border and Tompkins by 2004. Four years ahead of 
schedule, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this year, on this section of the Trans-Canada, we will pave 
and open a further 19 kilometres from the Alberta border to the 
east. And we will also begin upgrading and grading 21 
kilometres that will take us to the junction of Highway 21 at 
Maple Creek. 
 
We’ll be opening 33.5 kilometres of new highway on the 
Trans-Canada between Indian Head and Wolseley. And we’re 
going to open 16 kilometres of new highway on the 



418 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2001 

 

Yellowhead, from west of Maidstone to east of Lashburn. 
 
Last year we budgeted $13.3 million for twinning our national 
highway system, and this year we’re almost doubling that 
amount of our spending by investing $25.6 million in additional 
twinning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re ahead of the schedule set in our 1997 
provincial twinning commitment. And, Mr. Speaker, we pushed 
ahead our twinning plans without federal government 
participation. The federal government still refuses to accept 
their share of responsibility for the national transportation 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re also going to improve those roads that make 
up our major trade corridors. We want to improve northern 
highways, and northern roads as well. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to be fixing the highways damaged by increased grain 
hauling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to clear the air once and for all on the fuel 
tax and equivalent road and highway spending. 
 
Fact — this year’s budget estimates fuel tax revenue of $367 
million. Fact — when you deduct fuel tax revenue from the 
trains, planes, farms, and First Nations fuel tax rebates, you 
have $326 million collected on . . . (inaudible) . . . fuel tax. 
 
Fact. Our government will invest $334 million in 
Saskatchewan’s roads and highways in this year’s budget. Fact. 
Our investment in roads and highways in our province is greater 
than the . . . (inaudible) . . . road fuel tax collected. End of issue, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be fixing the roads. And it will be a 
very good year for employment in the Department of 
Highways. And it will be an even better year for Saskatchewan 
people who will see real improvements to their roads and 
highway transportation system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to upgrade primary and regional 
pavements, and we’ve substantially increased our surface 
preservation program this year to improve the condition of 
aging pavements and the level of surface on TMS (thin 
membrane surface) roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely happy to see that our government is 
enjoying very rewarding and co-operative relationships with the 
major transportation stakeholders. I’d like to take this 
opportunity to acknowledge the contributions as such important 
stakeholders as the Saskatchewan Road Builders and Heavy 
Construction Association, the Association of Consulting 
Engineers, and SARM, and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association). I’d also like to acknowledge the 
good work that’s being done by our 11 area transportation 
planning committees throughout our province. All of these 
groups, Mr. Speaker, are working with us to improve 
transportation in our province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, clearly improving transportation is a priority 
for our government, and that’s reflected in this year’s budget 
increase. Mr. Speaker, our major or primary highway systems 
carry about 65 per cent of the traffic in our province. These 

major highways are the arteries that support economic and 
social development. They are the highways that serve us 
interprovincially, and these are the highways that support 
economic development across our province. 
 
These highways are absolutely critical to our ability to move 
commodities to market. And these highways are essential as we 
encourage tourism in our province. Mr. Speaker, this budget 
provides for the kind of system we’ll require in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a minute to talk about short-line 
railroads. Short lines obviously are going to help us with our 
TMS highways and are one of the solutions to TMS’s is to keep 
rail service in many of our province. 
 
In 1994, Saskatchewan had just one short-line rail company that 
was serving a 50-kilometre distance. Today we have seven 
short lines serving 1 point . . . or 1,250 kilometres of railway. 
Our department’s short-line advisory unit has helped 
organizations and communities cope with branch-line 
abandonment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were extremely pleased to hear CN (Canadian 
National) announce last week that they have put a moratorium 
on further branch-line abandonment in our province and in the 
prairie basin in order that all of the stakeholders can come 
together and determine how we’re going to have an integrated 
road, rail, and grain-handling and marketing system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last fall our Premier made rural revitalization a 
centrepiece in his campaign for the leadership of our party to 
become Premier of our province. In one of his first moves as 
Premier, he created a new Rural Revitalization office and 
appointed a Minister Responsible for Rural Revitalization to 
work with rural communities to help create initiatives for 
economic growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, make no bones about it, revitalizing rural 
Saskatchewan will be a key focus for our government in the 
coming months and years. The office of Rural Revitalization 
will ensure that programs and services across government work 
to support rural citizens, to support rural communities, as they 
endeavour to promote economic development in our province. 
The office will develop initiatives that contribute to rural 
economic development. And this office will work to alleviate 
the kinds of obstacles that we sometimes see when it comes to 
rural opportunity. 
 
Another important part of my new department’s mandate will 
be to consult with rural communities, businesses, and 
individuals about economic development opportunities. The 
focus of the office is first and foremost to ensure that rural 
individuals and businesses have the support of our government 
to seize the various business opportunities that will be available. 
We’re going to help to build a strong and competitive economic 
base outside of our large centres, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite in the Saskatchewan Party 
would try to have us believe that Saskatchewan is the most 
godforsaken place to live on earth. — that no one is working in 
our province, that our roads are crumbling, that our health care 
system is a disaster. The Saskatchewan Party would have us and 
the world believe that our children are leaving in droves, that 



April 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

 

our taxes are too high, and that our farm economy and rural way 
of life is gone. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, under the leadership of our new Premier, the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale, our government is going to 
work with all citizens in our province to develop opportunities 
in all regions of our great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve learned as a minister of the Crown, that 
budgets are not about numbers but they’re about people, they’re 
about our citizens. Good budgets address people’s priorities, 
and Mr. Speaker, this budget addresses the priorities of the 
citizens of our province. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Premier has a vision for our province. It’s a 
vision where people are prosperous and where they enjoy a 
good quality of life. Mr. Speaker, our Premier has a vision for 
this province that builds on the spirit of the citizens of our 
province. He believes that our province is filled with prosperity. 
 
We can be a confident province and an innovative province and 
that’s why you see, throughout the budget, the notion of 
connecting to the future. Mr. Speaker, this is the true spirit of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a Premier and a government that is moving ahead into 
the future. We have confidence in this province. We have 
confidence in the citizens of this province. We are optimistic 
about the opportunities available for our young people, our 
citizens, and we are going to build on our many strengths, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’m going to be supporting the budget when we vote on it 
tomorrow and I can assure the members opposite I will not be 
supporting their amendment where they basically say to the 
public service in this province that the work that you do is not 
valuable. And, Mr. Speaker, the work that people in the public 
service provide to our citizens is valuable. 
 
The work that the people do in the Department of Highways to 
maintain our highway system in this province is valuable. It 
makes our roads safe for our vehicle traffic, for our ambulances 
and for our school buses. That is good public work. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the public service deserves to be treated with 
respect and any government that does not understand that, any 
political party that does not understand the importance of the 
public service in terms of getting the work done in this province 
in the public sector is doomed for failure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Their motion will fail tomorrow. It will fail tomorrow. And, Mr. 
Speaker, their motion has been sent far and wide across this 
province to the 60,000 people that provide public services in 
municipal government, in schools, in hospitals, in Crown 
corporations and in the civil service. They and their families 
will know what kind of contempt these members opposite show 
to the public service. 
 
So I will be supporting the budget and I will not be supporting 
the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m very pleased to stand and talk on the budget. We’ve heard 
an awful lot of . . . from both sides of the House about what the 
budget has done or has not done, but I want to, I want to come 
again back to you with some of the comments that we have 
already heard, but some that are in the paper from Saturday, 
March 31, The Leader-Post: “Budget has spending back in style 
again.” There’s an interesting point in this particular article, Mr. 
Speaker. And it says, quote: 
 

While I applaud Calvert’s concern for the downtrodden and 
disadvantaged, I offer this caveat: Just as government does 
not exist to merely make ends meet, it must also remember 
from where the means to those ends come. 
 

And I think that’s a very, very important message in this, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also another point that I’d like to address is from 
the Saturday paper also: “Business leaders call for longer-term 
tax plans.” And I think we all look at that. 
 
And in the article — and I’ll paraphrase a bit — and it says, 
we’ve got to be competitive on our taxes. And it talks about 
there’s 500 million in new spending from three years ago, and 
with that half a billion dollars they could have eliminated the 
small-business tax, cut school taxes in half, and sped up, 
deepened, and broadened the personal income tax cuts they 
announced last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear an awful lot of rhetoric about the budget. 
But here’s one I think that’s very near and dear to the members 
opposite when it hits the urban centres: “Urban centres said shut 
out.” And I quote: 
 

“Municipalities are completely shut out of this budget, and 
it hurts,” Regina Mayor Pat Fiacco said. “There isn’t one 
new dollar going to municipalities, not one . . . the urban 
centres have been absolutely blanked.” 
 

And in the same article, Mr. Speaker, I want to read another 
part of it. In this particular same article it says: 
 

The president of Regina’s Amalgamated Transit Union is 
worried the lack of increases to the revenue-sharing grants 
will lead to reduced services, such as bus routes and 
para-transit services. 
 
“We hear they’re going to increase funding for the disabled 
by 20 per cent for education, but there’s not enough rides to 
get them there,” John McMormack said. “They may have 
forgotten who put them into power here . . . now they’re 
going after the rural vote and we’re going to be paying for 
it.” 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if this budget is going after the rural vote, I 
think there’s something really wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on[CORRECT] The Leader-Post on Tuesday, 
April 3, here’s another article that, I think, should be very near 
and dear to all of us. And it says: “Oil industry came up dry in 



420 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2001 

 

the latest Sask. budget.” 
 
In this article, Mr. Speaker, we look at what the oil industry is 
basically saying. And I quote: 
 

“We don’t see much advantage at all for the $1.2 . . . 
(million) we’ve put into the economy,” said Mike Monea, 
president of Flatland Exploration Ltd. of Regina, following 
Friday’s budget. 
 
“The only thing that’s good for Saskatchewan oil 
companies is that the taxes here are so high we don’t have a 
lot of competition.” 

 
So competition . . . there’s so much taxes they don’t have 
competition. That’s the only positive thing they have to say 
about the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to do just a little quote here. And I 
think it’s something, I think it’s something for the members 
opposite. And this is . . . it says: imaginative insight, 
statesmanlike foresight, sagacity in planning. And I’m 
wondering, I wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if anybody on that 
side knows, knows what that really means. Because I have 
heard, I have heard for the last few days about a vision — a 
vision for Saskatchewan. We hear from members opposite, we 
have a vision on this side of the House, over there. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I just quoted you 
was the definition of vision. Now I say to you, was any of that 
in this budget? And I think the answer is absolutely no. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s very, very interesting, it’s very 
interesting when we talk about taxes. And I’m going to read 
about taxes from the member from Regina South. Mr. Speaker, 
in Hansard on March 26, the member from Regina South, he 
says: 
 

Saskatchewan today draws the single lowest — the single 
lowest — proportion of its revenue from income taxes of 
any province in Canada. 

 
And goes on to repeat it, goes on to repeat it: 
 

I want to repeat this . . . the lowest — write this down, 
members opposite — lowest percentage of its budgetary 
income from income tax of any province. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I consider that a sorry state of 
affairs if you consider that you’re proud of the fact that you’re 
not collecting any income tax. That means to me you don’t have 
people working and that people are going out of the province to 
work. I would be happy if every person in this province could 
pay income tax, and the member opposite is not happy with it. 
He’s proud of the fact that we have the lowest source of revenue 
from it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, it just does not make sense 
— and that is not progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I spoke with a . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I understand that the 
hour of adjournment is approaching and members may be 
getting a little restless, but I’d just ask . . . the hon. member for 
Wood River has the floor and I’d just ask that we all quieten 
down to hear him. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to digress. 
I would like to digress if I may for a couple of minutes. And the 
jeering and the heckling, which I don’t mind, but it brings to 
mind a story, a factual course of events that happened to me 
when I was in Winnipeg. 
 
I was in Winnipeg listening to an individual speak, and as he 
was speaking, people opposite like the people opposite here, but 
people in the crowd were heckling the speaker. And the speaker 
stopped right in mid-tracks and said; please don’t heckle while 
I’m speaking. He said, quote, he said: 
 

I only have 15 minutes to make an idiot of myself and you 
have the rest of your life. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I talk to my constituents, one of the 
things that very much concerns them is taxes. And now with 
this budget and the increase of taxes that is evident, they are 
going to go up in the rural areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one individual I talked to with reassessment, RM 
No. 77, taxes going up 100 per cent. Mr. Speaker, that is a 
problem that we have. 
 
There was going to be, there was going to be a very rare 
occurrence. Not unlike myself, I retired back to Saskatchewan. 
An individual was coming back to Saskatchewan, retiring 
where I now live. After the Friday budget he phoned and said, 
nix, I am not coming back with taxes going up like they are. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d now like to talk a little bit about this 
revenue sharing that the municipalities are being faced with. 
People have suffered long enough. They have tightened their 
belts, and now the government is loosening their belt again, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to the tune of 570 more people. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to explain a little bit 
about my knowledge of a system such as this. Having been 
involved with a government organization for some time, it was 
looked at as an inverted Coke bottle type of a system. Now that 
is what we’re dealing with here — a very, very large number of 
people at the top; a very large number of people in the middle, 
as middle managers; very, very few workers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to read you something that 
very much subscribes to that theory. Here we have news release 
by the Government of Saskatchewan. And here they’re talking 
about 54 new positions in child welfare. We all applaud the 
positions in child welfare, we all applaud it — funded by the 
feds but we all applaud it. 
 
But here is something in this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I 
believe everybody has to know. And it’s right in their own press 
release. There are 9 supervisory positions — keep in mind for 
those that have trouble adding 54 people — 9 supervisory 



April 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 421 

 

positions, 25 administrative positions, and 20 caseworkers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, does that not fit into my inverted Coke 
bottle philosophy? That is what this government is doing. 
That’s why our bureaucracy is so large, it’s expanding, 
expanding, and yet our front line people are down at the lowest 
numbers. And all we have to do is look around at the other 
agencies and we can see where that’s happened. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to go on and talk a little bit 
more about the inverted Coke bottle theory. We look at hearing 
where we are, in a letter from the Minister of Municipal Affairs 
and Housing, we are proposing to cut — cut — jobs. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are not cutting, we are . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll run it out of time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to vote for adjournment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 
 


