















































Hansard: March 27, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 167 
 March 27, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and good afternoon. 
I’d like to present a petition this afternoon on behalf of the 
citizens of Cypress Hills. It relates to the concerns that they 
have expressed about the implications of the Saskatchewan 
EMS (emergency medical services) development project. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by residents of Gull 
Lake, Tompkins, Webb, and Hazlet, as well as Success. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish 
to present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
conversion of paved highways to gravel. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel, commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents, and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Briercrest, Claybank, and Drinkwater. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people in Swift Current and the southwest who are concerned 
about the regional hospital in Swift Current. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the 

city of Swift Current, from Lang, from Ernfold, and from 
Wymark. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens in Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency who 
are concerned about ambulance service. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 

And this petition is signed by residents of Radville, Trossachs, 
Gladmar, Minton, Ogema, and more from Minton. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 
Opposing reverting of highways to gravel; 
 
Opposing the centralization of ambulance services; and 
 
Requesting a new hospital for Swift Current. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and all members of the Assembly I would like to introduce 
in your gallery, Ms. Joy Johnson who is the executive director 
of the Registered Psychiatric Nurses Association of 
Saskatchewan. Ms. Johnson is here today to watch the 
proceedings and with great interest in the concerns of registered 
psychiatric nurses in this province. 
 
Would all members please welcome her. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 
constituent of mine, a friend of mine, and a farming partner of 
mine I guess at times, Mr. Troy Arndt from the Colfax area. 
Troy has been one of the farmers that we’ve talked about so 
often in diversification. Not only is he into grain production but 
they also have a number of alpacas on their farm. I’d like to 
welcome Troy to the Assembly and hope you enjoy the 
proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



168 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2001 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
On behalf of the government I also want to welcome Joy 
Johnson to the legislature this afternoon. I really appreciated the 
work that the Registered Psychiatric Nurses did along with the 
SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association) and the 
LPNs (licensed practical nurse) in putting together the nursing 
articulation document. Joy represents the psychiatric nurses 
very well in the province of Saskatchewan, and I’m sure she 
will enjoy the proceedings this afternoon. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

First Nations First Responders 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — There is good news from a First Nations 
community in the South and a northern community. Piapot First 
Nations near Regina and the northern community of Sandy Bay 
have recently certified their initial groups of first responders. 
The people in these communities are excited to be a part of the 
solution that contributes to the well-being of their people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
First responders are specially trained front-line medical staff. 
They provide basic emergency care before the arrival of police, 
nurses or emergency medical services personnel. As such they 
are vital links in the delivery of health services, especially in 
rural or northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Piapot had 11 students certified, the initial First Nation 
community in the Regina district to do so. Sandy Bay now has 
six local residents trained to assess patients and give basic 
immediate care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate Chief Murray Ironchild of 
Piapot and the graduates. I also congratulate local fire chief 
Lazar Morin of Sandy Bay and the five members of the 
department who successfully completed the course. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is dedication which builds strong, vibrant, 
healthy, and safe communities. This is an example to follow. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and all the members of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Region 4 Saskatchewan Drama Association Competition 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, nearly 
200 students from eight different schools took part in the 
Region 4 Saskatchewan Drama Association competition held in 
Yorkton on March 22 to the 24. Productions from schools in 
Nipawin, Kamsack, Sturgis, Wadena, Invermay, Broadview, 
and Yorkton entertained audiences for three full days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to inform you that students from 
Invermay School received numerous awards for their 
outstanding performances. I want to recognize Wesley Setre, 
runner-up for best actor; Elyse Franke, Jeremy Andreas and 
Lindsay Krawetz for acting awards of merit; Krystal Chicilo, a 
certificate for an acting performance; Julie Velichka, award for 
lighting; Krystal Nieckar, award for sound, and the entire crew 
for properties. 
 

Other awards were also presented to the Invermay group. And 
I’m extremely proud to say that the 17 Invermay students 
received the Most Courteous Cast and Crew Award. And they 
were also named the best overall performance for the second 
consecutive year. 
 
I want to commend the students for their dedication and 
commitment, but especially congratulate co-directors Diana 
Driedger and Gail Krawetz. Your dedication to your students 
brings out the best in each of them. 
 
I want to wish the entire cast and crew from Invermay School 
all the best in the provincial finals on May 3, 4, and 5 at 
Campbell Collegiate here in Regina. And if I may, Mr. Speaker, 
a special best of luck to my daughter, Lindsay, and my wife, 
Gail. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Twine Manufacturer Praises Saskatoon 
 

Ms. Jones: — Mr. Speaker, more good news for the province 
and the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Tim Mason, the president of Bridon Cordage, stood up at the 
Canada-Minnesota business council trade mission to extol the 
virtues of doing business in Saskatoon where Bridon Cordage 
has a branch plant. 
 
This plant was initially supposed to be constructed in Calgary, 
Alberta, the opposition’s favourite city, but aggressive 
marketing by the Saskatoon Regional Economic Development 
Authority caught the eye of Mr. Mason and convinced the 
company to open in Saskatoon in 1997. 
 
The company’s key requirements for location were 
transportation and a quality labour force, both of which 
Saskatchewan has. Because of the positive support by Bridon 
Cordage at the trade mission in Minnesota, Saskatoon caught 
the eye of companies interested in the new, not yet operational 
synchrotron. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is creating jobs and opportunities to 
carry us into the future. Mr. Speaker, our vision for this 
province is strong and I am proud to be a part of that vision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Comment on Legislative Proceedings 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
not a great sports fan so I don’t listen to sports news very often 
but this morning coming to the Legislative Building I had on 
CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) and they had an 
interesting item on the sports relating to a pitcher by the name 
of Johnson who pitches, I guess, at close to 100 miles an hour. 
 
Yesterday he threw a pitch and it hit a duck. The duck died — a 
flurry of feathers and the duck was dead. 
 
It reminded me very much of the legislative proceedings 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, when the Saskatchewan Party Health 
critic threw a question. It hit the Minister of Health. Fortunately 



March 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

 

the Minister of Health is still in good shape. He does however 
have a serious limp. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Recognized by Conference Board of Canada 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you for 
recognizing me. I was a little taken aback by that last statement 
and have lost my own. But I have found it now. 
 
And what I wanted to do was to bring to the attention of 
members that for the second year in a row the Conference 
Board of Canada has recognized one of our home-grown 
companies, SaskTel, for their excellent work as one of 
Saskatchewan’s top youth employers. 
 
SaskTel, as we know, is a very important company in our . . . in 
our province and does a lot of work with young people. Three 
of the programs for which they’ve been recognized for, Mr. 
Speaker, include the construction technology for women 
program, the First Nations school-to-work transition program, 
and of course the work they do year around in terms of hiring 
co-op students. 
 
This is an excellent, excellent set of initiatives on the part of 
SaskTel and on behalf of all of us I know we want to recognize 
the good people who work over there and who are an important 
part of helping mentor our students. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Archer Honoured As 
Junior Male Athlete of the Year 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
this afternoon in this Assembly to share with my colleagues and 
yourself the astounding accomplishments of a young man who 
resides within my home constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 17-year-old Owen Gunther of Spruce Home is one 
of our province’s best in the sport of archery. 
 
Gunther is the first Canadian ever to win individual medals at 
tournaments that took place overseas. He won the bronze at the 
world junior championship in France and also became the first 
archer in Saskatchewan history to win what is the so-called 
FITA Star 1200 from FITA international, the International 
Archery Association, which is based in Switzerland. 
 
Owen Gunter has also set numerous Canadian archery records 
and has received gold medals in the US (United States) 
nationals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it should come as no surprise that now another 
prestigious honour has been bestowed upon Owen Gunther. He 
has been named Saskatchewan Junior Male Athlete of the Year. 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Owen on these many 
accomplishments and wish him the best of luck in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Film on Painter Count Berthold Von Imhoff 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 
Sunday I had the privilege of attending a unique event in the 
village of St. Walburg in my constituency. The evening 
consisted of a banquet in honour of and the preview of a film 
dedicated to the life and work of Count Berthold Von Imhoff. 
The film is called Servant of God: German Painter Berthold 
Imhoff. The film is produced by White Pine Pictures of Ontario 
and will be shown soon on public television. 
 
And to ruin the suspense of the movie, Mr. Speaker — the 
Count did it. He created and he created much. In his career in 
St. Walburg during the 1920s and 1930s, Count Imhoff created 
over 250 works of religious art which can be seen in churches 
and galleries across North America, Mr. Speaker. He was a 
remarkable immigrant who was knighted by Pope Pius XI two 
years before his death in 1939. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the evening had three connected purposes. To 
preview the film during an evening of good food and 
fellowship, to raise funds towards the preservation of Count 
Imhoff studio located between the metropolises of St. Walburg 
and Paradise Hill, a studio where many of his paintings can be 
viewed, and to remind all Saskatchewan people that this studio 
has been declared a municipal heritage site, with recognition by 
Saskatchewan Heritage, with yearly visitors, literally, from 
around the world — a site I invite all members to members to 
visit on their way to and from the beautiful North on both ways. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hayley Wickenheiser Homecoming 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on the weekend of the 17th and 18th of March the town of 
Shaunavon hosted a fundraiser for a new omniplex, but also as 
part of their weekend festivities, it was a homecoming for 
Hayley Wickenheiser. The event was a huge success, meeting 
all expectations, and one of the real reasons of the weekend was 
to pay tribute to Hayley Wickenheiser for her accomplishments. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to read some of Hayley 
Wickenheiser’s accomplishments. She was a member of 
Canada’s National Women’s Hockey Team since 1995; played 
on Canada’s world championship teams in ’94, ’97, ’99, and 
2000; captured a silver medal at the ’98 Winter Olympic Games 
in Nagano, Japan as a member of the national women’s hockey 
team; became only the second Canadian woman in history to 
take part in both the Winter and Summer Olympics, after being 
named to Canada’s women’s softball team that competed at 
Sydney, Australia, last September. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the organizers of this 
event in Shaunavon, and also in the House, I would like to 
acknowledge Hayley Wickenheiser for her exceptional 
accomplishments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



170 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2001 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Tax Provisions in Upcoming Budget 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, confusion 
reigns in the ranks of the NDP. The Minister of Health, the 
Minister of Health doesn’t know how many nurses there are in 
the province, the minister of Gaming doesn’t know how much 
money SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) owes 
the province, and the Minister of Agriculture doesn’t know if 
he’s in or out of CFIB. 
 
It reminds me of the same kind of occurrences last year at this 
time when the Minister of Finance was so confused he 
promised to cut taxes, and then he went out and raised them. 
 
My question is for the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, have 
you learned anything from last year’s budget disaster? Will you 
cut taxes in Friday’s budget without raising other taxes to offset 
the benefit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is the fifth 
question period we’ve had in this House since the House 
resumed sitting, and the opposition has had 50 opportunities to 
ask a question about taxation. And I noticed, Mr. Speaker, this 
is the first question about taxes. And I think the reason, Mr. 
Speaker, is because the people of the province and the 
opposition know that our record on tax cutting is good, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We can listen to the doom and gloom from 
the member from the opposition, Mr. Speaker, or we can listen 
to the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce which says in their 
latest edition of Business View that the province with the 
second-lowest marginal income tax rate today is — guess 
where, Mr. Speaker? — Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Or we can listen Joanne Paulson of The 
StarPhoenix who says that when, quote: 
 

Ken Krawetz, Finance critic for the Saskatchewan Party, 
was not comparing apples to apples when he said there was 
no tax cuts . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, she says, naysayers aside, tax cuts are for real. 
 
The chamber . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Would the member please put 
discussion through the Chair in the third person. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it would be 
good if the Finance minister would pay as much attention to 
counting the people leaving Saskatchewan because of his high 
taxes rather than counting our questions. 
 
The Minister of Finance blew it last year, Mr. Speaker. Yes, he 

cut income tax but he also raised the PST (provincial sales tax) 
and he raised other hidden fees and surcharges. And a result, 
Mr. Speaker, families ended up with less money in their pockets 
— not more. 
 
And what are the results? Over 13,000 jobs lost in the last year. 
Nearly 6,700 people lost to other provinces in the last year. 
 
Mr. Minister, you blew it. Have you learned from your mistake? 
What tax cuts will you be providing to small business? What 
tax cuts will you be providing to Saskatchewan families in this 
Friday’s budget? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I just want to remind the member to 
take a good look at his question please, and to address his 
remarks through the Chair and to the Chair. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, we can listen to Mr. Doom 
and Gloom over there in the opposition. Or we can listen to the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix saying, naysayers aside, tax cuts are for 
real. The Saskatchewan Business magazine, which says, the 
first pay cheque of the year for Saskatchewan workers 
contained a pleasant surprise. Norm Halldorson from the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce saying that the tax cuts 
met the chamber’s highest priority. The Canadian Taxpayers 
Federation — get this, Mr. Speaker — saying that the net result 
of the government’s tax changes is $43 million in 2000, and 
$260 million by 2003. 
 
Or we can listen to the CFIB (Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business) that says we think the budget was 
positive because taxes went down. Or the Saskatoon Chamber 
of Commerce. Or the Regina Chamber of Commerce, where the 
member and I were at a meeting January 29 and they praised the 
tax cuts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Who are we going to listen to? All of those people, or the 
Leader of the Opposition? We’re going to listen to the people, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve heard the people calling in to the call-in shows 
and complaining about this minister’s so-called tax cuts. They 
said, we got our pay cheque and our taxes went up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, though, the minister’s pockets are fuller than 
they’ve been. Friday’s budget will show a surplus of hundreds 
of millions of dollars due to windfall oil revenues. This money 
should be given back to Saskatchewan families and 
Saskatchewan businesses through meaningful tax cuts. 
 
Right now Saskatchewan has the second highest small-business 
tax in all of Canada. At 8 per cent, Saskatchewan’s 
small-business tax is nearly triple that of Alberta’s. Where do 
you think the new businesses and jobs are going? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party believes we could provide 
a major boost to our economy by eliminating the 8 per cent 
small-business tax. 
 



March 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Finance. Will you 
make Saskatchewan a small-business tax-free zone? Will you 
cut the small-business tax, and will you cut it all the way to 
zero? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the last time I heard this kind 
of snake oil from Mr. Doom and Gloom was in the context of 
the Riversdale by-election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Members are asked to address 
members of the legislature either by their constituency or by 
their title — no other name. The members, in addressing their 
questions, should use the pronoun he or she, not you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The last time I 
heard the member from Rosetown-Biggar selling this snake oil 
was in the context of the Riversdale by-election. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they had billboards up that said that everybody was 
being taxed to death. 
 
Well the people know, Mr. Speaker, that we’re not being taxed 
to death. Taxes are coming down in Saskatchewan. And the 
people in Saskatoon Riversdale had an opportunity to judge the 
doom and gloom for the Leader of the Opposition and they 
rejected it resoundingly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I want to tell the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, Mr. Speaker, that a one-income family 
earning $50,000 a year would, today, have had to pay $5,203 in 
provincial income taxes in 1999. By 2003, Mr. Speaker, that 
will be $3,229 — a reduction of . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, if the Finance minister 
would eliminate the small business tax, it would cost his 
government less than $70 million. Think of the powerful 
message that that would send to business owners all across 
Canada. The message is, we want you to come to Saskatchewan 
instead of leaving the province. Saskatchewan’s a great place to 
start a new business. That’s the message we should be sending. 
 
Instead, what is the message that this government is sending? 
They are saying get out and stay out. That’s why businesses are 
leaving. That’s why people are leaving. That’s why the NDP 
have the worst job creation record in the entire country. 
 
My question to the Minister of Finance. On Friday, you can 
take one simple step to change all that. You can eliminate the 
small business tax; make Saskatchewan a small-business 
tax-free zone. Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the Leader of 
the Opposition something that he apparently doesn’t know and 
it’s this, Mr. Speaker, that this province is a great place to live. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And this province has a great future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — One of the highest priorities of the business 
community is to cut personal taxes, Mr. Speaker. And I said in 
my last answer, a one-income family of $50,000 with two 
children will save $1,974 in income tax by 2003. A two-income 
family with two children, Mr. Speaker, will have a reduction of 
over a thousand dollars; 55,000 people will be taken off the tax 
rolls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that member wants to tell people that their taxes 
are going up. I’ve got news for him — nobody believes him, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Staffing 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, last week 
you asked the Saskatchewan Party to run the Health 
department. Yesterday you needed the Saskatchewan Party to 
do research and it looks as if things haven’t changed much 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it appears the NDP’s record on health care is 
worse than we thought it was. In 1999, the NDP promised 500 
new nurses but according to the SRNA there are 48 fewer 
nurses practising in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Please allow the member 
to put his question. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, and today the Registered 
Psychiatric Nurses Association of Saskatchewan says that there 
are fewer psychiatric nurses working in the province today than 
in 1999 — fewer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you doing to stop the exodus of nurses 
from the NDP’s crumbling health care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the 
September 1999 campaign, the promise set forward by our 
party was to add 500 health providers. I’ve received 
information from SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations) this morning . . . or yesterday afternoon, 
basically saying that at the end of 1999 there were 36,074 
people who were part of their system of registration of 
employees. That number at the end of 2000 was 36,891, an 
increase of just over 800 members within the year 1999. 
 
What we do know is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what we do know is that the 



172 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2001 

 

lemon of a plan that they had in September of 1999 would have 
had zero increase for Health and there would have been no 
increase at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the . . . we ask the member to also 
put his question in third person. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
doesn’t the minister understand that what we’re concerned is 
about health care professionals, not about administrators and 
janitors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister simply cannot 
count them as health care professionals. And while they are 
important to keep facilities upgraded, they’re not the kind of 
people that are going to be at your bedside when you’re needing 
health care professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, doesn’t the minister understand how critical it is 
to have psychiatric nurses in this province? There’s more stress 
on Saskatchewan families today than at any time in the past due 
to this government’s mismanagement. According to the 
Psychiatric Nurses’ Association, there’s almost 250 fewer 
psychiatric nurses than when the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
took government in ’96, and almost a hundred and sixty fewer 
than when the government made the promise of more health 
care professionals in ’99. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister understand how important 
psychiatric nurses are in this province, and what is he going to 
do about getting health care professionals staying in our 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we 
care about all the workers in the health system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We care about all of the workers because 
if we don’t have the full team working to provide the care for 
the patients, then the whole system doesn’t work. We are very 
concerned that the members opposite would devalue part of the 
health system with part of those workers. 
 
I’d also like to point out that the numbers that I have provided 
from SAHO do not include the number . . . the increase in the 
number of medical doctors in Saskatchewan. The numbers from 
the College of Physicians and Surgeons show that in 1997 there 
were 1,493 doctors registered at the end of March. At the end of 
December, 2000, there was an increase of 151 up to one 
thousand . . . 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, while the minister is busy 
bloating the bureaucracy, psychiatric nurses are having too few 
positions in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister should know that the Registered 
Psychiatric Nurses Association is also saying that a nursing 
shortage caused a closure of six acute psychiatric beds at City 
Hospital in Saskatoon last Friday. Six more beds on top of the 
few that there already are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just the latest hospital bed closure that has taken 
place, thanks to the incompetent health management of this 
government and their increased bureaucracy. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . The problem is, Mr. Speaker, that while the 
minister stumbles through question period, he isn’t aware of the 
impact of his decisions on real people. Mr. Speaker, now it’s 
confirmed that six more acute psychiatric beds are closing at 
City Hospital in Saskatoon, what’s the minister going to do 
except hiring more bureaucrats? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we are 
doing in the nursing profession is working with the various 
professional groups including the Registered Psychiatric 
Nurses, the Registered Nurses, the Licensed Practical Nurses to 
increase the number of places for them to study and basically 
regenerate the profession, get more people involved in the 
profession. 
 
And we’re working together with those people because we 
know that they know how the system works and what the needs 
are, and we will continue to work with those people. We won’t 
listen to all of that negativity that comes from across the way. 
We ask them to come and help us create a climate in this 
province where we can invite people to come and work here 
and build a career. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if the minister 
won’t listen to us, perhaps he’ll listen to the chairman of the 
College of Medicine Budget Committee at the University of 
Saskatchewan, and he says that if the NDP government doesn’t 
wake up, the College of Medicine is in danger of shutting down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the College of Medicine plays a critical role in the 
recruitment and retention of doctors in Saskatchewan. And now 
senior university personnel are saying that the college could 
close because the NDP government has neglected to provide 
sufficient support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government and the minister doesn’t have a 
plan, doesn’t understand what’s going on. What are they going 
to do to save the College of Medicine? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think maybe the 
members opposite today have been chewing on crabapples. 
 
But what I would say, Mr. Speaker, is that in 1999 we received 
a report called the Blueprint for Change about the College of 
Medicine because we were concerned about the future of the 



March 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

 

College of Medicine. And we are working together with those 
people at the college, at the university, and throughout the 
health system so that we can continue to support and build on 
our college. 
 
And what we have also created out of that process is a Health 
Sciences Advisory Council where all of the people involved are 
part of setting out a plan which will make that school better. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
hope you’ll impress upon the minister how serious this issue is. 
Professor Roger Pierson is an internationally recognized 
scholar. He is known around the world for his work in 
developing new health care technologies. He’s chairman of the 
College of Medicine Budget Committee, and I’m quite sure he 
doesn’t appreciate the trite jokes that this minister is putting out 
in this question period. And he is saying that the NDP’s failure 
to manage health care could force the College of Medicine to 
close. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is not willing to allow that 
to happen. In our submission to Fyke, we said that we would 
recommend and support a world-class integrated health care 
science facility at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Health go on record and 
indicate unconditionally if he will support our submission and 
the call for an integrated health sciences facility at the 
University of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think he’s referring to the 
plan that they had which he had a great deal of difficulty 
explaining the costing of the plan. And so what I would say is 
we are working with the Health Sciences Advisory Committee, 
with the university, with the various professions within the 
health system to see whether the whole plan around a new 
health sciences faculty makes sense. 
 
But we are going to work with the people in a planned way like 
we’ve always done on this side of the House. We’re going to 
make sure that whatever we do we can afford and we can do it 
in a way that benefits everyone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Utility Rate Increases 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
the Minister Responsible for SaskPower announced a one-time 
rebate of $25 to help Saskatchewan families deal with the 
exorbitant price of energy. That’s $2 a month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year SaskEnergy received government 
approval to increase their rates to the extent that many 
Saskatchewan families have seen their energy bills double in 
the last few months. Now SaskPower, we hear, will be getting 
an increase for their homeowner rates for electricity of between 
5 and 6 per cent. 

Mr. Speaker, on the question of SaskEnergy, the president of 
that corporation was quoted earlier today. He was indicating, 
Mr. Speaker, that we can also look forward to another 
SaskEnergy rate increase later this year. 
 
To quote him, he said, there’s no question there’s another hit 
out there, but it’s not fun, he said. 

 
Well you can imagine how tore up we all are that Mr. Clark 
isn’t having much fun. Frankly we’re not either, and the people 
of Saskatchewan aren’t having any fun putting up with this 
government and their rate increases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this: when will 
SaskEnergy be hitting Saskatchewan people, to quote the 
president of the corporation, and how much will the rate 
increase be? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, to 
the member, there is absolutely no application by SaskEnergy 
for a rate increase. 
 
But I do want to point out right now, Mr. Speaker, that 
SaskEnergy currently charges $4.52 per gigajoule. If you cross 
the border into Alberta, Mr. Speaker, and guess what they 
charge — $9 per gigajoule — $9. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote if I could, from the Melville 
Advance on January 3, 2001, Mr. Speaker. A small steel mill in 
Calgary . . . It says the following, Mr. Speaker. The mill’s 
energy bill would have gone from $17,000 a month, Mr. 
Speaker, 17,000, to, get this, $75,000 a month, Mr. Speaker. 
And the most important words, Mr. Speaker — had the 
company decided not to close, Mr. Speaker, in Alberta. 

 
A 441 per cent increase. And that member, Mr. Speaker, has the 
nerve to complain about what we might apply for here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people 
are doing a little comparing today too. They’re comparing the 
NDP $25 per year rebate to the $1,600 that people in Alberta 
are getting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we understand today that 
SaskEnergy officials are informing certain people that their 
costs for gas have gone up between 50 and 60 per cent and that 
even if they undertake some cost-cutting measures, they will be 
asking for a 40 per cent rate increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm — and surely he will 
have talked to Mr. Clark in SaskEnergy by now about this — 
will he confirm that SaskEnergy will be asking for a 40 per cent 
increase in gas rates for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I repeat, 
there’s no application at all by SaskEnergy for a rate increase, 



174 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2001 

 

but I’ve given the history of what SaskEnergy is currently 
charging. 
 
The member referred, Mr. Speaker, to the credit that we 
announced yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and he’s complaining about 
this. Mr. Speaker, if we’d have raised the rates by 441 per cent 
as I pointed out, I suggest we probably could have provided a 
larger rebate as well. But we didn’t, Mr. Speaker. We cared 
about the public of Saskatchewan. We kept our rates down, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out some rate differences here. 
This is with reference to power. In Grande Prairie, the monthly 
bill is $159. In Calgary, it’s 140. In St. John’s, Newfoundland, 
it’s 123. And in Regina, Mr. Speaker, it’s 113. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and with the number of lights that I see on on that 
side of the House, my guess is it would actually be considerably 
less over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Partnership Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 1, 
The Partnership Amendment Act, 2001, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 2, 
The Securities Amendment Act, 2001, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
(14:15) 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Historic Properties Foundations Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 3, The 
Historic Properties Foundations Act, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Jones, seconded by Mr. McCall, 

and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you can tell from 
the thickness of this sheaf of papers, I haven’t got very far with 
my speech. 
 
And given the fact that several members from the government 
side and my own side were not privileged to hear the substance 
nor the sum of this speech, I believe it to be important, Mr. 
Speaker, before proceeding with the balance of my comments 
on behalf of the people of Cypress Hills, to reiterate some of the 
more salient points from my presentation yesterday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I began, Mr. Speaker, yesterday, by expressing 
my thorough disappointment with the lack of direction and 
substance provided by the government’s Throne Speech 
agenda. 
 
However, I did give the government due credit for its promise 
to twin the remaining section of Highway No. 1 West in four 
years. Having said that however, I pointed out that even this 
promise is less than the government acceded to in April of last 
year when this House unanimously passed a motion to twin all 
of Highway 1, east and west, as well as Highway No. 16. And 
the promise at that time was to do it in four years, provided the 
federal government cost shared the project to the tune of 
one-half of the price. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t got the federal government’s 
share, but neither have we got this government’s full 
commitment to the project. We got about half the money, but 
only about one-third of the project as promised by this 
government and last year’s unanimously passed motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nor did the government commit itself to any other 
specific activity on highway reconstruction, except to say that 
we will see the biggest budget ever. More money doesn’t 
necessarily mean quality work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Where is the plan? What will the emphasis in transportation 
requirements be? 
 
These are questions that went unaddressed in the Throne 
Speech as they relate to the issues of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Let’s look briefly again at agriculture. Mr. Speaker, the word 
agriculture, as I alluded to yesterday, is only mentioned one 
time in the entire text of the Speech from the Throne. That’s 
really not much credit given for what was often called 
Saskatchewan’s number one industry. 
 
I spoke too about AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster 
Assistance) and the inequities that that program has produced 
among farmers in rural Saskatchewan. I addressed the 
psychologically degrading impact of sending cheques to 
farmers who are financially stressed and then demanding 
repayment with interest for the mistakes made by the AIDA 
administration. 
 



March 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 175 

 

I talked about our concerns with CFIP and the appropriateness 
of this son of AIDA to address the needs of rural Saskatchewan 
without substantial changes to address the problems inherent 
with its predecessor. 
 
I addressed the current and potentially devastating effects of 
drought in the Cypress Hills constituency, on ranchers 
particularly. And I alluded to the inadequacy of the new cover 
conservation program which is limited to 50 acres per year. 
How many decades, Mr. Speaker, will it take for a program 
with such severe limitations to have any positive effect on the 
herd size to the ultimate benefit of this province? That’s the 
question I think that needs to be addressed with the limitations 
of that program. 
 
On rural revitalization I spoke about the disillusionment of my 
rural constituents for the appointment of the new Minister of 
Rural Revitalization because of her track record in the field of 
health care. The people of Cypress Hills have experienced 
demoralization and alienation from this government as a result 
of diminished health care services in our part of this province. 
 
This new Minister of Rural Revitalization was responsible for 
much of that angst; through programs, reduced services, closed 
beds, slashed budgets, and the resultant loss of doctors and 
other health practitioners in the southwest. The people of rural 
Saskatchewan see the minister’s appointment as a cruel irony, 
especially since she was the architect of most of the debilitating 
policies and governmental activity affecting rural regions. 
 
We say clearly from question period yesterday, that this 
minister’s agenda is to negatively impact the economic vitality 
of rural communities with her solutions to commercial truck 
traffic on provincial highways. 
 
Rural revitalization, Mr. Speaker, requires dependable 
infrastructure in the way of highways, not for the convenience 
of people only, but to achieve the benefits of expanded 
economic activity. Infrastructure is the basis on which all 
economic activity is built. The two items go hand in hand; you 
can’t have one without the other. 
 
This minister seems to think that rural revitalization is possible 
without highways. The people of Saskatchewan know better 
and they will expect better than they are getting already from 
this minister. 
 
If Crown corporations are going to be major players in rural 
revitalization, they need to address the ways in which they can 
help as opposed to hindering the process. The cost to non-profit 
recreational facilities of power and natural gas need to be 
reviewed. Increases there have put such a strain on many of 
these important community facilities that several of them are 
already under threat of permanent closure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, reassessment formulas imposed on small town 
hotels by Saskatchewan Assessment Management Authority are 
about to make many of them virtually unprofitable. Who, Mr. 
Speaker, will revitalize those businesses when they’re forced to 
close their doors? 
 
I address the issue of expanded PST (provincial sales tax) on 
used inventory by this NDP government in the budget a mere 

one year ago. Once again we have a situation that makes doing 
business in this province more onerous and uncompetitive than 
neighbouring jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rural revitalization is absolutely essential to the 
long-term viability of every community and region outside of 
Regina and Saskatoon. If the matter isn’t going to be taken 
seriously, Mr. Speaker, it would be better if the government 
didn’t try to address it at all. Half-hearted measures are not 
needed nor acceptable, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately I don’t think 
this government is up to the task because too many of the 
factors that currently assail rural business development were put 
in place by this very government or various early versions of it. 
 
Literally dozens of problem areas exist which, if attended to, 
would allow the people of rural Saskatchewan a real 
opportunity to revitalize the regions by their own initiative. 
They don’t need government help, Mr. Speaker. They need 
government gone — out of their way and out of their wallets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, several times we on this side of the House have 
been accused of doom and gloom. We don’t celebrate the 
successes of the province; at least that’s what we’re told. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m here to tell you today, and the members opposite, 
that I am happy to report several successes in my constituency. 
But from every one of them I have been told the same thing: 
they succeeded in spite of this government, not because of it. 
They have surmounted every bureaucratic obstacle, overcome 
every hindering policy, and survived every malicious or malign 
attempt to prevent their successes. They are survivors of this 
government’s business and economic policies and I can truly 
celebrate their persistence and contribution to our communities. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the members 
opposite that I am a member of the official opposition. It is not 
my job to be a cheerleader for the government of the day. It is 
my job to hold the government accountable for what it does or 
doesn’t do on behalf of the people of Cypress Hills and by 
extension, the people of all Saskatchewan. 
 
And we will do our job, Mr. Speaker, to the best of our abilities, 
whether the government is comforted by the efforts of our party 
or left feeling uncomfortable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much of Regina and Saskatoon appear to be doing 
quite well from an economic perspective, and I appreciate that 
fact. But for government members to say that we are preaching 
doom and gloom when we point out that there is more to this 
province than two major cities and that there are real problems 
outside those two major cities, is doing a disservice to the very 
people they purport to properly govern. 
 
Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, again, why rural revitalization is 
so very urgent to the future of this province. Let me tell you 
why it’s important to do something about this issue rather than 
just speak about it. 
 
I had some research done by my office through the regional 
library based in Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. I’m told that 
statistical information indicates that the area served by that 
regional library, which includes my constituency of Cypress 
Hills and parts of several others, has lost a population of nearly 
15,000 people since 1972 — 15,000 people gone from 



176 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2001 

 

southwest Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s almost the 
equivalent of the entire city of Swift Current — gone, just gone. 
 
Gone from southwest Saskatchewan to who knows where. Gone 
from the farms and the small villages that dot that region. Gone 
from jobs that have disappeared for all kinds of reasons. Gone 
with little likelihood of returning unless someone takes the issue 
of rural revitalization seriously. 
 
I’m certain that the current government is not up to the task, as I 
mentioned before. And I’ve already indicated some of the 
individual areas of concern. There are literally dozens more that 
affect rural Saskatchewan in the most deleterious manner. 
 
What troubles me most about this situation, Mr. Speaker, is the 
cavalier attitude expressed by the members opposite when we 
tell them that people of my region are leaving in droves. The 
numbers prove it, but the members opposite think it’s a big 
joke. 
 
I’ve heard the laughter and the derision emanating from 
government benches when we say things are not good in the 
province. I’ve felt the scorn and the contempt being directed to 
the concerns raised in these matters. I’ve heard us called the 
Alberta-envy party, with a hint of a sneer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, sir, such derision just proves my point. This government 
and the members opposite are so out of touch with the people of 
this province that they don’t understand the depth of distrust 
they have inculcated in the very people they once . . . who once 
believed in them. 
 
Fifteen thousand people gone from southwest Saskatchewan, 
and nobody on the government side cares. They laugh at that 
statistic. They laugh at the problems created by that. They 
charge us with doom and gloom, Mr. Speaker, while the figures 
tell the telling results — 13,200 jobs gone in this province 
according to StatsCanada. And the government tells us that 
things are great in socialist utopia. Daily the NDP is becoming 
more like Nero himself — fiddling while Rome burns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard today a new definition for an optimist. It’s 
someone who insists that black is white in spite of the evidence. 
The Premier stands in this House and says the loss of jobs is 
due to weakness in the farm economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just last spring when faced with the same kind of 
information, the former minister of Economic and Co-operative 
Development insisted that our economy was so well diversified 
that any downturn in farm figures would not affect our overall 
economic performance. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the question is, which is it? It looks like 
StatsCanada has provided the answer. The numbers on job 
creation for this government are going south faster than 
snowbirds in November. The crisis of numbers was really put to 
the test, Mr. Speaker, when the government announced, yet 
again, the creation of 10,000 jobs in the forest industry during 
their Throne Speech. That same announcement has been made 
before, leading me to believe that I have now clearly discovered 
the government’s job creation strategy. 
 
You announce the same 10,000 jobs on three separate 

occasions, and voila — there you have the magical 30,000 jobs 
originally promised several years ago. Such enlightened job 
creation strategies do not only boggle the average citizens’ 
mind, it stretches the government’s credibility into incredulity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech says with great pride, that we 
have 485,000 people currently working in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That, in turn, indicates that we have at least 
525,000 people who are not working. That’s the unstated 
corollary to the 485 that are working. And what we hope . . . 
excuse me, and what hope do we have for all these people? 
There’s no significant new job-creating initiatives; there’s not 
even modest ones in this Throne Speech. 
 
We have measly prospects, all with the civil service. Six 
thousand temporary jobs, to be exact, all on the public payroll. 
And an invitation for young people to look seriously at working 
for the government as the only career choice of any 
consequence. 
 
With these types of proposals, Mr. Speaker, for employment, 
the job growth projections look bleak indeed. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have one . . . well under one half of our 
population employed in this province, and even with the 
significant numbers of two income families, that isn’t all that 
good a record. And we have taxes, Mr. Speaker, which 
discourage job creation. And the loss of a population in the 
southwest alone, equivalent in number to the entire population 
of the city of Swift Current. I can’t stress the significance of 
that number enough, Mr. Speaker. It’s completely unacceptable. 
And I think the government ought to be ashamed of that record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has become smug and 
unapproachable. This government has become arrogant. But 
worst of all, this government has become completely 
self-satisfied. So easily self-satisfied it acts as though it alone is 
responsible for increased oil and gas activity; that by its own 
power, potash sales were increased and wild rice grew in 
abundance. 
 
(14:30) 
 
The fact is this government is satisfied with a record of poor 
performance, while the members opposite stand and defend it 
daily. Satisfied with falling job numbers. Satisfied with a loss of 
population in vast parts of the province and a projection for an 
unsustainable population growth. Satisfied with a workforce 
that is contracting and growing older. And satisfied with 
incomparable outward migration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of this happens under the watch of the current 
regime. This province has so much to offer but has so little to 
show for its riches. More resources than its neighbours in 
almost every category, but squandered opportunities on every 
hand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not the party of Alberta envy. We are a 
party of people who believe in this province and the people who 
live here. We believe that we have a future full of promise and 
prosperity for all. 
 
But we are disheartened by the failures of this government to 



March 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 177 

 

allow the natural abilities of our people and the boundless 
resources of this province to be loosed for our greater benefit. 
 
The government of the day, Mr. Speaker, is self-satisfied 
because the members opposite don’t have to live with the 
economic consequences of their decision. Their paycheques 
arrive each month at the expense of taxpayers that do suffer the 
consequences of this government’s policies. 
 
But the people who actually create wealth within this province, 
as opposed to those who merely redistribute it, are calling for 
relief. The people need relief from the policies that stifle their 
initiative. Mr. Speaker, we have the people and we have the 
talent to turn this into a land of opportunity. 
 
So I ask, Mr. Speaker, what is there about this government’s 
policies and philosophies that have kept our population 
numbers at just over 1 million over the last 60 or more years, 
while turning Calgary into Saskatchewan’s third largest city. 
 
I have many more examples of government regulations that are 
driving business and people away from this great province. I 
have names of individuals who would give their eye teeth for a 
chance to come home and contribute to our economy if 
circumstances were right. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, those opportunities will not be realized 
because this government insists it knows better than anyone else 
how business ought to be done and how they can spend your 
money and my money better than I can. With such an attitude, it 
is difficult to see what chance there is for a change in direction. 
 
I hope something happens soon, Mr. Speaker, before the 
countryside in Cypress Hills constituency is decimated any 
further by the wisdom and largess of this government. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment 
as put forward by the Leader of the Official Opposition, the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar, and will oppose vigorously the 
government’s motion. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. May I begin this debate by congratulating you, sir, on 
your election as Speaker of this great Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’d also like to congratulate the member from Regina 
Sherwood on his election to the role of Deputy Speaker. I have 
every confidence in each of you that you will do a fine job and 
will make us all proud of both of you. 
 
The role of Speaker, Mr. Speaker, is one that I enjoyed very 
much because of its challenges. But there was a greater 
challenge facing myself and the Liberal caucus — a challenge I 
felt I had to meet because of the needs of not only my 
constituents, but of everyone in this province. 
 
It is a challenge of how best to serve the people who put their 
trust in you to represent their interests. Service, Mr. Speaker, 

towards others is nothing new. It is what separates us from the 
lower forms of life whose sole purpose in life is perpetuating 
their own species at the expense of others. 
 
As a former RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) officer, 
my job was to serve and protect all people, a job description 
that continues as an MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly). When I served in the RCMP it was not unusual to 
be transferred or to be assigned new responsibilities as the 
occasion warranted, or as the need was seen fit. 
 
What has happened to me recently in my political career is 
almost no different. I simply wish to serve the public where it is 
felt I can serve best. Public service, Mr. Speaker, has been my 
life’s goal. Integrity and teamwork have been the code of 
honour under which I operated, Mr. Speaker, and I will not stop 
living up to that code now. 
 
In 1999 I felt honoured to seek re-election as the Liberal 
candidate in the Melville constituency. I was truly, truly, 
humbled, Mr. Speaker, by the huge majority I received as the 
Liberal candidate. 
 
When the provincial results of that election consequently 
presented an opportunity and challenge for me to serve as 
Speaker of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, I accepted 
that challenge. I was convinced that to serve as Speaker was in 
the best interest of the people of my constituency and this great 
province of Saskatchewan. I accepted because I am convinced 
that stability is important to good government. 
 
There are people who believed that I discharged the 
responsibility of Speaker of the Saskatchewan legislature with 
impartiality and distinction. It is no secret, Mr. Speaker, I was 
deeply, deeply touched by that honour. I am truly grateful to 
have had that opportunity to serve. 
 
There are people who disagree with the choice I made, and I 
respect the right of others to hold an opposite view. However, I 
want to make it crystal clear that I do not share their view. 
 
It is not my intention to question their integrity. It is not my 
intention to impugn their motives. And it is certainly not my 
style to attack the personal political agenda of others. I will 
never fan the flames of discontent in an attempt to advance my 
own personal agenda. I want to build, Mr. Speaker. I will not 
work to tear down this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I will not be frightened by 
false personal accusations or innuendos. We must have the 
courage to dare to do our duty as we understand that we must 
enjoy faith in the wisdom of Saskatchewan voters. 
 
For 25 years I was a proud member of the Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police, and during those 25 years I learned to 
appreciate that order, peace, and good government were 
fundamental to our Canadian democracy. My faith in peace, 
order, and good government is as firm today ever. I will serve 
the cabinet for this province, of this province, with courage and 
determination. 
 



178 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2001 

 

A few weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, I made a very difficult decision. 
I resigned a position that I clearly enjoyed. I left that position 
because I judge it important to support a coalition government. 
A coalition government that provides Liberals with an 
opportunity to propose legislation that is important to this 
province. I believe we can draft a legislation particularly 
important to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I look forward to the challenge of my new role as Minister of 
Municipal Affairs and Housing, and Sask Water. I have already 
been able to meet many of the fine municipal leaders of our 
province and I look forward to meeting many, many more and 
listening to their ideas in order to forge this province forward. 
 
I hope that they will regard me as a sincere partner in creating 
effective municipalities. I think you will see an increased effort 
on our part to serve those needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this point I would just like to tell you a little bit 
about my constituency, of which I’m very, very proud. And I 
make no secret of the fact that I represent a rural constituency. I 
am proud of that fact. And I am proud that the voters of my 
rural constituency gave me a resounding vote of confidence. I 
will not destroy their confidence through partisan party politics 
or personal political bickering. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it has been an exciting year in that 
constituency of mine in Melville. And we expect more exciting 
things to happen in the coming year. 
 
First of all, I would like to welcome any and all my constituents 
who might just be watching these proceedings in their own 
homes, checking up on their Member of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Melville people believe in the values of families, 
of working together as a community. There were many 
homecomings held in our constituency in 2000. Homecomings 
that brought people together. They were an outstanding success. 
And I was proud to represent the province at these events, 
letting Saskatchewan people know we are one community, that 
in the words of our provincial motto: “from many peoples, 
strength.” 
 
That community spirit continued, Mr. Speaker, with fowl 
suppers held in rural communities around the Melville 
constituency — communities such as Grayson, Abernethy, 
Killaly, Dubuc, just to mention a few. These dinners and these 
events also brought together people, allowing that community 
spirit to continue and their pride to show. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Melville constituency still believe in 
this great province of Saskatchewan. They have not given up on 
this province of ours. 
 
There have been other events in my constituency that have 
provided further evidence that this coalition government 
provides real, tangible benefits to Saskatchewan people. The 
hospital sod-turning in Melville was a landmark event. It 
brought health care in our constituency into the 21st century by 
providing a truly vital and essential service to the surrounding 
area. I look forward to that facility opening in the year 2002. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this did not come about easily. This was as a result 
of hard work through hospital fundraising events, dedication of 
community volunteers — people who put community first, 
ahead of trying to destroy it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 10 years, 10 years of hard work paid off in being 
noticed and supported by this coalition government. 
Communities such as Goodeve and Neudorf are still holding 
hospital fundraisers. Communities of a few hundred people, Mr. 
Speaker, that are raising hundreds of thousands of dollars for 
this particular project. 
 
Again in this area of health care, I’m pleased to report, Mr. 
Speaker, that in Ituna, the provincial support from this coalition 
government’s Centenary Fund helped replace their handivan for 
the transport of people with disabilities. We would not have 
seen this under Saskatchewan Party government which would 
have frozen all support for health care and helping people who 
need our help the most. 
 
Another moment of community pride in the Melville 
constituency was winning the bid for the Canada Cup, including 
a 256,000 Centenary Fund to improve Melville’s baseball 
facilities for the midget national baseball championships. Many 
community leaders from Melville and area realize the 
importance and the potential of holding a national tournament, 
not just for the city of Melville, but for all the communities in 
that constituency and beyond, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another great athletic event was the performance of zone 4 
athletes who competed in Yorkton for the 2000 Saskatchewan 
Summer Games, very successful games. And those young 
people that participated brought back medals, and the thrill and 
the joy of competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this coalition government has brought other 
tangible benefits to the people of the Melville constituency. We 
have seen highway construction on Highway No. 10 and 
Highway No. 310, projects that continue to improve the 
opportunities for transportation in the Melville constituency. 
 
We have other ways the coalition government has worked on in 
responding to the needs of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. We have seen a number of provincial municipal 
infrastructure projects in the year 2000-2001. 
 
Included in these infrastructure projects, just to mention a few, 
is $80,000 to the town of Ituna water project. There was 
$105,600 going to the Ituna Bon Accord Rural Municipality for 
rural roads. There was $286,000 that went to the Grayson Rural 
Municipality for rural roads. 
 
There was $67,046 to the village of Lebret for a water project. 
The city of Melville street project, Mr. Speaker, received 
$160,000 from this particular program. The village of Neudorf 
received $30,000 for their water project. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I did not mention one of the 
most important roles that I see as an MLA, and I’m sure that it’s 
shared by other MLAs in this Assembly, and that’s the 
opportunity to help individuals, to help people, Mr. Speaker, 
who come to us for assistance through our constituency offices. 
 



March 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 179 

 

And just on that note, I would like to express appreciation to 
those people in our constituency offices — to Candace, and all 
the other constituency assistants who are there taking care of 
business while we are here in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. They 
work very, very hard on our behalf and we should really 
recognize and appreciate their efforts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — There are other people that make our life a 
lot easier while we’re here, Mr. Speaker. And that’s to the Table 
officers; it’s to the Legislative Assembly staff; it’s to the SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) staff; our 
legal counsel here; and all the folks in this particular building 
that help us in our day-to-day efforts representing the people of 
this great province of ours. 
 
But let me get back to more great news from the great Melville 
constituency. There is good news from all those who work on 
economic development in all our small towns throughout the 
constituency. They’re working very, very hard to keep rural 
Saskatchewan alive, and I plan on continuing to give them my 
full support in helping them to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s just a brief snapshot and good example of 
the Saskatchewan spirit and endless talent that we have in this 
great province of ours. It takes more these days for small 
communities to survive. And I would like to acknowledge the 
tireless effort of those residents in their communities who 
continue to give of themselves to continue to maintain a healthy 
community spirit. 
 
These efforts allow our community to showcase the most 
important part of living in rural Saskatchewan — the 
relationships and the friendships that we have within those 
communities. Each day, Mr. Speaker, these people work 
extremely hard to maintain the quality of life in our 
communities. They provide a vital service and stabilizing force 
in small town rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the coalition government has done much for my 
constituency, but my constituents, myself included, will expect 
more. And this coalition government will continue to make all 
people of this great province a priority. 
 
This coalition government has provided much for other 
constituencies as well. An MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) 
for southern Saskatchewan; the farm education rebate program; 
Centenary Fund grants; highway construction; job creation; an 
infrastructure program; an enhanced provincial disaster 
assistance program; elimination of the farm fuel tax. And that’s 
just naming a few initiatives, Mr. Speaker, and there are more 
to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now turning to a vital sector of our economy, one 
that is struggling in our province — the agricultural sector. 
Melville and district have some of the finest farms and farm 
families. They have tried to make a success of the family farm. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my next comments are going to be said very 
slowly so the opposition members can understand, including the 

member from North Battleford. Farm families in my area, 
despite their innovation, are struggling; they’re hurting. They 
need help as does the entire agricultural sector in our province. 
 
Earlier in this session, Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosthern 
and the member from North Battleford suggested — and it’s in 
Hansard and people can recognize that — they suggested that I 
said everything was wonderful on the farms in my constituency. 
 
I looked over the record, Mr. Speaker, and I found I did not say 
that at all. That was said by members opposite for whatever 
reason, whether it was meant to intentionally mislead this 
House or the people in my constituency. And they do owe an 
apology to those people. They do owe an apology to those 
people for having misled and twisted what was said in this 
House. 
 
For whatever reason I guess, Mr. Speaker, desperate people do 
desperate things and say desperate things. Mr. Speaker, the 
member from Rosthern and the member from North Battleford 
clearly misstated my remarks about the state of farms in my 
constituency. 
 
Certainly not everything is perfect for farm families in the 
Melville constituency. And as I have said today, Mr. Speaker, 
despite great challenges, farm families in my seat are resilient 
and innovative like the people of this province. They have been 
doing everything in their power to take each and every 
opportunity that comes their way. They do not buy the negative 
trash talking of the members opposite. They believe in 
themselves and in their farm. And they’ve done much to 
diversify and will continue to do so. 
 
They do need short-term help to fight the treasuries of Europe 
and the United States. But despite these challenges the farmers 
in my seat don’t give up on Saskatchewan like the members 
opposite do, Mr. Speaker, and this coalition government will 
not give up on farmers either. We will continue to fight for 
agricultural producers right across this great province of ours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — In the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, our 
coalition government is proposing to expand access to 
high-speed Internet service right around Saskatchewan. 
Recently in this House, we heard the member from Kindersley 
scoff at the need for such a service, particularly during a farm 
crisis. 
 
In recent weeks, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to talk to 
many rural residents. Despite what the member from Kindersley 
says, I’ve spoken to rural people who are deeply concerned 
about rural businesses being at a disadvantage with the cities 
because they do not have that kind of an access. 
 
The member from Kindersley should remember that the world 
will in fact continue to forge ahead regardless of whether or not 
there is a crisis on our farms. This government has had the good 
sense and foresight to make sure that Saskatchewan does 
everything it possibly can to keep rural areas in tune with the 
rest of the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should not be surprised however, that the 



180 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2001 

 

member from Kindersley is opposed to bringing rural 
Saskatchewan into the information economy. After all, he is the 
person who thinks that smaller family farms have no future in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have a case of envy. It’s not 
just any type of envy, Mr. Speaker, it’s Alberta envy. And they 
have an acute case of it. They think everything in Alberta is 
better. They think that unless you live in Alberta there is no 
hope that you’ll ever achieve your dreams, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They believe there is little chance of achieving prosperities in 
one’s community and for one’s family here in Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, our good neighbours to the west live in a province 
which no doubt has many, many attributes, but its success by no 
means prevents Saskatchewan from obtaining a more 
prosperous and bright future. 
 
It’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite spend so 
much time telling the people of Saskatchewan how much better 
off things are in Alberta. It’s shameful that they devote so much 
effort telling everyone in Saskatchewan that this is a bad 
province to live in. It’s shameful under any circumstance, but 
even worse given that they want to call themselves the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Even though, even though, Mr. Speaker, we’re not very far into 
this session we’ve heard plenty of trash talking from the 
Saskatchewan Party about Saskatchewan. According to their 
brain trust our economy is faltering, our health care workers are 
all packing their bags, our schools are all soon going to be 
empty, and our farmers and our agribusinesses are all going to 
close up shop because there are no opportunities here. 
 
You’d think this was the end of the world, Mr. Speaker, as we 
know it. Well, those of us in this coalition government know 
however that the world will be fine so long as the Sask Party is 
kept on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly Saskatchewan has had its share of 
problems. Sure we face a number of challenges and some of 
them will be very difficult to address. While the Sask Party 
laments the fact that these problems exist and uses them to try 
to get power, the coalition government colleagues — my 
coalition government colleagues and I — are going to face them 
head on and do the work needed to rise above these challenges. 
That is what this province has always been all about. That’s 
what it’s always been about. 
 
Rather than scoring political points by painting a negative 
picture of Saskatchewan and the challenges it faces, the Sask 
Party should remember how this province was built. When your 
parents grew up in this province things were not always perfect. 
When your grandparents and your great grandparents arrived to 
settle Saskatchewan they faced far greater challenges than we 
face today. Rather than giving up and saying let’s move to 
Alberta or somewhere else, they stuck it through. They believed 
in themselves. They believed in their communities. And they 
believed in this great province of Saskatchewan. And they did 
build a brighter future for all of us. 
 
Under Liberal governments in the early decades of the last 
century, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan settled the 

prairie, built numerous communities, set up local governments, 
schools, universities, and founded union hospitals which serve 
as a basis for medicare. Within a few decades . . . despite, 
despite a war, an epidemic, and many, many untold challenges 
we built, we built the third most populous province in Canada. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province more than ever 
want to believe in their province and to continue to be proud of 
who they are and where they live. That is unfortunately made 
difficult when the members of the Saskatchewan Party 
constantly trash Saskatchewan. It’s made tough when they tell 
people this isn’t the place of opportunity. This isn’t the place 
where one can meet their needs or fulfill their dreams. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge the members opposite to remember what 
their parents and grandparents did. Saskatchewan people are 
resilient, innovative, and patient and they are capable of 
overcoming any challenge that they confront. Rather than trash 
talk Saskatchewan every time they confronted a problem, our 
parents and our grandparents believed in themselves. They dealt 
with these problems and they built a brighter future to ensure 
that we could enjoy a better future in this province. 
 
In the Throne Speech before us today, we are offering to 
connect with the future. The sooner we believe we can connect 
with the future and make this a better province, Mr. Speaker, 
the sooner we will be able to do that. The sooner the members 
of the Sask Party join us in reminding Saskatchewan people that 
we can overcome challenges, the sooner we will build a brighter 
future. 
 
Saskatchewan people have it within themselves to make the 
future whatever they want it to be. They don’t need to live in 
Alberta and they don’t need an Alberta-style government to 
make their dreams come true either. Like our parents and our 
grandparents, it’s not where we are that matter, it’s who we are 
that matters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people will meet challenges face to 
face, determine their own destiny, and plot their own course in 
history. Despite whatever the members opposite suggest, it’s 
who we are that counts, not where we are. 
 
We are a creative and an innovative people. When we combine 
this with our willingness to overcome any problem we face, we 
can assure ourselves that we will connect to the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I travel around the province today, I detect a 
real concern, almost a fear, about the political future of this 
province. People are expressing a real fear about the extreme 
agenda of the party opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the Saskatchewan Party have a vision 
that’s scary. They seem to think it’s important to sully my 
reputation and my personal integrity. Well I take their interest 
as a compliment. But I want them to know that I will not sit idly 
by while prominent members of their party, Mr. Speaker, meet 
to fan flames of separation from Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe in this province and this country of ours. 
I was in the service of this country to help keep this country 
together through enforcing the laws of this country that promote 
peace, order, and good government. Mr. Speaker, wasn’t that 



March 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 181 

 

long ago that I got up in this Assembly and spoke about the 
importance of national unity in this great country of Canada. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not believe in the agenda of division, of 
tearing this province and this country apart as a way to distract 
the people of Saskatchewan from the fact that that party has no 
vision of the future. In fact, they have nothing to offer 
Saskatchewan people but a return to the past and a betrayal of 
the future of this province — a future that, to date, has been free 
from their talent for deficit budgets and crippling debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not betray the people of Saskatchewan by 
going back to the past. Mr. Speaker, I will not betray the people 
of Saskatchewan by not offering a future. And, Mr. Mr. 
Speaker, I will not take part in the effort to tear our province 
and our country apart. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — This Throne Speech builds on the present 
for the future, Mr. Speaker. It builds by offering a vision, a 
vision that is lacking in the opposition benches. Mr. Speaker, it 
continues to build a legacy that I’m proud to build on and take 
part in. That is why, Mr. Speaker, I will support this Throne 
Speech put forth by the coalition in 2001, but I will not in good 
conscience support the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to start this afternoon by first congratulating you. Certainly 
those of us who are from the more central part of Saskatchewan 
are very proud that you’ve attained this position and I 
congratulate you. 
 
At this time, I would also like to take the opportunity to 
congratulate the new Deputy Speaker, the Chair of committees, 
the member from Regina Sherwood. We look forward to 
working with him as we do look forward to working with you 
now and in the near future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again the people from Saskatchewan Rivers are 
pleased to have the opportunity to be able to get up this 
afternoon and to spend some time alluding to this airy-fairy 
Throne Speech that was presented last week by the NDP 
government. 
 
And what we need to do is take some time and go through the 
Throne Speech and help everyone to understand what this 
government is trying to do as they completely accede to the 
possibilities that they have completely devoided themselves, 
Mr. Speaker, of any vision for the future of this province. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s become painfully clear and with a 
great deal of disillusionment in the Saskatchewan Rivers 
constituency that the lack of vision by this NDP government is 
causing a great deal of concern, and right now, Mr. Speaker, it 
is become the number one priority in my constituency to work 
hard with my constituents, to convince them that, yes, there is a 
future in Saskatchewan. No, you don’t have to move to Alberta, 
such as the members in the government keep alluding to; that 

we shouldn’t be talking about Alberta — and they’re right, we 
don’t to talk about Alberta. We want to keep our children here 
for the future of this province. But unfortunately with speeches 
from the throne such as this, that opportunity is not going to 
happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the years the citizens of Saskatchewan, when 
spring arrives, look forward to the opening of the session, the 
Speech from the Throne, later in the week we’re going to get 
the budget from the Minister of Finance. Saskatchewan, the 
people of Saskatchewan and certainly those people in rural 
Saskatchewan always see spring as a sign of hope. The world is 
turning green again. The snow is melting and lushness starts to 
build in our province again. This will be the first time probably 
ever in the history of this province that when we go through a 
Throne Speech when it is presented that there is no hope for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, when the Throne Speech was presented by 
this NDP government, they didn’t even know what season it 
was. Spring is here. Spring has been here for quite a while, Mr. 
Speaker. Unfortunately, the Premier of the province had to be 
told by one of his cabinet ministers that it was spring, so it leads 
to a great deal of disconcertment, Mr. Speaker, that anyone over 
there has any idea what time of the year it is. And quite often, 
we’ve heard in their speeches, they don’t know if it’s morning 
or afternoon or evening. 
 
Now in the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, there were 
very, very little here that the province can look forward to. In 
fact, there’s virtually nothing that the province can look forward 
to. I think we need to spend some time taking a look at this 
budget speech, how it’s going to reflect upon the constituents of 
Saskatchewan Rivers, and in fact, whether there is anything in 
this budget speech that the people of Saskatchewan Rivers can 
look forward to that will build up their hopes. 
 
The Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, spoke about a 
thriving economy in Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, in the 
constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers they don’t see a thriving 
economy. And so for . . . they are very concerned that the 
government of the day, this NDP, so-called NDP government, 
would stand up and proudly say that there’s a thriving economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spent several hours on the phone with several 
different constituents of mine this spring — hours, Mr. Speaker, 
literally hours and hours — of people saying, what can we do? 
We want to stay here in Saskatchewan and work. We know 
there’s opportunity; we know there’s potential, Mr. Speaker, in 
this province, for growth, for wealth creation. We know that we 
can provide the goods and services that are needed by the 
people of Saskatchewan, by the people of Canada, by the 
people of North America. Everyone in the world can use the 
goods and services that could be — and I emphasize the word 
could, Mr. Speaker — that could be produced in this province. 
 
Unfortunately, after listening to the people from Saskatchewan 
Rivers, as they explained to me very, very clearly, there is only 
one problem that is preventing them from creating the successes 
that they would like to see for themselves, that they would like 
to see for their children, and that they’d like to see for their 
grandchildren, they would like to see for their 
great-grandchildren. And that number one problem, Mr. 



182 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2001 

 

Speaker, is that NDP government sitting opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about a thriving economy . . . Of 
course those of us on this side of the House understand the term 
thriving economy. That is when the people in this province feel 
that sense of pride as they rise every morning and go off to their 
workplace, go off to their businesses, go to work for their 
employers with a sense of pride, a sense of accomplishment. 
 
And in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, that is disappearing on a 
day-by-day basis. In the town of Choiceland, Mr. Speaker, a 
mirror has been held up for the province of Saskatchewan to 
take a look at what this NDP government has done for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This winter alone, in the period of time that there was snow on 
the ground . . . in the wintertime, we have lost five businesses. 
Five businesses, Mr. Speaker, in one town alone. 
 
Now if you take this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It is so. It is 
so, the member from Indian Head-Milestone. I must reiterate, it 
is so. That is exactly what’s happened. And if it’s happening in 
Choiceland, we know it is happening elsewhere in rural 
Saskatchewan. Everywhere in this province. 
 
Five businesses. The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool elevator is 
closing. The Bank of Nova Scotia had to close its doors because 
of a downturn in business. The service station with a restaurant 
had to close because of a downturn in business, because of the 
increase in taxes. 
 
Two other businesses also, Mr. Speaker. There was a machinery 
dealer that had been servicing the people of Choiceland and the 
community surrounding it and the entire farm area from 
Nipawin to Prince Albert had been there for decades, and this 
winter, Mr. Speaker, they had to close their doors. 
 
And the last business, Mr. Speaker, was the fertilizer dealer in 
the town of Choiceland; again, a long time business that had 
been providing a service to the farmers in the Choiceland, 
Smeaton, Snowden, Garrick, Love areas for decades, and last 
winter, Mr. Speaker, because of the regressive policies, the lack 
of vision by this NDP government, they too had to close their 
doors. 
 
Now that’s not to say . . . There’s something I have to say about 
a thriving economy. This NDP government has talked many 
times about potential. And certainly, we all want to agree that 
there is potential, Mr. Speaker. But we need to take a look at the 
work potential. How long do we just sit back, Mr. Speaker, and 
say that this province has potential and then simply do nothing 
about it. 
 
That’s what we see now in the last 10 years is a do-nothing 
attitude by this NDP government and their desire to gain control 
of the economy rather than allow the economy to provide the 
goods, the services, the jobs, and the dynamic economy that 
could and should make Saskatchewan the envy of the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the town and the rural municipality of Birch Hills 
actually are trying — are trying — their very hardest to create 
an opportunity for economic development in this province. 
There is a firm from outside this province that is looking at 

creating a medium-sized business in Saskatchewan that is going 
to generate tens, nay, hundreds of millions in opportunity for 
the people in north and central Saskatchewan. 
 
But as hard as they try to create this opportunity, the local 
governments are doing their utmost, providing the opportunity 
for this business to come and start up opportunities. There’s 
infrastructure that needs to be taken care of; these communities 
are working hard to ensure that this infrastructure is going to be 
in place. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it’s also going to have to come out 
of the local tax base to do that, because they’re not hearing 
anything from this NDP government that is showing 
encouragement for job creation in the Saskatchewan Rivers 
constituency. 
 
Which reminds me, Mr. Speaker, that it’s unfortunate that my 
constituents are not able to reap the same benefits as the 
constituents of Melville. I’m sure that they’re very pleased, and 
we’re very pleased for them, Mr. Speaker, that things are doing 
very well in Melville, even though the farm economy is not as 
bad there as it is in the rest of the province. And we feel very 
proud of that for them. But in my constituency of Saskatchewan 
Rivers, we are suffering a great economic disaster. 
 
Now this corporation that I spoke of, Mr. Speaker, that is really 
working hard to try to get a foothold in Saskatchewan, they’ve 
met with the local governments, reached some very good 
understandings, setting some agreements in place. Some 
long-term, short-term intermediate plans are all being put in 
place so that we can put in a corporation, develop jobs, job 
strategies that are going to have long-reaching and far-reaching 
effects in north central Saskatchewan. 
 
Yet when we talked to the corporation about what is the 
province doing. Nothing, the province isn’t going to do 
anything. In fact, Mr. Speaker, what this corporation is telling 
us is that even though they’re coming in and providing 
hundreds of jobs, many of them unionized — many of them 
unionized — what they’re hearing is that because of the 
regressive tax policies of this government, they’re going to have 
to wait for a change in government, for the Saskatchewan Party 
to become the government of this province, before they’re 
going to be able to come in here and do business. 
 
Now one of the areas that I noticed, Mr. Speaker, in the budget 
when we talk about a thriving economy, the opportunity that 
there’s business actually taking place in this province. And 
certainly we’ve heard many times from the members opposite, 
from the NDP government members, that there is good business 
taking place in this province. Unfortunately they’re only able to 
hold up one example at a time. 
 
The government has said that there’s about three areas in this 
province where the economy is doing well. And that’s in 
potash, it’s in the oil and gas sector and in wild rice. So we have 
one area of farming, Mr. Speaker, according to this government, 
that is actually doing well. 
 
Now of course the member from Melville will lead us to believe 
that the farm economy is only bad outside of Melville. 
 



March 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 183 

 

Now unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, there are many other areas of 
the economy that are trying to take place in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, that are not tied up with these three — the potash, oil 
and gas, and the wild rice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:15) 
 
In fact the wild rice producers, Mr. Speaker, in this province, 
would like to see a lot more, a lot more value added put on their 
product, Mr. Speaker. But again they’re finding the restrictive 
NDP government with their regressive tax policies, it’s much 
easier to ship out raw product than it is to develop value added 
in this province. 
 
Now they also talk about the boom in the oil and gas. And I’m 
sure, Mr. Speaker, that OPEC (Organization of Petroleum 
Exporting Countries) must be absolutely dancing in the sand 
because there’s an NDP government here taking credit for oil 
prices in the world. 
 
But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we 
understand very clearly that this NDP government has no effect 
on world gas prices. And for them to take any credit for that is 
an insult to the people of Saskatchewan, to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan, and it’s an insult to the oil producers of the 
world. And it’s an insult to those people who work in the oil 
field industry when they hear statements by this NDP 
government that they are responsible for the boom in oil prices 
and everyone should be proud of their ability to manage the 
books, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we do know, we do know something on this side of the 
House that they don’t understand on that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is when you look at economy, you look at 
thriving businesses, that you can actually reduce taxes. You can 
reduce royalties and even have more tax dollars to work with in 
government coffers than you would have previously. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the NDP socialist philosophy is, is 
that the pie is only so big and so if you take a little bit out of it 
you have to find . . . you have to take away from someone else 
to put that back. 
 
Now that is really an astounding belief, Mr. Speaker, that in this 
day and age the economists have established centuries ago that 
wealth can be created, that you can create new and more wealth 
and everyone can benefit. 
 
Everyone can benefit, Mr. Speaker, whether you live in 
Saskatchewan Rivers or you live in Regina, subsidize Regina. 
That the Minister of Crown Corporations got up and proudly 
boasted today that it is the responsibility of the citizens of 
Saskatchewan to subsidize Regina when he announced that the 
average household only pays $113 for power this winter, when I 
know very well that the people of Prince Albert paid 
significantly higher — significantly, Mr. Speaker — probably 
in the range of $50 a month more in Prince Albert. 
 
So I think for you and I, Mr. Speaker, to know that we — even 
though we live in the banana belt in Prince Albert which was 
significantly warmer all winter of course than Regina because 
the hot air hadn’t showed up here yet — that in Prince Albert 
we have to pay more for power, for hydro, than they do in 

Regina. And I think the people of Prince Albert are going to be 
outraged finding out when the Minister of Crown Corporations 
got up and made that astounding announcement this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to take a look at some other things in this 
budget speech that are having a significant effect upon the 
citizens of Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Now this government, again for the 10th time, has got up and 
talked about the health of its citizenry, the health of its families, 
and the health of its communities. Well, Mr. Speaker, we know 
that the people of Saskatchewan and their resilience in spite of 
this NDP government . . . that the people of Saskatchewan are 
healthy in spite of the health care system that is being provided 
by this NDP government. 
 
In fact we’re disconcerted on this side, and certainly we’re 
hearing this week and through the weekend when the Minister 
of Health is unsure of whether anybody even works for the 
Department of Health outside of Regina, the citizens of 
Saskatchewan Rivers are saying, well what is with the Minister 
of Health? Doesn’t he know that there’s nurses in this system, 
or does he think that none of them have left or none have 
retired? Doesn’t he understand that when they made the 
promise of 500 more nurses in the 1999 campaign . . . that’s 
exactly, Mr. Speaker, we both remember that clearly, is that this 
NDP government promised 500 more nurses; that there was 
actually when all is shaken down, by the time this government 
is replaced, there’ll be probably 500 less nurses in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In health care, Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing to listen to this NDP 
government and all the credit that they take for all the good 
work that is being taken by the volunteers in this province. 
 
Now we’ve heard this government and we’ve heard the minister 
get up and say how well the government is doing in health care; 
how well the bureaucracy is doing in wealth care . . . health 
care. And how that by having less nurses in the health care 
system, the health is now better. By having fewer doctors in the 
health care system, it’s now better. By taking money out of 
services, capital services, the health care is now better. 
 
Well what’s happened in reality? There’s a reality that has taken 
place, Mr. Speaker. And the reality is the good citizens of 
Saskatchewan and certainly the good citizens of Saskatchewan 
Rivers have taken it upon themselves, they’ve taken it upon 
themselves, Mr. Speaker, to take over the health care system 
and look after the health care system and look after their 
citizens so that they know, they know very clearly that this 
NDP government has decided not to do that. They’re more 
interested in trying to solve their problems, internal problems, 
the inner fighting that is going on in their caucus, rather than to 
look after the health of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact communities in my area of the province, Mr. Speaker, as 
you may be aware, as in other communities, the communities 
have had to set up hospital foundations so that they can do 
fundraising. Communities are doing their own fundraising, Mr. 
Speaker, to replace dilapidated, antiquated equipment so that 
quality health care and quality services can be provided to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 



184 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2001 

 

And then this government, in their complete lack of wisdom, 
Mr. Speaker, is actually taking the antiquated, broken-down, 
useless equipment that is of no value to southern Saskatchewan 
and shipping it to places such as Ile-a-la-Crosse. And the staff 
taking a look at this and saying, we need a manual to operate 
this stuff, Mr. Speaker, because nobody here was even around 
when this stuff was built. 
 
But that’s the kind of quality health care that they’re providing 
in northern Saskatchewan — second-rate, second-class health 
care for northern Saskatchewan — an area of this province that 
is vital, that is an absolute necessity to continue this drive and 
for the exciting economy that could be in Saskatchewan and is 
an integral part of the potential this province could have for 
success. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s so much in this budget that has to be 
gone over to point out to the people of Saskatchewan its 
negative impact upon the people of Saskatchewan, the people of 
rural Saskatchewan, and specifically to the people of 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
In my area of the world, we’re certainly highly amused — and 
it is an amusement, Mr. Speaker — that the government is 
looking at investing through the Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker, $70 million dollars so we have high-speed Internet 
access. Now this sounds like a wonderful, wonderful 
opportunity for the people of rural Saskatchewan, the people of 
northern Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there’s a terrific, 
horrific downside to this announcement. 
 
The first part of it, Mr. Speaker, is that the technology, the 
technology that this government is going to invest in to provide 
high-speed Internet access — they call it. Actually, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not even high speed, it’s medium-speed Internet 
access they’re going to be provided. It’s already outdated and 
this government is going to make a $70 million commitment to 
outdated technology — outdated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’d like sometime this spring or this sitting, Mr. Speaker, to 
have someone from the government explain to those of us on 
this side who are more interested in moving into the 21st 
century, why it’s important to invest in the 20th century, even 
though the 20th century has long past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government seems to be able to find the 
money for $70 million worth of Internet access taken out of 
taxpayer pockets — the taxpayers of Regina, taxpayers of 
Saskatoon, the taxpayers of Moose Jaw, the taxpayers of Prince 
Albert — and taking those peoples’ taxpaying dollars, the 
people who create . . . who are trying to create wealth in this 
province, and investing it in second-rate technology for Internet 
use in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Now what we could have, we could have, Mr. Speaker, have 
taken that $70 million and looked at tax reduction. We could 
have done that, Mr. Speaker. But I didn’t see that anywhere in 
the budget speech, Mr. Speaker; there is no talk here of tax 
reduction. In fact what the . . . we can hardly wait to see the 
budget speech and the rampant spending that we’re sure there’s 
going to be brought down in there. 
 
But in the meantime we have to take a look at what’s in front of 

us now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m sure the farmers of Saskatchewan are going to be highly 
interested, or maybe the better term is they’re going to be 
non-interested in receiving medium-speed access to the Internet 
when in today’s day and age, this government, if they had got 
on their bus that the Premier promised — he’s going to get a 
bus although the wheels have fallen off, as we’re all aware on 
this side of the House, Mr. Speaker — if they had gone on the 
bus and went out to rural Saskatchewan where there is not the 
cable service that they have in the cities and saw that on the 
farms that they’re actually using wireless technology. Wireless 
technology, Mr. Speaker, which is incredible, which is 
incredibly much quicker than what the province here is 
promising in this so-called Throne Speech. 
 
So we’re going to set up in rural and northern Saskatchewan 
technology that is already outdated and nobody is looking 
forward to. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there have been proposals 
made to this NDP government to provide high-speed access, not 
medium speed that they’re talking about in this Throne Speech, 
but actual high-speed Internet service to northern Saskatchewan 
and this government said no, we can’t do that. We have to have 
medium-speed service. The people of northern Saskatchewan 
have got to crawl, even though they’re already walking, we’re 
going to slow them down to a crawl first. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure and I know that the NDP 
government is not sure how this is going to benefit the people 
of northern Saskatchewan by introducing a regressive 
technology that is not going to provide them with the needs and 
the services that is going to be required to encourage thriving 
opportunities in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just touch a little bit on . . . I noticed in 
the Throne Speech there was some talk by this government 
investing, the government investing — because they certainly 
don’t want private corporations or the public to participate in 
investing — this government is quite, this government is quite 
sure that the only way that what can happen in this province is 
for the government to take control of the economy. 
 
What this government has talked about is that we have 
opportunities in this province for the growth of research and 
development. We have a large opportunity. The University of 
Saskatchewan has the synchrotron there. We have the 
Petroleum Technology Research Centre here in Regina. There’s 
massive opportunities for research and development here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:30) 
 
But what this government is promising the people of 
Saskatchewan is that no, we can’t have tax cuts because we 
need those tax dollars to fund research and development 
because we don’t want the private sector doing this. This 
government is saying that it’s more important for the 
government to participate in research and development than for 
the people who actually use it to participate in research and 
development. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers 
. . . Of course it’s mostly a rural constituency. The largest 



March 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

 

community, Birch Hills, is between 900 and a thousand people. 
The next largest, Mr. Speaker, is Choiceland, which is about an 
hour and a half north and east of Birch Hills. It has about 5 to 
600 people living in it. We have no large towns, Mr. Speaker. It 
is very much a very rural — very rural — constituency. Very 
scattered. Very few farms any more because of the 
rationalization that has taken place. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency, agriculture is one of the 
largest areas of economic opportunity that we can have in my 
constituency. Now there are some others but agriculture is one 
of the biggest. What is in this Throne Speech that would speak 
to a thriving agriculture economy for an opportunity for the 
agriculture community to feel comfortable, that things could 
look up, that this government actually supports agriculture in 
this province? Well what have we heard from this government, 
Mr. Speaker? They’re going to buy a bus. They’re going to get 
a used bus and haul the caucus around so they actually show 
them where rural Saskatchewan is. 
 
Now we’re not sure, Mr. Speaker, what having a bus is going to 
do for the people of rural Saskatchewan. I’m not sure what it’s 
going do for the people of Saskatchewan Rivers, for the farm 
community in Saskatchewan Rivers. Does it mean it’s going to 
lower their taxes? Well that’s not in the Throne Speech, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In fact, one of the largest expense items — one of the largest 
expense items — for the farm community in my constituency, 
Mr. Speaker, is property taxes. And what’s happened with 
property taxes, Mr. Speaker? In the last 10 years, this NDP 
government has downloaded education property taxes on to the 
local tax base at a rate that’s unprecedented in the western 
world — unprecedented in the western world. 
 
And what has that provided in my constituency? We have high 
taxes, reduced services for students. Reduced services, Mr. 
Speaker, from an NDP government that over the years has kept 
saying the children are the future, the children are the future. 
But we’re not going to do anything for them. The children are 
our future but we’re not going to do anything for them. In fact, 
what we’re going to do is punish them for even being here. 
 
What do we find from this NDP government? They’re actually 
putting plans in place — putting plans in place, Mr. Speaker, if 
you can believe that — that we’re going to have fewer children 
living in this province in 25 years. Now as a province, we 
should be looking at ways to build the province not tear it 
down. But they’re actually putting plans in place how to run 
this province with fewer people in it. Why don’t they put plans 
in place how to run this province with more people in it? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that the Saskatchewan 
Party, when the member from Rosetown-Biggar becomes a 
premier, has the plans in place to run this province with more 
people in it, more than 1 million, more than 2 million and 
maybe even more than 3 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Cypress 
Hills spoke at length last night and did a little wrap-up this 
afternoon. 

Now the member from Cypress Hills, who has keenly taken on 
the responsibility of keeping track, from the opposition point of 
view what is happening in the Department of Highways. 
 
Now we understand clearly that the highway system in 
Saskatchewan is in a great deal of disrepair. Fortunately for me, 
apparently, there is no disrepair up in my area of the world, 
because there’s no work going on. So therefore, it must all be 
good. Although we can’t convince the people who drive on 
them that the highways are good because the Department of 
Highways have said so. 
 
But what we have noticed is the little fix-it and little patching 
jobs that this NDP government has directed the department to 
do throughout the province, and certainly in my constituency; 
these little projects that you go over here and do a couple of 
miles for one day and then you go over and do somewhere else 
and do a couple miles rather than taking the whole project on 
and getting it done all at once. They do these little patch and 
repair jobs that are providing no services to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and are certainly are just providing the 
employees from the Department of Highways a large degree of 
frustration because everyday they come to work and they have 
no idea what they are going to be doing next because they have 
to wait for orders from Regina. 
 
One of the projects, a very small project that took place in my 
constituency . . . actually according to the Department of 
Highways it was a large project; the people of Saskatchewan 
Rivers called it a small project because it would only 
encompass three kilometres. Three kilometres, Mr. Speaker, 
according to the Department of Highways and according to the 
minister, is a large project but the people of Saskatchewan 
Rivers call that a waste of time. 
 
What they did, Mr. Speaker, is that they tore up a reasonably 
good piece of road, a highway, a heavy haul road, that was 
subsidized by a corporation in this province, Weyerhaeuser — 
at one time would, Prince Albert Pulp Wood Corporation was 
called at one time — they actually subsidized the building of 
that highway. The department in their wisdom tore the surface 
off it, tore the heavy haul surface off of it, and replaced it with a 
thin membrane surface, Mr. Speaker. Can you imagine that, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
They tore off a heavy surface and replaced it with a thin 
membrane surface for heavy haul trucks, for heavy haul trucks. 
These are trucks that are permitted to haul very heavy weights 
on our highways, Mr. Speaker, on a year-round basis. They 
replaced a heavy haul highway with a thin membrane surface. 
 
Now we don’t know what that is supposed to accomplish, and 
of course I’m sure we are not going to get a straight answer 
from the minister in the future should we ever ask her that; in 
fact it’s probably a waste of time to ask so we won’t bother 
anyway. 
 
Now we’ve also heard when we talk about transportation, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the government has a plan for strategic 
corridors, strategic corridors. Now there’s quite a term. Now 
strategic corridors, from an economic point of view, is that you 
develop a road system that would funnel traffic from the 
regions onto major highways in areas of the world and certainly 



186 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2001 

 

in areas of Canada. We’re hoping that would translate into 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Unfortunately a strategic corridor . . . a strategic corridor for 
this NDP government, Mr. Speaker, means that they’re going to 
get rural municipalities to build heavy-haul roads and then we 
can get the heavy traffic off the highways. And then the 
Department of Highways won’t have to spend as much money 
to fix them even though they’re taking all the gas money and 
not giving any of it back to the rural municipalities who are 
going to be bearing the brunt of the cost of building these roads 
and all the cost, all the cost, Mr. Speaker, of maintaining them 
in the future. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in my critic area of Northern Affairs, I have 
a great deal of interest, a keen interest, in what’s happening in 
northern Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Speaker, throughout my life 
I’ve had a great many opportunities to live in northern 
Saskatchewan, to work in northern Saskatchewan, to make 
friends in northern Saskatchewan. And certainly I know that the 
members opposite think northern Saskatchewan starts just north 
of Ring Road but unfortunately] for those of us who are from 
the North know that northern Saskatchewan starts somewhere 
around the Churchill River. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, for the third time, and this is the third time 
this government has announced a strategy for new initiatives in 
forestry. This is the third time they’ve announced it, Mr. 
Speaker. How many times are they going to announce it? Do 
we hear it next year? Maybe it’ll come true, or the year after, 
maybe it’ll come . . . 
 
Well what we’re hoping, what the people from northern 
Saskatchewan are hoping of course, is that by next year there 
will be a different government sitting on the other side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, and then there will be 10,000 jobs in 
forestry in northern Saskatchewan rather than what’s 
happening. 
 
And what’s really happening, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve spoken 
. . . we on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, have spoken to 
the citizens of northern Saskatchewan. We’ve said to them, now 
the government’s promised you jobs. Where are they? We’d 
like to see them. And they stand up, every one of them, every 
one of them, Mr. Speaker, and say the same thing. There are no 
new jobs; the 10,000 jobs don’t exist. 
 
In fact what they’re telling us, the people of northern 
Saskatchewan are telling us, Mr. Speaker, is that we have lost 
our jobs because of this so-called initiative in forestry . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you, member, I will do that. 
 
Northern Saskatchewan which encompasses about 57 per cent 
of the land mass of this province is an integral part, Mr. 
Speaker, of the future, of the future promises, and is an integral 
part of the potential for the province of Saskatchewan. It is 
integral for job creation; it is integral for wealth creation. It is 
integral so that we have the resources that are necessary in the 
future to look after our senior citizens. It is integral that 
northern Saskatchewan enjoy and reap the same benefits as 
southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Do we see that, Mr. Speaker? Well the Throne Speech, again, 

talks about it. But as we’ve seen in the last two years talk is 
cheap, because nothing’s happened. There’s been job losses. 
Sawmills have closed, people are laid off, used up their EI 
(Employment Insurance), forced to go on welfare, and then this 
province says, oh, we don’t have unemployment in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Well of course they don’t — 
they’re all on welfare. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, when I talked to the council at La Loche, 
they were outraged that this province, this government is saying 
that unemployment rolls . . . unemployment has been reduced in 
northern Saskatchewan. When they were able to stand right in 
front of us holding up the document that showed that what they 
had in fact was 90 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 90 per cent 
unemployment in La Loche. 
 
Now I want, Mr. Speaker, desperately to try to understand how 
this is beneficial to the people at La Loche, how this is 
beneficial to the people of northern Saskatchewan. And I hope 
some time in the future that this NDP government, or the 
minister from northern Saskatchewan, or the minister from 
Environment and Resource Management, be able to explain — 
he’d probably have to explain it to his own colleagues first, 
because they don’t understand it either — how 90 per cent 
unemployment is good for the people of northern 
Saskatchewan. But only in Saskatchewan would a government 
brag that 90 per cent unemployment is a good thing — a good 
thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what we have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and welcome to the 
Chair this afternoon. It’s a pleasure to have you presiding over 
the affairs this afternoon. This government says that the people 
. . . that the members on this side of the House promote doom 
and gloom. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further from the truth. 
Nothing could be further from the truth than saying that the 
members from this side of the House are promoting doom and 
gloom. We are the only ones that have a positive, aggressive 
agenda so that the people of northern Saskatchewan are going 
to be able to look forward to a future of wealth creation and job 
creation that is not, that is not a part of the agenda of that doom 
and gloom NDP government. In fact, they insist — they insist 
that the people of northern Saskatchewan are now and should 
remain second-class citizens. 
 
(15:45) 
 
We on this side of the House however, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
bound and determined that what is going to happen, that the 
people of northern Saskatchewan will not remain second-class 
citizens, and in fact will become full participants in the 
economy of Saskatchewan where they have the right for the 
ownership of property, where they have the right to have jobs 
for themselves, Mr. Speaker, with the opportunities that already 
exist in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I notice in the Throne Speech, the so-called 
Throne Speech, that this government is talking about improving 
education. That is certainly a magnanimous stance to take, Mr. 
Speaker, that this NDP government is going to look at. And 
that’s exactly the term they used. They were going to look at 
improving education. They’re not sure if they want to do it or 



March 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 187 

 

not, but they’re going to take a look at it. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, they have 10 years of undoing to do first 
before we can even start the process of improving education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my previous life, I spent quite a bit of time 
going over education budgets, trying to figure out how we’re 
going to cut staff to absorb the cutbacks that this NDP 
government inflicted upon educational organizations in this 
province. 
 
Now this government talks about improving education — 
improving education. They took $200 million, Mr. Speaker, 
$200 million out of education in this province, and now they’re 
going to start talking about improving it. Well before they can 
even start the process, they need to put $200 million back into 
education. But are they talking about that in this? No, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
What they’re talking about in this Throne Speech is going back 
to a time when instead of investing money in people, we’re 
going to build a building. We’re going to build a building and 
everything will be much better. We’ll build a building and it’s 
going to be so much better for education because we have a 
building. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the children of Saskatchewan are 
just absolutely jumping up and down in their chairs knowing 
that they’re going to have a building. We’re not going to have 
teachers for them, Mr. Speaker. Now that would be a bit of a 
problem, having the teachers in them, but we’re going to have a 
building. 
 
Now what’s needed is a commitment from a government in 
Saskatchewan that education is important; that it’s one of the 
big-ticket items in this province that deserves more attention, 
far more attention than it is getting from this NDP government. 
 
In fact, all we’ve seen in the last 10 years of NDP government 
is downloading, downloading, downsizing, cutting of education, 
and making the children, making the children and the future of 
our province, Mr. Speaker, pay for their complete lack of vision 
and the necessity and the need that education is one of the very 
basic tools, one of the founding principles of having a thriving 
economy, of having a booming economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The necessity to have the skilled labour force, the skills that are 
necessary to create jobs, the skills that are necessary to fill job 
openings that are going to take place, that can only take place, 
Mr. Speaker, through education. A lot of infrastructure is in 
place, but this NDP government has chosen not, not to 
participate in education that is required in order to have the 
skilled labour force that is necessary to carry this province into 
this century. 
 
Now we found, Mr. Speaker, as I get closer and closer to the 
end here, that there are some opportunities in this . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tell us what’s happening in the forest 
industry. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Well I haven’t got there yet. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we see in the Speech from the Throne that the 
government is talking about connecting, connecting to 
Aboriginal people. What a phrase we want to put in a Throne 
Speech — connecting to Aboriginal people. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, apparently we’re going to have to give the 
members opposite, the so-called NDP government members, a 
lesson in connecting. First off, Aboriginal peoples were here 
first; and those of us who moved from the European countries, 
whose ancestors came from the European countries in the 
1800s, we’re already connected to the Aboriginal people. We 
work with them on a daily basis in our communities. We work 
with them in a daily basis in our job sites. We work with them 
on a daily basis in education, in health. But now, after 150 
years, suddenly this government has come up with this wild 
concept that maybe they should start, should start connecting to 
Aboriginal people. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, again the NDP government is a day late and 
a dollar short. 
 
The fact of the matter is the Aboriginal people of Saskatchewan 
have been making presentation after presentation after 
presentation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to this NDP government 
about what needs to happen for job creation in Aboriginal 
communities; for job creation, for wealth creation in northern 
Saskatchewan. And now for the first time since 1944, this 
government has come out with a catchphrase — 66 years to 
come up with a catchphrase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Aboriginal people and the people of northern 
Saskatchewan deserve more than a catchphrase of, connecting 
to Aboriginal people. The people of northern Saskatchewan, the 
Aboriginal people in Saskatchewan not only want to connect 
with Saskatchewan, they want to be an integral part of the 
future, of the wealth creation that is going to take place in this 
province after this NDP government is removed from power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Now, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan Rivers, I 
spoke about . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I spoke about agriculture, 
the impact it’s having on the communities in my constituency. 
The negative impact it’s having upon farm families. The 
negative impact it’s having on the communities because of the 
downturn, because of the regressive tax policies of this NDP 
government. 
 
But there is another industry that has a very, very large impact 
also in my constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and that area is forestry. 
 
Now in Saskatchewan Rivers we’re quite blessed being close to 
the northern forests with the job opportunities that become 
available; for the opportunities for small business to be able to 
establish businesses because of the forest, in the area of 
sawmills, logging operations to feed Weyerhaeuser. The 
opportunities are boundless and many people have taken 
advantage of that opportunity over decades and decades, going 
back into actually the 19th century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Unfortunately this winter has been their bleakest ever in 
forestry, the bleakest in more than a century, Mr. Speaker, in 



188 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2001 

 

forestry. We’ve had town hall meetings. I’ve had meetings in 
my office. I met with individuals at coffee shops. To a person, 
every one of them has said the same thing: there’s only one 
thing preventing the 10,000 jobs from being created in forestry 
and that is this regressive, tax-grabbing NDP government. 
 
This NDP government has sawn fit, is seeing fit, it continues to 
see fit, is planning for the future to continue to tax out of 
existence the small-business men that create the wealth in the 
forest industry that is vital — is absolutely vital, Mr. Speaker — 
for job creation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this province. 
 
If we’re going to have the 10,000 jobs that this NDP 
government is promising, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we must take a 
hard, hard look at how this government operates. We cannot 
continue to have the regressive tax policies that are in place and 
we must, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we must streamline the red tape 
that this government has put in place for forestry operators to 
operate. 
 
In my area of the world, in Saskatchewan Rivers, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that I can count weekly, I can count weekly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the operators, the sawmill operators, the 
logging operators that have packed their equipment up and left 
this province. Every one of them has said the same thing. Every 
one of them has said the same thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 
cannot continue to operate in this regressive regime, under this 
regressive regime. We must have the freedom to create wealth. 
We cannot, we cannot, Mr. Speaker, even create enough wealth 
to create the property taxes that have been downloaded by this 
regressive government through the education system. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s . . . as we look at the Throne 
Speech we see no hope, we see no vision. Again we see a 
government that is rehashing, to a large degree, promises that 
were made in the early ’90s, promises that were made in the 
mid-’90s, and promises that were made in the late ’90s. 
Promises, promises, promises, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
They announced so many of these programs so many times, 
we’re beginning to wonder on this side of the House that if you 
announce the same program enough times, you actually get to 
believe it yourself over there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that they 
believe it. They need to convince themselves that they’re 
believing it first and then they’re going to try to convince the 
rest of Saskatchewan. 
 
When you talk about 10,000 jobs in forestry when there was 
actually job losses, Mr. Speaker, I guess the NDP government 
feels, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they need to announce it over 
and over and over again and maybe they’ll start to feel better 
themselves, rather the extreme economic downturn that they 
have forced upon the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is with a great deal of regret that I 
wish to inform you that I will not be able to support the Throne 
Speech; and it is with a great deal of pleasure, a great deal of 
pleasure, Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, that I wish to inform 
you that I will be supporting the amendment proposed by the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First I would 
like to congratulate you on your election as Deputy Speaker, 
and I’d like to also extend my congratulations to the member 
from Prince Albert on his election as Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am certainly proud to be able to 
represent the people of Last Mountain-Touchwood 
constituency. It is a constituency that is largely rural based, with 
the largest community being Wynyard of a little over 2,000 
people; the rest of the towns are quite a bit smaller than that. So 
agriculture of course is certainly a major concern in our 
constituency. 
 
But there are also a number of other concerns that the citizens 
of Last Mountain-Touchwood have and have asked me to 
advocate for them and to raise for them, and I intend to do so, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, today and in the future days during this 
session. 
 
Some of the issues that we have in our constituency are not 
unlike issues that are in most members’ constituencies, 
particularly those members that represent constituencies outside 
the major urban centres. They centre around health, agriculture, 
infrastructures, highways, municipal roads, water and sewer, 
and those sorts of things. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we often hear the government talk about 
value added and we need to add more value to the products that 
we produce here in Saskatchewan, and I’m happy to say that 
that is . . . has been going on for some time in the community of 
Wynyard. Wynyard is the home to the only poultry processing 
plant in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I have been in discussion with members of town council 
recently, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they have some very real 
concerns that centre around the poultry processing plant. As 
you may know, to process . . . to do this processing requires a 
great deal of high-quality, good, clean drinking water. Water so 
that we can prepare the food so it’s fit for consumption. And 
these added costs of providing more and more water are falling 
on the laps . . . in the laps of the town councillors of Wynyard. 
The poultry processing plant in the last two years have seen an 
increase in water usage of some 35 per cent. And this is causing 
a real, as I mentioned, a real strain on the water supply in the 
town. 
 
(16:00) 
 
The town has undertaken a study to look at future water 
supplies. They have talked to the government about perhaps 
having some assistance in at least developing a plan and so on. 
And they seem to be running into a number of roadblocks and 
experiencing some frustrations in that area. And I’ll be working 
. . . I’m working with the town to help solve their problems. 
 
Another community that has been in discussions with this NDP 
government and haven’t had the type of results that they would 
like to have seen, is the small town of Kelliher. Some 
far-sighted folks in that community had the vision . . . had the 
foresight to seize on an opportunity that presented itself to . . . 
so that they could enhance their emergency measures services 
in their town. 
 



March 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 189 

 

They were made aware of a lot . . . of a portable power plant 
that was being removed from one of the office buildings here in 
Regina, and they followed the . . . these people from Kelliher 
followed up on this. They went ahead and purchased the power 
plant. This power plant has the capability of providing power to 
all the skating and curling rink waiting rooms. It can run their 
water system and those sorts of things, so that in the event of a 
Saskatchewan ice storm or some such natural disaster, the 
people in the community and surrounding communities would 
have a place to go to be warm, you can look after the seniors in 
the area, and so on. 
 
And as I mentioned, they went ahead and purchased the power 
plant. They’ve got all the plans in place to locate it in . . . and 
hook up to their essential services, but for a small town it’s a 
fairly sizeable cost and they were looking for some sort of 
assistance, whether it be through the federal government or 
provincial government. And to this point in time, they haven’t 
been able to be successful in obtaining that sort of assistance. 
 
But we are continuing to work with them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and hopefully we will find a solution to this problem, which 
will certainly be a valuable asset to that whole general area of 
my constituency. 
 
Highways, as you can well imagine, are certainly . . . are a 
major importance to the constituency. We need good highways 
to move our products to market, to move products to a number 
of pulse processing plants that we have in the area. 
 
We have a number of inquiries from within and outside the 
province to develop some major agricultural facilities and one 
of the first things that they ask is, what are the highways like? 
Do we have a primary highway to serve . . . if we go ahead and 
build a feedlot will we have a primary highway to serve that 
feedlot? They talk about a number of trucks a day moving back 
and forth between the facility and so a primary highway is of 
utmost importance. In fact when you, as I mentioned, when you 
look at a list of the things they’re considering, highways are 
right up at the top of the list. 
 
One of the highways that is causing some major problems to the 
citizens of Last Mountain-Touchwood is the No. 22 Highway, 
which happens to go past my home community, to the east of it. 
It was one of those highways that this government really didn’t 
know what to do with last summer so they just didn’t do 
anything and allowed sections of it to go back to gravel and that 
caused a whole host of problems, everything from people losing 
windshields to losing their . . . holes in their oil pans and those 
sorts of things. And the people are certainly looking for some 
solutions because gravel certainly is not an option. 
 
This whole plan that the Minister of Highways and Rural 
Revitalization, has, to have a two-tier highway system, a thin 
membrane surface for light-weight vehicles and a gravel service 
for heavy trucks, is not a solution, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 
insult to the people that have to use those roads. It just goes to 
show that the people who concocted such a ridiculous plan have 
never really been out and had to use those kind of roads and 
drive down them after an eighteen-wheeler has gone by to see 
the dust and the stones. If nothing else, it’s a safety hazard and 
it’s certainly not a plan that should be pursued. If this 
government has additional money from oil and gas revenue, 

develop a plan to fix the highways and get at it and get it done. 
 
Last Mountain-Touchwood citizens, like many other citizens 
across this province, certainly know what waiting lists are all 
about. It seems like it’s almost on a daily basis where we have 
people call my office and relate stories of having to wait 
anywhere from 10 months to 2 years for elective surgery; 
people who are waiting for MRI scans. I recall a case in 
particular, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where this lady in my 
constituency phoned the office and had indicated to my 
assistant that she has a medical problem and that she was 
diagnosed with a growth in her head. And her doctor told her 
that she would have to wait between four to six months for an 
MRI before he could operate. 
 
Well this isn’t . . . that’s not a solution to have to wait four to 
six months. And so what do these people do? They cashed in 
some of their savings and went off to Alberta to get the MRI. 
They got it within two or three weeks. And hopefully her 
medical problem will be resolved. And that’s what people are 
doing. They’re not accepting these long waiting lists, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The whole area of emergency medical services is certainly an 
area of concern, particularly in the Wynyard area and Foam 
Lake and Kelvington where the plan that was presented to 
government calls for removing ambulance services out of those 
three major communities and centring it in the small town of 
Elfros. The people in that area certainly feel that this is not an 
acceptable plan and they would be very unhappy if that was the 
final plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Many of our small towns, and we have quite a number of small 
towns in the constituency, many of the citizens, or a high 
percentage of the citizens living in these small towns as you can 
well imagine, are seniors. They are people who have perhaps 
farmed in the area or ran a small business or perhaps a retired 
teacher or an RM (rural municipality) administrator or a town 
administrator — those kind of people. And they choose to retire 
in the small towns. They feel safe in their small communities. 
They would have that they have the necessary services that they 
will need as they grow older. And as I mentioned, medical 
services and emergency medical services are certainly high on 
their priorities. 
 
Many of these folks live on fixed incomes whether it be a small 
pension from their place of work or those folks who perhaps 
were self-employed and weren’t able to accumulate large 
savings live on Canada Pension and Old Age Security and so 
on. So any additional costs in utility bills certainly has a major 
impact on their cash flow. 
 
And I’ve often been told by some of these citizens, whether it 
be widows or widowers living in their modest homes, that 
whenever there is an increase in their electrical bill or their gas 
bill, they sometimes are faced with the choice of paying the bill 
and doing without, making those savings in their grocery . . . 
when they go grocery shopping or perhaps trying to stretch their 
medication a little bit longer and those sorts of things. 
 
So now today when we hear of a possible, another 40 per cent 
hike in energy rates, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these certainly will 
be serious concerns for some of our seniors. 



190 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2001 

 

Another need that our seniors have is there’s a real need and 
there’s a void in housing for those folks who no longer can live 
in their own houses but certainly don’t need to go into a 
long-term care home. We need to have something in between 
there. There are a limited number of facilities that fill the need, 
but that need is growing. We know what’s happening to our 
population, it’s aging, and we certainly need to look in that area 
and see what can be done. 
 
There’s also a number of people that are looking at this area in 
the communities and are saying, you know, we’re ready to put 
up some money, we need to have some . . . we need a plan from 
this government to know what their plan is in this area, and if 
we see that there’s a definite plan there we’d be willing to 
invest. And so we don’t always need government money, 
maybe we need a little bit of seed money, but maybe that’s all 
we need; but what we need is a plan and that’s what’s lacking. 
 
Now we’ve heard much talk about this high-speed Internet that 
these folks are going to, they’re going to hook everybody up in 
Saskatchewan on high-speed Internet and that’s going to solve 
all our problems. Well it’s going to save our farms; we’re going 
to have a whole bunch of small businesses jump up and start 
operating out in all parts of the province, and that sort of thing. 
Well I have a number of questions about that program. 
 
First of all I’d be interested in knowing what communities are 
going to be hooked up to high-speed Internet? Are all of our 
communities going to be hooked . . . receive this high-speed 
hookup or are there going to be some? I’ve heard it said that 
what they’re looking at is they’re looking at putting the service 
into those communities that have either a health facility or a 
school. 
 
Well if in fact that is true, I did some . . . I looked at my 
constituency and I found that there are 10 small towns and 
villages within my constituency that don’t have a school and 
they don’t have a health facility, so they would be out; if that’s 
the plan they won’t get it. 
 
Well interestingly, interestingly, the latest statistics that I was 
able to get, there was over 2,000 people live in those 
communities so we’re writing those folks off. And then what 
about the people that live out on the farms and the ranches and 
the small acreages, what are they to do? What’s the plan to 
provide them with high-speed Internet? It’d be interesting to see 
what the answers are. I wonder if there is a plan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Last Wednesday, the Minister of Agriculture initiated an 
emergency debate on agriculture, and I was pleased to be able 
to participate in that debate. And so therefore I won’t spend a 
lot of time in that area, but there are a couple of things that I 
would like to cover dealing with agriculture. 
 
We often hear the . . . Since this session has started, we notice 
that the government has taken a new tactic. They ask us what 
our plan is. And the reason they do that is because they 
themselves don’t have a plan. So they’re reaching out and 
they’re trying to see if we’ve got a plan. When we present a 
plan, then they’ll say, oh well we didn’t think of it so we can’t 
use that plan. 
 

So let’s look at what their plan is for agriculture. Well last year 
they brought in this rebate, education tax rebate on farm 
property, and they say they’re going to spend $25 million a year 
for two years on that plan. 
 
Well I wonder if any of them . . . I would think maybe one or 
two of members opposite actually had to sit down with this 
six-page form and fill it out to qualify for this rebate. And the 
frustrating thing about having to do that, if you went through 
that process, is that all the information you needed was on your 
tax notice. There was one piece of information missing and that 
was your health card number, which I’m sure the bureaucrats 
could have figured out a way of incorporating the information 
on your tax notice with your health card number. 
 
I understand that SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) made a proposal to the government, to the 
minister responsible, saying that they would administer this 
program. After all, it’s the RM administrators that prepare the 
tax notices that provide all the information. So wouldn’t it make 
sense to have these people administer the program, where a 
property owner walked into the RM office, the administrator 
would have calculated the taxes owing, could have calculated 
the rebate, and you would have given that person a cheque for 
the difference? 
 
People are saying, you know, it obviously was too simple, 
because the government didn’t take SARM up on this sort of 
thing. No. 
 
What did they do? They said we’re going to administer this 
program. They hired some additional staff to administer the 
program. Then they found out that the staff couldn’t handle the 
workload, so they had to hire some more. 
 
And there are people waiting right now for these cheques. They 
said that they would have them within the next couple of 
months, that everyone would have their cheques. And we get 
calls on a constant basis — what’s happening; can you follow 
up on this? 
 
(16:15) 
 
So this is just another example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of these 
people having an idea, trying to do something, but they just 
can’t seem to quite get it right. It’s not unlike when they talked 
about cutting taxes, but yet they had to go and they expand the 
PST because they just couldn’t get that part of it right. And 
that’s . . . there are numerous examples. 
 
Then here, just the other day, we had this announcement with 
the Conservation Cover Program. This is their plan for 
agriculture. They’re going to help farm people convert cropland 
to grass. They’re going to give them $15 an acre to a maximum 
of 50 acres, which works out to $750. 
 
So if you do a little bit of work, and obviously the people that 
designed the program didn’t do it, if you just . . . a simple phone 
call, I mean one phone call on Friday, and got a bit of 
information that just would point out the shortcomings of this 
plan that the NDP are putting forward. 
 
It costs anywhere between $25 and $30 an acre for grass seed 



March 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 191 

 

alone, to seed an acre down to grass. So let’s just use $30 an 
acre as a happy medium. 
 
So in my area of the world where there’s some . . . people have 
been doing this for quite a number of years, and I’m sure it’s 
been going on throughout the province. People have been 
seeding some of their land down to grass, some of the more 
marginal land, and where they’ve been expanding their beef 
herds and require more pasture and hay. 
 
An average quarter of land that a farmer would consider to seed 
to grass would have about an average of 140 acres cultivated. 
Because normally you don’t take land that is top quality farm 
land and seed it down to grass. The majority of the land is 
somewhat marginal, so there is already some wasteland on 
there. 
 
So at $30 an acre the seed costs alone are $4,200. So do you 
think this $750 is really going to make a difference? I don’t 
think so. 
 
According to the news release, $5 million will be spent on this 
program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well according to the most recent statistics, it 
seems like there’s about 50,000 farmers in Saskatchewan. Well 
if all 50,000 farmers decided to take advantage of this program, 
do you know how many acres each farmer could seed? — 7 
acres; 7 acres. That’s about the size of their yards. 
 
So basically, what is this program? It’s a program to help 
farmers seed their lawns, and not a whole lot more. 
 
Last Friday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from 
Cumberland stood in the House and made some, what I 
consider, disparaging remarks about our party and our 
relationship to First Nations. And I was really disappointed with 
those negative comments. They’re counterproductive. 
 
The First Nations people, particularly the youth, they’re . . . 
Many of those young people don’t see a future; they have no 
hope for the future. And when we have people like the member 
from Cumberland make those kind of remarks, I don’t think it 
helps in promoting hope for these young people. 
 
We in the Saskatchewan Party have worked hard to connect 
with First Nations people. we’ve met many . . . with them, 
we’ve exchanged ideas, and we’re working hard on developing 
policies that will be of benefit to all of Saskatchewan, and 
particularly First Nations people. 
 
And there are members on this side of the House, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, who have very close connections to First Nations 
people. Some of us have family members; some of us are 
related in other ways. And so I don’t think that that side of the 
House has the only insight to the issue. I think we have a very 
good insight on the issue and we will certainly be presenting 
more ideas as time goes on. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me turn now to Post-Secondary 
Education, since I’m the critic for Post-Secondary Education. I 

see this area as a very important area in today’s 
knowledge-based economy. I think some of the things that we 
have to do is we have to identify our strengths and then we have 
to build on them. We can’t expect our post-secondary education 
institutions to be everything to all people. And I’m happy to see 
that that’s already happening. And I think that has to be 
encouraged. 
 
In this province we have a number of problems, of issues that 
need to be dealt with, issues such as health care, highways, and 
agriculture. It seems to me that we can take these issues and use 
the resources that we have within the province, primarily at our 
universities and other research facilities to turn these areas into 
opportunities — to seek some innovative solutions to these 
problems and come up with Made in Saskatchewan solutions. 
And I’m convinced that we have the ability to do that. All we 
need is some co-operation and coordination in that area. 
 
As most members of this Assembly know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we are very fortunate here in Saskatchewan to have the biggest 
scientific investment in 30 years in Canada, right here in 
Saskatoon, and I’m talking about the synchrotron — the 
Canadian Light Source. I think this is a tremendous opportunity 
for our province. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to tour the facility on several occasions 
and I urge all members who haven’t been to that facility to take 
the time to go there. The people there are very accommodating. 
They take you through the facility. They explain the operations 
and, most importantly, explain the opportunities and the 
potential of that facility. It’s a world-class facility. When it’s in 
operation, it will be the fourth strongest light source on the face 
of the earth — not just in North America but on the face of the 
earth. And that’s pretty . . . that could be a powerful tool, not 
only for Saskatoon and Saskatchewan but for Canada. 
 
But it’s imperative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have to, we in 
Saskatchewan here, have to be users of that facility. We’ve got 
a great opportunity and if we don’t . . . but if we don’t get our 
ducks in a row, if we don’t do our homework, if we don’t make 
the necessary investments, all we’ll end up is being the 
operators and we’ll have the users coming in for two or three 
days, doing their research, and then leaving. And we’ll be the 
hewers of wood and the drawers of water. And I’m afraid that if 
this government doesn’t get their act together that’s all we may 
be and it would be a real shame. It would be a real lost 
opportunity. 
 
I am told that it is already possible to operate these beam lines 
from a remote city such as Edmonton. I understand that there 
are some folks in Edmonton that are already working on plans 
to operate one beam line on a remote basis from Edmonton. So 
in other words, they wouldn’t even have to send their scientists 
here. They could do it on a remote basis from Edmonton and 
that would be a real shame. 
 
So what do we need to do to attract these folks? Why do people 
come to a city or a facility? Primarily it is they come to a 
university or a research facility to talk to people, to talk to other 
researchers. And so it’s imperative that we have a core of 
researchers who use the synchrotron, who are doing research in 
various areas, whether that be in the health care area, in the 
health area or in the environment area or numerous other areas 



192 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2001 

 

that this research tool can be used. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we see the integrated health sciences facility that has been 
talked about, that the president of the university has talked 
about, that our own Health critic has talked about, as an integral 
part of that whole research atmosphere and activity at the U of 
S (University of Saskatchewan). 
 
I had the opportunity to attend the grand opening of the light 
source building late last month, and at that time, for those 
people that were there they may have noticed that there was in 
the corner of the building, near the podium, not too far from the 
area where the dignitaries were speaking and so on, was a 
display manned by some folks from Alberta, and it was entitled 
the Alberta Synchrotron Institute. 
 
And I kind of thought about that. I mean here we’ve got a sister 
province, a neighbouring province who has invested money 
here — which is great; we like to see that sort of thing — and 
they’ve already got their Alberta Synchrotron Institute at least 
in its formative stage. And they were there; they had people 
manning their display. They’re getting their act together and 
they’re going to be up and running very shortly. 
 
And it struck me: where is the Saskatchewan synchrotron 
institute? Does something like that exist? I think this is where 
this government has a role to play, to encourage, and to 
facilitate those sorts of things. 
 
Just a little further on down the mezzanine there was another 
small display. It was manned by a young student from the 
university in Saskatoon who basically would show you some 
features of the synchrotron, some of its uses, and that sort of 
thing. 
 
So I got talking to this young person and I asked him what, you 
know, his education activities are, what courses he’s enrolled in 
and that sort of thing. And if I understood him correctly, he was 
doing his master’s in Engineering. And I asked him about his 
future plans, and he said, well, once he obtained his master’s he 
was going to go to Calgary and do his Ph.D. (Doctor of 
Philosophy). 
 
And I said to him, I says, what would it take for you to come 
back once you’ve got your Ph.D.? What would it take for you to 
come back here and work in Saskatchewan? And you know 
what he said, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What he said is he wants a 
job, a position, in this research community here. And that is the 
important thing. 
 
And these are some of the things that we must do as a province. 
And it’s incumbent upon the government. These are the folks 
that are so desperately hanging on to power, so it’s their 
responsibility to do the things that are necessary to attract 
young people like this person back to the province to do the 
research. 
 
There is a real lack of graduate students at both our universities. 
We compare the ratio of graduate students that we have at our 
universities to other universities — we are at the low end of the 
scale. And it’s imperative that we increase those numbers, that 
we have more graduate students in our universities, so we 
develop the scholars that will be able to go and do the research. 
And not only the research. We also need them folks to take the 

basic research and apply it. 
 
And that’s where the real benefits to this province can be. Once 
we take this basic research and move it on into the commercial 
world and develop those economic activities and those spinoffs 
that can develop from this, this can be . . . this facility can be a 
major player in our economy. 
 
But do you know what my greatest fear is, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— is that this government, this NDP government doesn’t 
recognize the type of opportunity that we have right now. They 
don’t know how to capture that opportunity. And they don’t 
know . . . and they won’t make the investment that’s necessary 
— the investment in people, the investment in facilities, the 
investment in our universities. 
 
And as a result of this lack of action, we could lose this 
tremendous opportunity. And I certainly hope that that doesn’t 
happen, but it’s certainly a great concern of mine, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
In conclusion, I would like to say that after hearing the Speech 
from the Throne, I realized that it lacked a lot of substance, 
although there was one or two things that I must say that I 
found encouraging. And one of those things was the reference 
to fetal alcohol syndrome and some initiative in that area. And I 
certainly encourage the government to move in that area 
because it is a serious problem. We’ve all seen the effects of 
fetal alcohol syndrome and we certainly . . . more needs to be 
done in that area. 
 
However, looking at . . . as I mentioned, looking at the Speech 
from the Throne and thinking back to last year’s Speech from 
the Throne and last year’s budget, quite often these folks over 
there, they’ll have an idea but they don’t take it to fruition; they 
just don’t go far enough. 
 
And a prime example of that is the recently announced 
centennial student employment program that the Premier 
announced about a month ago in Saskatoon, where they’re 
going to take some funds, some money from the centennial fund 
and put it into this program so that they can create more 
summer jobs. But what area are they going to create summer 
jobs in? Well is it a surprise that an NDP government is going 
to create summer jobs in the public sector and forget about the 
private sector, about small business? I was disappointed I must 
say when I saw the announcement, but I certainly wasn’t 
surprised, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So having said that I will be certainly not . . . I will be opposing 
the original motion but I will be supporting the amendment. 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I’d like to congratulate you on your position. I 
know that you do a lot of important things in the community 
and your constituency. I’ve attended your business dinners and 
I know that you make a great effort to work on behalf of the 
community. So I think you’re just the right choice for that job 



March 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 193 

 

and I congratulate you. 
 
As well I’d like to congratulate our Speaker who certainly 
served long and well as an MLA and I think many people in our 
caucus have many good memories of working with him over 
the years. And I’m certainly hoping that he’ll carry on the fine 
tradition set by the previous two Speakers in the school 
program that helped a lot of our students in the province learn 
about democracy in the parliamentary system. 
 
As well I want to say how pleased I am to be working with our 
new Premier. I certainly give recognition to all the work done 
by our former leader, Roy Romanow, and our new Premier, also 
the member from Riversdale, has certainly shown that he is 
going to be a great inspiration to all of us in carrying out our 
work in the House. 
 
And I’m going to move now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to respond 
to the Throne Speech. 
 
You know one of the great things about democracy is that 
people do have a choice about what happens. And part of what 
this legislature is all about is helping articulate those choices for 
people. So I’m going to make an attempt as I go through my 
remarks today to talk about the kind of choices I believe the 
people of the province have and how our Throne Speech and 
our budget speech will help people think about those choices. 
 
Our theme of course is to build on our success that we 
accomplished under our previous leadership and now to connect 
to the future — a thriving economy, healthy citizens, families, 
and communities, and responsive and effective government. 
And I think it would be very hard to disagree with those broad 
objectives. 
 
But I want to bring to your attention, Mr. Speaker, that this is a 
province that sets records. We have 485,000 people working in 
Saskatchewan in the year 2000 and that’s 5,000 over the 
previous record set in 1999. 2000 was a record year for potash, 
sales over 14 million metric tons, an increase of 11 per cent 
over the previous year; a new record for drilling natural gas 
wells; a new high for oil production; wild rice over 80 per cent 
of Canada’s production; and we have world class writers, 
filmmakers, athletes. 
 
But that’s not enough for the opposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Their case of Alberta envy is so great that their leader’s 
thinking of changing his name to Ralph. 
 
But Mr. Speaker, I want the opposition to know that it’s okay to 
have self-esteem, it’s okay to care about who you are, and it’s 
okay to be proud of who you are. If I wanted to join the rat race, 
I know where it is. But I like the pace of life and the values in 
Saskatchewan — the respect that we have for achievement, for 
community, and for involvement in the way that we believe that 
every person has the right to an opportunity and a chance. 
 
I like the way we continue to set records. On the fiscal side, in 
debt reduction; on the credit rating side, in improving our credit 
ratings; on the social side, in child poverty reduction; and on the 
innovation edge, in having the largest number of patents per 
capita of anywhere — not just in Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
but in the world. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And so we are a record-setting 
province. And if that is troubling to the members of the 
opposition, they’re going to have to go to one of those social 
skills classes where you learn about developing self-esteem and 
being proud of who you are, your roots, and where you come 
from. 
 
I want to talk just a little bit about my constituency because it’s 
such a terrific place. There’s always something new there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. There’s new music stores, new organic food 
stores, a new organic bakery, new restaurants, and it’s always 
growing and changing. But the one thing that never changes, 
the high value that we place on community. 
 
I’m going to talk a little bit today about how pleased I am with 
the new responsibilities that I was honoured to be given by 
Premier Calvert . . . oh, by the Premier. They’re about 
community and how we prepare our communities to connect to 
the future, and how we prepare the young people in our 
communities, but also our very society to have options for the 
future. 
 
And I want to begin by saying that in our lives probably many 
of us think about what our dream occupation would be, should 
we ever be so lucky as to get the job of our dreams. And I keep 
pinching myself thinking that maybe I’ll wake up. But I do 
believe in this portfolio I’ve found a home for many of the 
experiences and talents that I believe I’ve developed over the 
years. 
 
Certainly in the past I’ve been involved in many cultural 
pursuits — in music, the arts, and social change. I’ve worked 
for many years with youth organizations and in recreation. In 
fact I was even a member of the swim team at the university. 
You guys didn’t know that, did you? 
 
And I spent many interesting years as assistant director of 
personnel for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. And 
these areas all link strongly to the Department of Culture, Youth 
and Recreation and to the Public Service Commission. But as 
well, being responsible for the office of information technology, 
I do understand the profound effect that satellite TV, 
deregulation, the Internet are having on our constitutional, 
democratic, and cultural diversity. 
 
We’re in a situation now where the world could reach into the 
very heart of our province and pluck out our identity unless we 
ensure that we’re thoughtful about how we include our youth, 
our new technology, and our cultural workers in helping to 
ensure the future survival of what we call the Saskatchewan 
way. 
 
These new responsibilities are partly about handing over the 
torch to the next generation of young people. I don’t know if 
you know, Mr. Speaker, but in the next 10 years 70 to 80 per 
cent of our existing workforce will retire. 
 
I don’t know about . . . well you’re a little younger than me but 
this is not something that I’m sorry about. I will be quite 
prepared to be part of helping prepare people for that 
changeover. And this year, as you know, we established the 



194 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2001 

 

centennial youth employment program because we want to 
ensure that the youth of today understand the need for a strong 
and vibrant public sector but also an ethical and successful 
private sector — all working in support of prosperous and 
healthy communities. 
 
Now people have talked about some of our youth leaving. And 
some youth are leaving, particularly for jobs in the information 
economy. And we have to think about what this really means. 
I’ve been very concerned about the lack of understanding the 
members opposite seem to have about the effect this is having 
on the way that we do everything in our society. 
 
The Net is rapidly becoming the new way of reaching out, 
providing services, and overcoming distance. The technology 
has been adopted more quickly by more people than any other 
technology in the history of human endeavour. And certainly 
we have to ensure that our students, our residents, our 
businesses have access to the infrastructure necessary to meet 
the demands where much of the work, the information 
exchange of the future will be done. 
 
Now you may already have heard about CommunityNet, an 
advanced high-speed, digital telecommunications network for 
Saskatchewan that will link health care, libraries, schools, 
communities, organizations, and government. And I think I 
heard one of the members opposite — it might have been even 
the member who just spoke from Last Mountain-Touchwood — 
talk about we could have spent that 70 million some other way. 
 
Well pardon me, you might as well close the door to the future 
if you don’t provide that broadband Internet service to those 
communities because it’ll shut off all the possibilities that the 
rest of the world is rapidly becoming part of. And I don’t think 
that’s something that we want to do to our communities. 
 
This is a very powerful tool for both economic development 
and for community. Increasingly businesses will choose where 
they locate based on issues like bandwidth. Communities that 
can’t provide the link will be left out. It’ll be a little like a hotel 
without a waterslide. 
 
And I think we have impressive examples already with the land 
corporation. There’s a project that’s taking place I think in 
North Battleford — I think the other community is P.A. — 
where they’re experimenting with thin appliance networks in 
the school. And the very attractive thing about these thin 
appliance networks is that each school doesn’t have to have its 
own technical support. That’s provided at a remote location, so 
you’re able to provide a higher level of technology and more 
ease of use for the teachers and the students, without having the 
high costs of the support infrastructure and technology support 
that goes with it. 
 
And I don’t know if you know this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
we’re one of five locations in the entire world that was chosen 
for this project. And certainly along with developments like the 
synchrotron, I think people will understand, and along with the 
records that I mentioned to you earlier, that this province is on a 
leading edge of many of the developments that are taking place 
in the world today. 
 
Now I just wanted to say that this generation is the most 

educated generation in the history of this province. They have 
the skills, the technical knowledge, and there’s just no way that 
we can afford to do without the skills of these students. 
 
So again, I mention the centennial youth employment program 
because whether students are from rural areas, Aboriginal 
students, students, graduates from our universities, our technical 
institutes, our high schools, all of them will have an opportunity 
to participate in these jobs, and help become linked to the 
workforce. 
 
You know, I want to talk a little bit about the culture and 
recreation area. Two weekends ago, I attended a workshop on 
free trade as it relates to culture. And there was a teacher there, 
and what that teacher said was a bit troubling. He said when he 
goes into the classroom every day, he’s standing in front of a 
classroom of young Americans. And by that he doesn’t mean to 
demean America, but his point is is that this is where we live. 
And certainly I don’t think we need to teach our children to be 
young Americans; they’re bombarded on the commercial 
networks daily with movies, with film content. 
 
And of course, one of the reasons why I’ve been a strong 
advocate of a film industry of the Saskatchewan 
Communications Network is because we need a way to convey 
our information, our film, our stories, out to the world, so that 
we can continue to have people know who they are and a world 
who knows who we are. 
 
And I think it’s the work of educators. But it’s also the work of 
workers in arts and culture and recreation because it’s about 
development of the intellect, the spirit, and the soul. It’s about 
healthy activity and teamwork. It’s about provincial pride. And 
it’s about a winning attitude, being the best we can be and 
sharing that in a spirit of achievement and celebration. And 
today we find that it’s also about cultural industries, economic 
development and cultural tourism. 
 
The Premier and myself and many of my colleagues attended 
the Amateur Athlete of the Year Award in Saskatoon a couple 
of weeks ago. And by the way, we outnumbered the Saskatoon 
party at that event and I could tell that it particularly bugged 
them. So we’ll have to continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — But, I want to mention the pride that 
the young people had there in the achievements — even if they 
weren’t the people who won first prize — their achievement in 
reaching so far into the ranks of the most talented athletes 
around the world. Their pride in being the standard-bearers for 
Canada at these international competitions. You couldn’t help 
but be very impressed by the important work that all our 
coaches and whatnot are doing throughout the sports sector as 
well in Saskatchewan. 
 
And you know, the opposition gets pretty frisky and critical, but 
you know, the fact of the matter is they try to distance 
themselves from the previous Devine government. And while 
you can try to do that . . . but see, it doesn’t matter that you 
weren’t actually part of that government, even though some of 
them were. And it doesn’t matter if you didn’t actually work for 
that government, even though some of them did. 



March 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 195 

 

But what does matter is the philosophy. Because a philosophy 
that is always attempting to get something for nothing is going 
to be a philosophy that continues to produce the same results 
that that particular philosophy has produced every time it has 
managed to get the reins of government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And I just want to give you one fact 
that the members opposite probably don’t know and we’ll just 
have to hope that it sinks in to a few over there. But do you 
know that . . . I want to give you a little comparison figure. 
Now I don’t have all the most up-to-date figures right up to 
today, but I think this will give you a general idea. 
 
During the last time that their philosophy was operative in this 
province, there was a loss of over 33,000 youth jobs in this 
province — 33,000 youth jobs over the time that they were 
government — compared to 5,900 new jobs for youth created. 
 
Now you can argue that isn’t fast enough, but at least it’s on the 
plus side of the equation. At least we’re operating in the black, 
not in the red . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — . . . which is where they were 
operating. 
 
So the members opposite might feel they’re a little more 
responsible than the previous government, heaven knows it 
couldn’t be possible to be less responsible. But the fact of the 
matter is, is the type of policies they advocate were disastrous 
before and they would be disastrous again. And if they want to 
know what to do for the youth of this province, they can stay 
out of government. And that’ll be the best thing they can do for 
the youth of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now I want to talk a little bit . . . We 
have a very good organization in Saskatchewan called the 
Saskatchewan Labour Force Development Board. And they do 
a lot of work about connecting youth to the workplace, about 
attracting and retaining young employees. 
 
And here’s some pointers that they’ve given about attracting 
and retaining young employees, and hopefully the young people 
that are listening will know whether this is accurate or not, but: 
be open and honest about the opportunities your organization 
offers; establish co-op education and mentorship programs to 
help youth learn about your company and the people that work 
there; ensure that your programs provide a positive, memorable 
experience; differentiate yourself from the competitors — youth 
have choices about where they want to work, give them a 
reason to want to work for you; diversify your recruiting 
techniques, don’t look for new employees in the same old 
places; create an environment for continuous learning — money 
is important but it’s not the only reward mechanism; create a 
sense of community; give youth the opportunity to interpret the 
company vision; and give youth the opportunity to become 

entrepreneurs in your company. I think this is all very good 
advice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we should pay attention to. 
 
And I want to just mention a couple of recent events that I was 
involved in. I went a few weeks ago to a book launch which 
was an anthology of well-known Saskatchewan writers and the 
interesting thing about it, it was produced in a partnership 
between the K to 12 department, the Writers Guild, the SaskTel 
Pioneers, and Coteau Books. The purpose of it being to bring 
Saskatchewan writers to grade 12 students in the province. And 
I use this again as an example of how we can reinforce our 
province to the young people, whether it’s in the education 
system or in our film and publishing industries. 
 
But I have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a government is 
only as good as the people it employs. And the fact of the 
matter is, is that the public service is a very important part of 
what we do. And I’m very troubled when I hear the opposition 
referring in a derogatory tone to bureaucrats. 
 
A bureaucrat is nothing more or less than the best person who 
applied for the job, who was hired on the basis of their skills 
and abilities, and who takes their direction broadly from the 
government but also uses their own professional judgement to 
put forward the best advice they can about what should be 
happening. And I want to just read to you something that one of 
the members opposite said before he was elected. It says here 
— now this is one of the opposition members and it was 
published in the Moosomin World Spectator on March 23, 
1998. You can guess what picnic basket this came out of. But: 
 

The whole bureaucracy, the whole civil service has to be 
cleaned out (he said). Every socialist system in the world 
has collapsed under its own weight. I can wield a pretty 
good-sized broom. And you know what I would do with the 
broom in there. 

 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how can this member opposite talk 
about the future when he is so obviously stuck in the McCarthy 
era. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Because, Mr. Speaker, governments do 
have choices. We can be constructive forces or as the 
opposition wishes, they can be destructive forces. I don’t think 
their mothers ever told them that you catch more flies with 
honey. I think this is a missing part of their education. 
 
The other choice I think people have to make is, whether you’re 
electing people who want power for the sake of getting 
something done and for the sake of sharing that power with the 
community, or whether you’re electing people who want power 
for the sake of power. 
 
I understand that sometimes division erupts in that caucus 
opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they’re angling for 
power even amongst the slim power pool that exists over there. 
 
And I find that it’s a very poor spirit that traps itself in 
worshipping the dollar. Tax cuts are important, but the fact of 
the matter is the most important things that society has ever 
done are the things we have done by pooling our resources 



196 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2001 

 

together. And one of the ways we pool our resources is through 
our tax system. 
 
You know I was at an event a couple of weeks ago for a 
speakers bureau for athletes. And at this event one of the young 
athletes — a well-known athlete who is part of the speakers 
bureau to inspire school children to adopt healthy habits and 
healthy attitudes — he said to the students, isn’t it wonderful to 
be in this great gymnasium built by taxes. 
 
And I was so pleased to have someone recognizing that that’s 
what taxes are used for. They build schools, they build roads, 
they build health care, they build all kinds of community 
services. And the fact of the matter is, is you can go down the 
tax-cut road and I think we have an obligation to provide 
effective and efficient services, but to demean the role that taxes 
play in pooling our resources so that we can provide a higher 
level of service than we could afford to provide as individuals, 
that’s a goal that I’m never going to be ashamed of, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I want to talk just for a minute about 
the coalition government because I know that one of the 
problems with the opposition is they can’t stand to see people 
co-operate. There’s something that frustrates them about that. I 
think it has something to do with power for the sake of power. 
 
But the fact of the matter is the coalition partners have the 
maturity, the maturity to use the power they have to be involved 
in every single decision of government in a democratic process. 
It takes a lot of maturity to use democracy. We see places 
around the world that haven’t managed to achieve that level of 
maturity in their operations. And I commend our coalition 
partners in understanding the power of having a say in every 
single decision of government. 
 
Now for some reason the opposition, they can accept this at the 
municipal level. People at the municipal level work this way. 
All of a sudden when you translate it to the provincial level it 
becomes a concept that’s hard to understand. So I don’t know 
what gets lost in the translation. 
 
But I did find out the other day that the member from North 
Battleford is running for the Senate. And in fact one of the other 
federal MPs (Member of Parliament), Lorne Nystrom, is 
running his campaign because he figures that would be the 
quickest way to destroy the Senate. That was just to see if any 
of you guys were paying attention. 
 
I don’t have much time left, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll no doubt 
have to come back to this tomorrow. But there’s one thing, one 
thought I’d like to leave you with. Tomorrow I intend to start 
out on the theme of looking forward. And one of the things that 
certainly the government is looking forward on is the whole 
health care file. And we initiated the Fyke Commission which 
will be a matter of public discussion not too far in the future. 
 
But I just want to emphasize that I do wish if we’re going to 
have a discussion, that we have a factual discussion. Because 
I’m looking at a platform from the New Democrats from the 
last election. It says in the platform, we will hire another 500 

health care providers. This is the original copy — 500 health 
care providers. 
 
Now I’ll just mention that somehow through the opposition 
filter that turned into 500 nurses. But I do have the original 
copy here and I’ll just mention that we now have over 800 new 
health care providers of which many of those are home care 
nurses, which they neglected to count in their equation. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I look forward to continuing tomorrow 
on the topic of being forward looking. I thank you for your 
attention today and I’ll adjourn debate for today. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:55. 
 



 

 

 


