















































Hansard: June 01, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1483 
 June 1, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have 
petition again to present today from people who are concerned 
about the Fyke report and the resulting impact it may have on 
rural Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena health centre 
be maintained at its current level of service at minimum, 
with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral services 
available, as well as laboratory, public health, home care, 
and long-term care services for users in our district and 
beyond. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
Archerwill, Hendon, Fosston, and Kelvington. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions from 
people concerned about the water crisis in North Battleford. 
The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners pray that your Hon. Assembly may be 
pleased to call on the provincial and federal governments to 
provide immediate financial assistance to the city of North 
Battleford in order to facilitate necessary improvements to 
the North Battleford water treatment plant. 

 
Your petitioners come from North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise again on 
behalf of people in Saskatchewan concerned about the Swift 
Current hospital. They’ve signed a petition and asked me to 
present it here, and I’m honoured to do so. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the prayer reads as follows that: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by residents of Abbey, 
Saskatchewan, of the city of Swift Current, city of Regina, and 
Wymark. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present regarding the EMS (emergency medical services) 
service, and the prayer reads as follow . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that is: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people 
in the Redvers, Manor and Bellegarde areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition to present today on behalf of the people of Redvers and 
the Redvers Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral 
services available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to the users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the people from 
Antler, Redvers, Maryfield, Storthoaks, Reston, Bellegarde, 
Fertile, Alida, Gainsborough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition calling for immediate implementation of 
province-wide 911 emergency service. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to fulfill 
its promise to the people of rural Saskatchewan by 
immediately implementing the 911 emergency telephone 
service province wide. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Blaine Lake, Shell Lake, and 
Invermay. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise today to present a petition on behalf of some 
citizens of Saskatchewan who have expressed an interest in the 
maintaining and upgrading of the Saskatchewan road network. 
And the prayer goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ask the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue with its foresight and vision of 



1484 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2001 

 

increasing the funding to $900 million over the next three 
years to maintain and upgrade our thoroughfares of 
commerce. 
 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by the good 
folks from Preeceville, Kamsack, and Canora. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 
petition to present today to do with the lack of funding to 
non-profit personal care homes and to the seniors that reside in 
these homes do cause inequalities to seniors throughout the 
province. 
 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of 
Kamsack. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 
petition signed by folks concerned about the high cost of 
energy. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide more 
substantial energy rebates to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from 
Neilburg, Marsden, and Unity. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
with a petition today from concerned citizens with reference to 
cellular telephone coverage in the rural area, or more specific, 
lack thereof. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service to all 
communities throughout the Wood River constituency. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by the good 
citizens of Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the petitions have been 
reviewed and received pursuant to rule 12(7), and are received 
as addendums to 15 sessional papers. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I give 
notice that on day no. 53 I shall ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Post-Secondary Education: 
in the past fiscal year, 2000-2001, how many Saskatchewan 
students were awarded a Canadian Millennium Scholarship 
Foundation bursary; what was the total amount of the 
bursaries that were received from the foundation; were all 
the bursaries received from the foundation applied to the 
student . . . Saskatchewan student loan debts? 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 53 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: for what 
reasons were recent pavement repairs made to the exit 
ramps of the newly constructed Pasqua Street Highway 11 
interchange in north Regina? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, this weekend in Regina, the Canadian Hard of 
Hearing Association is holding its annual conference. 
 
I would add that this is the first time that the association has had 
its conference in Saskatchewan, and it’s hosted by the Regina, 
Saskatoon and Maple Creek chapters of the association. The 
association advocates for improved services for hard of hearing 
people and promotes public awareness. 
 
With us today, Mr. Speaker, are the president of the association, 
Colin Cantlie of Calgary. I know Mr. Cantlie is an articulate 
and energetic spokesperson for the needs of hard of hearing 
people. He’s accompanied by the executive director of the 
association, Janice McNamara. 
 
I would ask all my colleagues to extend a warm welcome to our 
guests who are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I’d like to as well extend a warm 
welcome to those representatives of the Hard of Hearing 
Association that have joined us today and wish them well in the 
conference this weekend. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I would like all members of this Assembly to welcome 
the many, many proud Metis people who are sitting up in the 
west gallery. There are so many there I’m not going to single 
anyone out or try to name you by name, because we’d be here 
all day. But I do thank you so very much for coming to the 
Assembly. 
 
Thank you so much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. As a former minister, I would like to join with the 
minister in welcoming the many representatives of the Metis 



June 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1485 

 

Nation we have with us this morning. And to say how proud I 
was to work with them and how proud I am of the revival of the 
Metis Nation presently going on in this province. 
 
And I wish them all the very best and welcome them here this 
morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, along with the rest of the Assembly, the members of 
the official opposition would like to welcome the Metis to our 
Assembly today. And I hope they enjoy the proceedings that 
take place, and we look forward to working with them in the 
future. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again it gives 
me great pleasure to join my colleague, the Minister of 
Aboriginal Affairs, to stand in this Assembly as a Metis 
member of the Assembly, along with my colleague from 
Cumberland, to welcome all the Metis supporters in the gallery 
and to pay special tribute to the president, Clem Chartier, and to 
also say it’s indeed a pleasure to have them join the Assembly 
today to celebrate the introduction of a very important Act. 
 
Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all the members 
of the House, a group of 16 students from grades 7 to 9, from 
the Riverdale School, from Kinville, Manitoba. And they’re 
seated on the east side of your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And 
they’re accompanied here today by their teacher Ms. 
Wohlgemuth. 
 
And I ask all the members to offer them a very warm 
Saskatchewan welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, through you and to the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce a person here visiting in Regina from my 
constituency, in your gallery. Darlene Campbell is a very good 
friend and a long-time resident of Melfort. She’s very much 
involved in the community, volunteering for a good number of 
organizations. And she’s here in Regina visiting today and is 
here to observe the proceedings. 
 
And I’d ask all members to please welcome her warmly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly a long-time friend of mine seated in the west gallery, 
Vince Folk. And down with Vince, sitting beside him, I had the 

pleasure of meeting just this day, Myles Pelletier. 
 
But I ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming my 
long-time friend and my new friend, Vince and Myles. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I’m very pleased this morning to introduce to you and 
members of the Assembly, 33 students from the Yorkdale 
Central School division. 
 
They’re accompanied this morning with their teachers Val 
Jeske, Lisa Cadiaux, teacher assistant Sandy Hubenig, and 
Emma Markham. 
 
Also parents that are accompanying the student group today is 
Joan Jensen, Shannon Lizon, and Deb Coleman. 
 
If you were to ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the students from the 
Yorkdale School division they’ll say to you that they’re the best 
grade 5 student class that’s ever gone through the Central 
School Division. And this morning . . . today they have a very 
busy schedule. 
 
They left Yorkton this morning at around 7:30 and they’re 
going to tour the Legislative Building as they are now, then I’m 
going to have refreshments with them around 11 o’clock, and 
then they’re going to the ferry at Willow Island — by ferry to 
Willow Island — then to the Science Centre, then to the IMAX 
theatre, then they’re going to have supper at Buffet Village, 
then get back at Yorkton tonight around 9 o’clock. 
 
So what we’ll want to do I think during this session here, or 
during this morning, is to try to make sure that we keep them 
awake during the debate because they’ve got a very long day, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join the other 
members in saying a special welcome and Ta wow to all the 
fellow Metis people, President Clem, the area directors and 
members of the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan. 
 
As a proud Cree Metis from northern Saskatchewan on 
introduction of this Bill that was here the other day, and with 
the second reading today, I think it’s an important historic 
occasion in this province and this country. To me I would say 
this: 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
It is to me a proud moment to be here with fellow Metis people 
and to be in this legislature to see and . . . (inaudible) . . . 
recognizing the accomplishments of Metis people and also 
putting forward the spirit of working together as we enter this 
new century. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 



1486 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2001 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

75th Anniversary of Royal Canadian Legion, 
Melfort Branch No. 30 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker and members of the legislature, please join me 
in congratulating the Royal Canadian Legion, Melfort Branch 
No. 30, on celebrating their 75th anniversary this year. 
 
The Melfort branch of the Royal Canadian Legion has had an 
active history in our area. The members have worked hard to 
look after our veterans and their families. Through their 
visibility in the community and projects like the City Memorial 
Centre, the establishment of the Royal Canadian Legion Centre, 
the Remembrance Day programs and essay contests, they 
promote their organization and remind us all of the sacrifices of 
those who have served our country ensuring that their sacrifices 
are not in vain. 
 
The members of the Melfort branch continue to contribute to 
our community through their involvement in numerous 
organizations and projects. Without their involvement, our 
quality of life would not be what it is today. 
 
I am sure you will be honoured to join with me in 
congratulating the Royal Canadian Legion, Melfort branch, and 
in thanking them not only for their sacrifices of the past, but 
also for their continued contributions to our community and our 
country. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Land Protection in Northern Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to tell the Assembly this morning that our 
provincial government is protecting three important and vast 
land areas in northern Saskatchewan through an interim 
designation under the representative area network program. The 
three sites north of Uranium City, north of Fond-du-Lac, and in 
the northeast corner of Saskatchewan will be protected on an 
interim basis for 10 years while more information about each 
site is gathered. 
 
During that time, forest harvesting, mining, and new road 
development will be prohibited. The total amount of land 
protected, Mr. Speaker, will be over 600,000 hectares. These 
areas, adjacent to the Northwest Territories border, include 
subarctic tundra, important water bodies, widely varying 
terrain, and vegetation such as lichens that are important to 
migrating barren ground caribou. 
 
Through the Athabasca Land Use Planning process community 
consultation will take place to gather more information about 
these sites, revise and finalize boundaries, and determine the 
best long-term management plan for each area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that the Athabasca Land Use 
Planning process will be co-chaired by the Prince Albert Grand 
Council and Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management. 
 

This is an important step forward in protecting our province’s 
bi-diversity, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Esterhazy High School Band and Choir Win Awards 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to congratulate 
the Esterhazy High School. The Esterhazy senior concert band 
attended a national Music Fest 2001 in Ottawa and when they 
were there they won a gold medal. They were acclaimed one of 
the best bands in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a total of 350 bands, orchestras, jazz ensembles, 
concert and chamber choirs were at the competition. Also, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the Esterhazy choir was presented with a 
bronze medal at the same competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to the Esterhazy High School 
students and teachers, especially Kevin Hrycay, who was their 
music director. A job well done. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me to congratulate these 
students and teachers in Esterhazy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liberal News Releases 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Even 
though they have the largest caucus grant of any party in this 
House, it worries me just how much trouble the members 
opposite have keeping up to us Liberals. 
 
They seem concerned that we never put out news releases. 
Apparently with all that staff and with the extra help from the 
member from North Battleford, they missed our May 30 news 
release. 
 
Seeing as they can’t keep up to our lonely Liberal media person 
or our news releases, I’ll help them out, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
The release says, quote: “Liberal caucus success has Sask Party 
sucking lemons.” And goes on to say: 
 

Liberals ran on a platform of approved funding for 
highways and in the last budget we have seen highway 
spending at an all-time high. Education funding was a 
priority in our platform. Those promises were also 
delivered on. And this follows making good on our promise 
to provide rebates for school taxes on farmland. Just to 
name a few of the great accomplishments of this coalition 
government. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was shocked enough the Sask Party can’t 
keep up to our one staffer; but even more shocked, they can’t 
keep up to me either. In their May 30 release they say I’m a 
35-year RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) veteran, 
adding 10 years to my 25 career and, most distressingly, to my 
age. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess I should be happy that I 
look that well preserved. Members opposite should know age 



June 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1487 

 

and experience always overcomes youth and ambition. So 
please, I already have advantage enough with them, I don’t need 
any more; although everyone recognizes accuracy is not one of 
their strong points. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Railways in Birch Hills 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’m pleased to rise this morning to inform our Hon. 
Assembly of an important event that took place and will 
continue to do so in the town of Birch Hills, a town that has 
decided to ignore this NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government’s doom and gloom, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Rail cars loaded with Saskatchewan’s finest wheat is once again 
moving west after a four-year hiatus, thanks in no small part to 
OmniTRAX and their subsidiary, Carleton Trail Railways. 
Officials from Carleton Trail Railways, local government 
dignitaries from the town of Birch Hills, and the rural 
municipality of Birch Hills were on hand on a warm April day 
to acknowledge the send-off of this memorable grain shipment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is the commitment of leaders such as 
Wayne Boyle, mayor of Birch Hills; Earl Mickelson, reeve of 
the RM (rural municipality) of Birch Hills; and Stewart Adams 
of the Birch Hills Producer Car Group that Saskatchewan 
indeed has a future in agriculture. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask that all members please join me in 
recognizing the Birch Hills community and Carleton Trail 
Railway on their remarkable resurgence in adapting to the 
marketing realities of this millennium. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Communications Network’s 
10th Anniversary 

 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On May 6, 
1991 the Saskatchewan Communications Network broadcast 
network came to a television near you for the very first time. 
 
The 10th anniversary of SCN (Saskatchewan Communications 
Network) was marked appropriately at the Yorkton Short film 
and Video Festival last Friday when the minister responsible for 
SCN, the Minister of Post-Secondary Education, brought 
congratulations on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
SCN’s list of accomplishments during the last 10 years is long 
and varied and the valuable services provided by SCN to the 
people of Saskatchewan have multiplied over the past decade. 
SCN’s broadcast network provides the people of Saskatchewan 
with unique programming choices such as distance education, 
education broadcasting, and satellite conferencing. 
 
It has doubled its air time from the initial eight hours a day it 
started out with in 1991 to 16 hours a day now. The SCN 
training network now serves over 180 Saskatchewan 
communities, allowing people in rural and remote areas of the 
province to access credit programming in or near their homes. 
 

SCN has contributed to both the cultural and educational sectors 
of this province, enriching Saskatchewan’s communities. 
SCN’s innovation, its creativity, and its vision are a true 
reflection of the spirit of Saskatchewan. 
 
On behalf of all members of the Assembly, I would like to offer 
congratulations to SCN for its accomplishments . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Local Improvements in Indian Head 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’d like to draw your attention to the beautiful 
community of Indian Head located about 50 kilometres east of 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this town is in turmoil right now over the 
replacement of the curbs, gutters, and repaving of its streets. 
The town has to rely totally on its local tax base to fund this 
program. Many residents simply can’t afford the increase in 
property tax for this program. I’ve talked to many residents who 
are either going to be losing their homes or their homes are 
already in foreclosure due to the increase in property tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of years ago, this town went through the 
process of replacing its water infrastructure. It was a little bit 
ahead of its time. Unfortunately it did not qualify for any of the 
programs offered federally or provincially in the green 
programs that are coming out now. It had to fund the whole 
program out of its tax base there. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, unfortunately the town lost out again and 
received no money from this year’s infrastructure program put 
out by Municipal Affairs. 
 
The town is trying to grow and prosper, unfortunately with no 
help from this provincial government. I really feel and so do 
most of the town residents that money from this government in 
the form of grant would go much further to revitalizing rural 
Saskatchewan than any department with more bureaucrats. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskEnergy Rate Increase 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question’s 
for the minister responsible for SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the big headline story in today’s 
Leader-Post is that SaskEnergy rates are going up — and way 
up, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But here’s the headline in today’s 
Globe and Mail, and I’m quoting, “Natural gas price slump 
eases concerns.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Globe and Mail is reporting, and I 
quote: 



1488 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2001 

 

A dramatic slump in natural gas prices is raising hopes that 
consumers may not have to endure another winter of hefty 
heating bills. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Globe and Mail is reporting that 
many Canadian natural gas providers are actually thinking 
about cutting rates. Meanwhile, the NDP is considering jacking 
SaskEnergy rates way up. 
 
Why is the NDP nailing Saskatchewan families with a 
$400-a-year increase when natural gas prices are falling? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, this is very interesting 
because I think it was about 10 days ago in this legislature that 
that member and that opposition were accusing this government 
of misleading people by saying that natural gas prices would be 
going down over the longer term. They said we were 
misleading people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now this member gets up and exposes, he says, that natural gas 
prices are going down in the longer term. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what we said in the budget, which 
we were ridiculed for in this House not more than 10 days ago. 
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this opposition has no credibility 
when it comes to numbers. 
 
That member wants to know what we’re going to do. I’ll tell 
that member, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We are not going to do what 
was done in the province of Alberta, which is to privatize and 
deregulate the natural gas facility leading to 100 per cent price 
increases in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. No wonder they 
aren’t contemplating privatizing SaskEnergy, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker; they’re too busy with their plans to sell SaskTel as we 
found out not long ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s what 
they’re doing. That’s what they’re doing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Finance has just made an 
important admission. We were asking not long ago — the 
member for Canora-Pelly was asking — who was right? Was it 
the Minister of Energy who predicted price of gas to be $7 a 
gigajoule or was it the Minister of Finance who said it would be 
3.39. 
 
The Minister of Finance just stood up and said he is right. If 
that’s the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why is the government 
even considering a 40 per cent rate hike from SaskEnergy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — What I would say to the people of this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that SaskEnergy has been 
doing a good job of protecting people from higher energy 
prices, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s true that in the last year SaskEnergy gas prices went up 23 
per cent, that’s the cost that they pay for natural gas, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. In the neighbouring province of Alberta the 
increases were more like 100 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And what the people have to understand is that that member and 
his colleagues will get up and complain about anything. But 
what they would do is to sell the utilities to their rich friends, 
and the consumer would end up picking up the bill because 
that’s what Tories do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And as long as we on this side of the House remain in 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will keep the natural gas 
prices in this province the lowest prices in North America, 
which they are, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s 
two important facts on privatization and deregulation. 
 
Number one fact: the NDP government is considering the 
privatization of SaskTel. 
 
And number two fact: that government has introduced a Bill in 
this session for the deregulation of the electrical industry, Mr. 
Speaker — his colleague, the minister for SaskPower. 
 
(10:30 
 
Mr. Speaker, the article in The Globe and Mail quotes several 
natural gas distribution companies saying they hope to cut their 
rates in the next few months. Enbridge Consumers Gas of 
Calgary says, and I quote: 
 

Lower gas prices would translate into smaller consumer 
bills this winter. 
 

An Ontario’s gas company’s official says, and I quote: 
 

If these prices stay, we will see a reduction in the price. 
 
Meanwhile, SaskEnergy is asking for a 42 per cent rate hike. 
The panel will report today; the cabinet will consider it next 
week. Mr. Deputy Speaker, why is SaskEnergy jacking up the 
rates at the same time that most Canadian natural gas service 
providers are going to be dropping them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well of course, what the member from the 
opposition doesn’t point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that up 
until the 1980s the people of the province, the people, owned 
their own natural gas fields, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The people 
owned the natural gas fields. 
 
And you know what? The government of the 1980s, which that 
member worked for, Mr. Deputy Speaker, sold — sold — the 
natural gas reserves of the province to their rich friends, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And then the member gets up and wonders 
why we’re having to buy natural gas on the world market. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’ll tell the people of 
the province. Because that member and his colleagues sold off 
the gas that these . . . that the people of this province owned. 



June 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1489 

 

And now what they want is to get into power so that they can 
sell off the gas utility company. That’s what they want to do, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we on this side of the House are not going to allow it to 
happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s easy, it’s easy to see 
why the Minister of Finance is in full rant this morning. We’ve 
caught them in a bit of a . . . on the horns of a dilemma. 
 
He just admitted today that his colleague, the Minister of 
SaskEnergy, was wrong in his projection for the price of natural 
gas, and that he was right all along and that this increase isn’t 
needed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy said . . . made their application based 
on a projection for the period of June 1, 2001 to October 31st, 
2002. Well today is June 1. Their projection was $7. The price 
today is $5 a gigajoule. 
 
Further CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce), Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is forecasting that the price will stay at $5 a 
gigajoule for the next period of time. That is a difference of 40 
per cent, which is about the same amount SaskEnergy is asking 
for in this increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Why is SaskEnergy basing its rate request on a $7 a gigajoule 
forecast, when natural gas is sitting at $5 a gigajoule? Why is 
the NDP government even considering gouging the families of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the member 
from Swift Current doesn’t want to listen to what I have to say, 
he should listen to what one of his own constituents has to say 
yesterday in the Regina Leader-Post. That member . . . no, the 
people should note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that member worked 
closely with the Devine government in the 1980s. And Mr. Bev 
Currie writes this in the Regina Leader-Post: 
 

. . . in the 1980s, the Grant Devine Progressive 
Conservative government sold Sask Power’s reserves of 
787 billion cubic feet of natural gas and 495,000 
underdeveloped exploration acres to Sask Oil for a pittance. 

 
They sold it off for a pittance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Then he 
goes and says, then the person sold it to Sask Oil: 
 

Then he sold Sask Oil, again for much less than its real 
value. Devine also deregulated natural gas, allowing it to be 
marketed through distribution companies. 

 
So first they deregulate it so we have to buy it on the world 
market. They privatize it. Then they ask us why we have to pay 
for it. What a bunch of phony-baloney hypocrites, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ve heard a lot of stuff 
from the Minister of Finance this morning, but what you 
haven’t heard is an explanation for why they’re even 
considering this increase when he has admitted that 
SaskEnergy’s projections are wrong, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP family of Crown corporation 
thinks nothing of losing tens of millions of dollars on dot-coms 
and potatoes, but they appear to be willing to do nothing to help 
Saskatchewan families with a $400-a-year hike in their gas 
bills. 
 
The NDP can find $65,000 for their wholly owned subsidiary, 
the Liberal caucus, which now can conduct their meetings on a 
bicycle built for two, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but they don’t have 
any time for Saskatchewan families and the price of gas. 
 
They’ve got $700 million in an election slush fund, but they 
appear unwilling to help Saskatchewan families with this gas 
price increase. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when is the NDP going to get its priorities 
straight? When will the NDP government put the interests of 
Saskatchewan families ahead of the interests of the family of 
Crown corporations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well this is how phony and ridiculous that 
opposition is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First they privatize the gas. 
Then they say, how come you have to pay for the gas? But then 
they say, you should have an independent rate review panel — 
not the government — saying what the fair price would be. 
 
So the government sets up the independent rate review panel 
that they called for, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Then when the 
independent rate review panel that they called for says there 
should be a 42 per cent increase, then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they say don’t listen to the independent rate review panel. 
 
So it’s very difficult to tell what the opposition wants, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. When they’re in office they sell off the gas and 
say it should be deregulated and privatized and everybody 
should pay the world price. Then when it happens they 
complain about it. Then they say there should be an 
independent rate review panel, then there is. When the panel 
reports, they don’t like that either because they’re just a bunch 
of opportunists who are hungry for power, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Resources for Health Care 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s June 1, and just so the Minister of Health doesn’t 
feel left out, we thought we’d ask him a question or two. 
 
Yesterday we learned that the Regina Health District will have a 
124 beds closed through the summer months. But the situation 
in the pediatrics unit at the Yorkton health centre is also serious, 
according to staff there. 
 
A few years ago this hospital had 32 pediatric beds — 32, Mr. 



1490 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2001 

 

Deputy Speaker — but now this regional hospital, which serves 
a huge area of eastern Saskatchewan and western Manitoba, 
will have only 6 pediatric beds. The staff say they have enough 
people to care for the existing 8 beds even during summer 
months. But they don’t understand why 2 more beds are being 
sacrificed in this department of that hospital. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the minister, why is the East Central 
Health District, under your government-appointed 
administrator, cutting beds for sick children? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what we are doing as a 
government, and what we will continue to do, is work together 
with the local communities, the health districts, to provide the 
services that are needed in various areas. 
 
What we know is that in the Yorkton area they have capable 
administrators who are working with the people there. They 
have had a number of challenges which they have been able to 
meet. And they are working to have a plan that will work for 
the longer term. 
 
And what we have to do, as members of this legislature, is to 
work together to help create and set out what will allow us to 
sustain our health system over the long term. 
 
And what I want that member to do, and all of the members of 
this House, is to be part of our discussion of the suggestions 
from the medicare commission so that we can continue to work 
and provide the best care that we can for all the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we had a health board out in the area too until 
that government saw fit to fire them too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the biggest concern in the region is that there’s an 
excellent pediatrician who may leave the area if the pediatrics 
department is cut further. Dr. Datta is the only pediatrician in all 
of eastern Saskatchewan. He and the nurses in the department 
are frustrated with the limits placed on the level of care he can 
provide due to bed shortages and long waits for equipment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the acting CEO (chief executive officer) 
of the health district promised the community last fall that the 
pediatrics unit would try and maintain 12 beds but now he is 
specifically reducing pediatric beds that is not part of a summer 
slowdown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister should know that the retention of 
health care professionals is every bit as important as 
recruitment. How is cutting beds and support in pediatrics going 
to help retain the only pediatrician in East Central Health 
District? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, retention and recruitment of 
the health providers in our province is a very important issue 
and we are working on that issue in a number of different ways, 
including the increased training of people, but also working 

together with the professional organizations — whether it’s the 
medical association, the nursing associations — to see what we 
can do to make workplaces good places to be, and so that we 
can retain the kinds of specialists that we need across the 
province. 
 
What happens is that we all have to work together to make sure 
that we have the resources but also the attitude about how we 
can provide and make a better health system. 
 
I very much appreciate the member’s questions opposite 
because I was really quite lonely during that whole month of 
May without a question until yesterday. 
 
What I would say is, Mr. Member and your party, please join us 
on the Health Committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I just want to remind hon. members 
to direct the questions to the Chair and through the Chair, and 
the answers to the Chair and through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that hospital, the Yorkton hospital, had 32 
pediatric beds a short time ago. Now they’re going to have six. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we want answers. He’s got questions; we 
want answers. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the issue of retaining staff 
is fundamental to maintaining the present level of health care 
available in the province. The nurses at the Yorkton Regional 
Health Centre say that they’re losing colleagues left and right 
because of stress and extreme workload. They keep saying 
nurses will be difficult unless the government deals with the 
problem. They’re leaving; day after day we’re losing more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the second day in a row we’re hearing from 
health care professionals that fear retaliation if they raise 
concerns about the problems in the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why are health care professionals 
in this province afraid of speaking out? If a health care worker 
were to come forward with public concerns about their health 
district or the system, what repercussions will they face? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to that 
latest line of questions by saying this: I very much appreciate 
the candour of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and all of the 
people there, of the CUPE (Canadian Union of Public 
Employees) workers, of the SEIU (Service Employees’ 
International Union), all of the different labour organizations — 
the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association). They have been 
very direct with me and with our colleagues to say; look we’ve 
got some work to do. 
 
But they also have said we want to work together with you. And 
that is the key here — that we’re going to work together to 
solve these problems. And I ask the member opposite, please be 
sure that your caucus is part of the Standing Committee on 
Health because that’s an important part of what you should do. 
And I ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the members opposite 



June 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1491 

 

please join what we’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the 1999 election 
campaign the NDP promised fair and improved access to health 
services, ensuring that services are available to people as close 
as possible to where they live. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, how is reducing pediatric beds at the 
Yorkton Regional Health Centre improving access? Why 
should people with a sick child have to travel to Saskatoon, 
Regina, Winnipeg, Edmonton because there are no beds at the 
regional hospital in Yorkton? It’s just another broken promise 
by that government. Where are the 500 new health care 
providers you promised? Where is the 30 per cent reduction in 
surgical waiting lists? Where are the preliminary evaluations in 
emergency in only 15 minutes? 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: can you explain to all parents of 
young children . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The last number of 
questions and last number of answers, the questions have not 
gone through the Chair and the answers have not gone to the 
Chair. So I remind hon. members on both sides please direct 
your comments to the Chair and through the Chair. Thank you 
very much. 
 
(10:45) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to the minister. Can you explain to all the 
parents . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, can the minister explain to all 
parents of young children in the Yorkton area how reducing the 
number of pediatric beds at the regional health centre is fair and 
improved access to health services in Yorkton area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member opposite 
has raised the promises in the last election. And I know that the 
people of Saskatchewan are extremely satisfied with the fact 
that those members opposite are not in control of our health 
system. Because their promise was zero increase, and we don’t 
know what effect that would have had on our whole system. 
 
What we do know . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. I’m having difficulty 
hearing the answer. Would members please come to order so I 
can hear the answer. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan want an accessible, publicly funded health care 
system. And what we are doing is working to provide a 
sustainable long-term accessible public health system. 
 
And what I ask those members opposite to do is participate in 
the discussion on the Standing Committee on Health; also 
participate throughout the province as we work to build a very 
good system for all of the people of this province. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, another issue that is 
causing stress for health care workers is actually the health 
districts’ budgets. 
 
Earlier in May the staff at St. Anthony’s Hospital in North 
Valley Health District were told that the hospital may not be 
able to meet their upcoming payroll. In the end, it turned out 
that the hospital payroll was met by the health district, but not 
before there was considerable alarm among staff and the 
hospital board and the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this raises questions about cash flow in the North 
Valley Health District — in fact all health districts in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the minister. How is it a health district’s 
cash flow is so diminished that a hospital’s ability to meet 
payroll is in question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the budget this 
spring we had the largest amount for Health ever in the history 
of the province — $2.2 billion. This was an 11 per cent increase 
over last year’s budget. And what this does show is that there’s 
a commitment on this side to make sure this system works. 
 
Now what the member opposite raises is the questions around 
employees and how they can get resources. Well one of the 
things that we know from the suggestions that they made in the 
last election is that they were looking at a zero increase, maybe 
an inflation increase. But what the effect of that would have 
been, would have been hundreds and maybe thousands of 
people laid off over the last two years. We have not had that. 
We’re going to work together with the people in the system to 
make sure that we can provide the best health care possible for 
all of our citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, for all this new money they’re putting into 
health care, we’re not seeing any improvements out in rural 
Saskatchewan, especially in the Yorkton area. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the board at St. Anthony’s Hospital said 
they were led to believe that the health district had a cash-flow 
problem and they felt that they had to inform the staff at the 
hospital about the situation. The chairman of the health district 
board believes it was all a misunderstanding. But the hospital 
board is still concerned that the uncertainty of the health 
district’s budget and cash flow is a problem. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new fiscal year for health districts 
began April 1 and yet this district still has no approved budget 
for the operating year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how many provincial health 
districts have received budget approval to date? And 
specifically, when will the North Valley Health District receive 
their budget approval? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1492 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2001 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, all of the districts have 
received their allocations of money and they are working 
together with the department to work within those allocations. 
 
But what I would say, Mr. Speaker, is that this member says 
that there are not improvements happening throughout the 
province. Well I know that I have been with the member from 
Melfort to go and see the new facility that’s going to be built in 
that area. I’ve been in Weyburn, alone, to see the new facility 
that was going there. I’ve been out in Unity to look at one there. 
I’ve been in Carrot River. 
 
And what I would say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that we are 
continuing to build the health system of the province. We’re 
going to continue to provide health services for people right 
across this province. But we have to do it together with both the 
workers and the communities because that’s the only way. 
That’s the Saskatchewan way. And that’s how this government 
operates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, 
on a point of order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cannington on a point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, during question period I’d like to draw your 
attention to some of the comments made by the Minister of 
Finance, and ask that he withdraw those remarks and apologize. 
Specifically for directing comments towards the member from 
Swift Current as being a phony hypocrite, Mr. Speaker, in 
referring to that member and to the members of the opposition. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I apologize and 
withdraw that remark. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I thank the Minister of Finance for 
withdrawing and apologizing. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m extremely 
pleased today to stand on behalf of the government and table 
responses to written questions 210 and 211. And note this . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, I’m afraid I cannot hear the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions nos. 210 and 211, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Questions 210 and 211 are tabled. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Just before the minister 
takes her feet, I just want to remind all hon. members and in 
particular members of the Assembly and the galleries, that they 
are not to participate in debate. The minister is also not to make 
reference to the members in the gallery in debate. And that 
includes applause, that sort of thing. 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Métis Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. As you can tell it is my very great pleasure today to 
rise in support of Bill 42, The Métis Act. Or as I have been 
taught to say in Cree . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
The Métis Act. 
 
I want to begin my remarks by acknowledging the very, very 
valuable contribution of the Metis people of Saskatchewan in 
helping this government develop this Act before us today. 
Thank you. Padama. Merci. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has a vision for all the people of 
this province. A vision where Saskatchewan people enjoy 
prosperity and a high quality of life; where we all can seize the 
future with confidence and a spirit of innovation. 
 
My work as a member of this Assembly and as Minister of 
Aboriginal Affairs has shown me the depth of commitment and 
the resourcefulness that men and women within Saskatchewan’s 
Aboriginal community have for the fulfillment of that vision for 
themselves, for their families, and for their communities. I 
believe this observation is shared by all of us in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Métis Act helps the members of the Metis 
community move a step closer to realizing that vision of a 
future filled with confidence, pride, and prosperity. I am proud 
of this piece of legislation and proud to be speaking today about 
such a forward-looking initiative. 
 
The Métis Act focuses on three principle areas. I would like to 
speak to each of these areas in turn. 
 
First, The Métis Act defines the breadth and richness of the 
historic and contemporary cultural and economic contributions 
Metis people have made and will continue to make to the 
development of prosperity of our province and our nation. 
 
Again in the words that I have been taught by a very proud 
Metis from the northwest of Saskatchewan. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Michif.) 
 
They’ve given a lot to this province. 
 
Metis people have a unique and proud history in Canada and in 
Saskatchewan. This government recognizes and respects the 
perspective that Metis individuals have brought to every sector 
to our society for hundreds of years. We speak with pride of the 
richness of diversity in our province, and of our respect for the 



June 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1493 

 

unique contributions each of us can offer to our way of life. 
 
The Métis Act give us an historic opportunity to celebrate the 
unique contributions of a community of people who help define 
Canada and its West. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — The Metis people have a rich and enduring 
history and this government illustrates its respect for the Metis 
history through this legislation. Mr. Speaker, I was taught a bit 
of Michif by a wonderful woman, Lavone Kirklon, who is the 
mother of a feisty and humorous proud Metis women in my 
office, Virginia Healey, and this is what she taught me. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Michif.) 
 
Our government respects the Metis. 
 
The Métis Act gives our children and all of us an opportunity to 
learn about the breadth of Metis contributions. We acknowledge 
the cultural distinctiveness of Metis communities and the 
traditional ways of life. Languages, including Michif, are a 
crucial element of Metis culture, and an invaluable gift to 
Canada’s culture and heritage. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all recognize some of the well-known 
and distinctive legacies of Metis culture, including the Metis 
flag, the Metis sash, the Red River cart, the fiddle, and the Red 
River jig. Let’s seize the opportunity given to us through The 
Métis Act to help teach our children the significance of these 
cultural symbols. 
 
Saskatchewan is fortunate to have particularly strong historic 
ties with the Metis community. The 1885 resistance at Batoche 
is perhaps the most well-known moment of Metis history, but 
the proud Metis past in Saskatchewan stretches back to the 18th 
century with the historic involvement of the Metis in the 
northwest fur trade. 
 
The Métis Act also pays tribute to the honourable and 
invaluable service of Metis veterans during the two World 
Wars, the Korean War, and in many, many peacekeeping 
missions around the world. 
 
As the daughter of a World War II veteran, I salute and respect 
the Metis veterans. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — The second major portion of The Métis Act 
establishes a unique body, The Metis Nation — Saskatchewan 
Secretariat Inc., as a corporate entity. 
 
The Act sets out a series of responsibilities, reporting 
requirements, and processes for the conduct of the secretariat’s 
operations. The secretariat is the administrative body by which 
the policies and programs of the MNS (Metis Nation — 
Saskatchewan) are to be carried out and administered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw attention to the specific 

provisions contained in this legislation related to the 
accountability of the MNS to its members. Accountability 
requirements as we all know are important. The specific 
provisions included in the Act provide a solid foundation for the 
MNS to maintain effective systems of accountability. The Métis 
Act gives the Metis Nation — Saskatchewan the authority to 
conduct its business in a new business environment, freed from 
the restrictions imposed upon the organization under The 
Non-profit Corporations Act, 1995. 
 
With responsibility . . . with authority comes responsibility and 
this government has ensured through this legislation that the 
MNS will act in the best interests of its members. The Métis 
Act allows any Metis person of Saskatchewan access to any 
bylaws, minutes of meetings and resolutions, a list of directors, 
all committees of the corporation, notices, and the audited 
financial statements. 
 
The Act also requires that the corporation appoint a qualified 
auditor to conduct, at a minimum, an annual audit of the 
records, accounts, and financial statements of the corporation. 
 
The Act recognizes the importance of ensuring that effective 
accountability processes are in place. Inclusion of these 
measures ensures a firm foundation for both the province of 
Saskatchewan and the Metis Nation — Saskatchewan as we 
move forward toward the realization of our shared vision for 
this province. 
 
The third and final section of the Act identifies a mechanism to 
address practical, non-rights-based issues and enhanced 
opportunities important to Metis people. These include such 
issues as land, harvesting, capacity building, and governance. 
 
In relation to land, the Saskatchewan government and the Metis 
nation agreed to co-operate in identifying opportunities for 
Metis access to lands and for developing economic 
opportunities for Metis people with respect to land-based 
activities such as farming, forestry, and mining. The parties also 
agree to identify and develop appropriate cultural initiatives 
related to the traditional Metis gathering places. 
 
In relation to harvesting, the two parties, Saskatchewan and the 
MNS, agree to work to improve economic development and 
harvesting opportunities consistent with sustainable 
management practices for Metis people in Saskatchewan’s 
resource and other sectors. The parties also agree to work 
toward greater Metis involvement in resource management and 
economic development related decisions. 
 
In relation to capacity building, the parties agree to work toward 
the devolution of programs and services to Metis communities 
and Metis institutions. Together, we will undertake preparatory 
and planning work leading to the development of a framework 
for the devolution that will be responsive to the interests of 
Metis people, effective and accountable. 
 
In relation to governance, the parties agree to continue building 
Metis capacity for governance of Metis communities and Metis 
institutions. This Made in Saskatchewan approach will respect 
federal and provincial jurisdiction and will build on existing and 
successful models and experiences, such as the Gabriel Dumont 
Institute, the Dumont Technical Institute, and the Metis 



1494 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2001 

 

Addictions Council. 
 
These issues are outlined in a memorandum of understanding 
that accompanies the legislation and that will be implemented 
through the Metis Nation Saskatchewan/Government of 
Saskatchewan Bilateral Process Agreement that was signed in 
1993. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has a proud history of 
developing successful sustainable solutions through negotiation. 
This bilateral process, already in place, is an excellent example 
of a trusted, reliable, effective solution that has already proven 
its worth to the people of this province. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, through The Métis Act, the 
province of Saskatchewan is confirming its support and respect 
for Metis people. It acknowledges the historic and ongoing 
contributions the Metis people have made to the economic, 
social, and cultural fabric of Saskatchewan. It includes specific 
provisions that provide a solid foundation for the MNS to 
maintain effective systems of accountability. 
 
And finally, it articulates the high priority this government 
places on developing and sustaining sound working 
relationships with key communities of people in the province. 
 
An effective government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, values its 
relationships and understands the vital role that constructive, 
respectful relationships fulfill. 
 
I would like to acknowledge the contributions of the Metis 
community and also the contributions of past ministers, and the 
contributions of Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management, Justice, and Northern Affairs in developing this 
Act. 
 
Once again, as I have been taught to say in Michif. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Michif.) 
 
Let’s keep working together. 
 
The Métis Act moves us a step closer to realizing our shared 
future, our vision of what Saskatchewan can become. 
 
I will conclude with a favourite quote from Eleanor Roosevelt. 
She said, many years ago: 
 

The future belongs to those who believe in the beauty of 
their dreams. 

 
Thank you for this opportunity to speak to this legislation today, 
Mr. Speaker. With that, I move second reading of Bill No. 42, 
The Métis Act. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
The Métis Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it is 
indeed an honour for me to join in this debate after the fine 

address by the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs. As a former 
minister, I’m honoured to have some small role in this and am 
pleased to participate in this debate. 
 
It is a good day for Saskatchewan, although this is not 
ground-breaking — the province of Alberta introduced a similar 
Act many years ago. So fortunately we are now following this 
example and making formal recognition of the contributions 
that the Metis have made to our history, and even more 
important, the contributions they are and will make to our 
shared future. 
 
As the minister has said, the Metis people arose at the time of 
the fur trade, and they were the bridge people who crossed the 
continent, canoed our rivers, did the voyages, and the 
discoveries, and built the economy, the first economy of 
Western Canada, as they were the people who bridged the new 
Europeans and the First Nations. 
 
Their language of course, the Michif that the minister was 
attempting, is a mixture I understand of Cree verbs and French 
nouns, which is a metaphor for the Metis Nation itself. 
 
The first economy of Western Canada was built on the Metis 
people and the opening of this continent was in very large 
measure due to the work of the Metis. Unfortunately after the 
defeats of the Red River and Batoche, there followed 100 years 
of marginalization. 
 
We know that the suppression of the First Nations people has 
become a blot on our nation’s history. What is less well known 
is that the fate of the Metis was, if anything, even more tragic 
and more scandalous. The First Nations were herded onto 
reserves. The Metis, not even having reservations, became 
known as the road allowance people. 
 
Sir Wilfrid Laurier said at the time of the uprising at Batoche 
that had he been a Metis at the Saskatchewan, he would have 
taken up arms against the Government of Canada. 
 
Louis Riel predicted, shortly before his death, that 100 years of 
shame and defeat would follow the events of Batoche. Sadly, 
that prophecy came true. But happily, that century of defeat is 
now past us. 
 
Today there is a rebirth of Metis pride and Metis culture and 
Metis innovation. This must be a very exciting time to be a 
young Metis. But it is also important for those of us who are not 
Metis to join in this celebration and to be supportive of the 
rebirth which is presently going on in our province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, last year at the Back to Batoche celebrations 
when I announced the commitment of the government to The 
Métis Act, I also announced the naming of Louis Riel Trail. 
 
I had thought that we as Canadians were people who didn’t 
know or care about our history. That is something that is often 
said about us. Well in the ensuing days and the radio talk shows 
throughout our province, some people phoned in who evidently 
care very much about our history, and some quite salty remarks 
were made about naming roads after traitors. It tells me we still 
have a long way to go and that history can still divide, and 
emotions can still divide. It is my hope that this Act will bring 



June 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1495 

 

us together. 
 
It also somewhat baffled me, Mr. Speaker, in that about the 
same time I went to Moose Jaw and found that that community 
is attempting to build a tourist industry around a gangster from 
the 1920s who may or may not have ever visited that 
community. And as far as I’m aware, no one has ever 
complained about the memorialization of Al Capone in Moose 
Jaw. 
 
Well Louis Riel is one of the pivotal figures of Western 
Canada. He is recognized as the father of Manitoba and he 
remains a compelling figure in the history of this province as 
well, and I think it is fitting and appropriate that he should take 
his place among the pioneer figures of Western Canada and of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There are other issues though besides the renaming of the Louis 
Riel Trail that we look forward to this summer. There are more 
substantive issues. There is the issue of the Green Lake farms 
that this government committed many years ago to, as a Metis 
land base. I think we look forward to some work being done on 
that and some movement finally being done on the issue of a 
land base. 
 
And specifically there is a long-standing injustice over the 
Primrose Air Weapons Range, and that certainly requires work 
on the part of the federal government as well. A fair settlement 
has been reached with the First Nations communities who were 
displaced by Primrose, and it is tragic that a similar agreement 
has not been reached to give fair compensation to the Metis 
who were displaced. 
 
(11:15) 
 
This is an ongoing shame and it is my hope that with this Act 
we will move on some of the substantive issues as well. 
 
Symbolic issues are important and I support the government in 
the symbolism of the Metis recognition Act. But I am sure that 
the minister and others will join with me in saying, even more 
important than the symbolism is what flows from it — a new 
and better future, the training for Metis young people, their 
entry and full participation in the economy of our province. 
 
May I say, Mr. Speaker, that the Metis have certainly been full 
participants in the politics of this province. I think most 
members were a little bit taken back in their seats when one of 
the Metis members of this legislature a few years ago piled up 
92 per cent in an election, proving that the Metis have been very 
successful vote-getters. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that sent some people scurrying to 
the history books and found out that wasn’t a record. Some 
friends of mine in North Battleford are descendants of Joe 
Nolin, who actually did better than the present member for 
Athabasca. 
 
He represented the entire north of Saskatchewan. He got 96 per 
cent and his family tells me that the way he did that was his 
winters were spent in Regina attending sessions here and come 
summer he would get in his canoe, which was the only way 
around his constituency in those days, and he would paddle 

from settlement to settlement through the entire summer, 
visiting his constituents and 96 per cent of them appreciated it. 
He was, needless to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a Liberal. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to celebrate our history with 
all its misfortunes and its missteps and its miscues, but also 
with its successes. But it’s even more important to celebrate our 
future — our shared future — a future of which the Metis will 
be a proud part. 
 
And I want to take this opportunity to wish all members of the 
Metis Nation in Saskatchewan the very best on this historic day 
for them when they are shedding off the century which 
followed Batoche. They are looking forward to a new and 
brighter future. We celebrate that with them. We look forward 
to that new and brighter future because we know the social and 
economic health of Metis people is the social and economic 
health of us all. 
 
And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that there are many 
other members anxious to participate in this debate. However, 
at this time I am going to move that this debate be adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Prairie and Forest Fires 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It is with great pleasure that I rise today for the second 
reading of the legislation creating a forest fire contingency fund, 
The Prairie and Forest Fires Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
As a Northerner, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and as someone who 
once worked in the forest fire program, I have seen tremendous 
improvements in the fire program in particular since the 1995 
fire season. Improvements in the fire program since 1995 have 
been absolutely stunning, particularly in the preparedness 
system which increases fire suppression resources when hazards 
arise, even when a fire source has not been identified, allows for 
a much quicker response time when a fire does start. 
 
In 1995, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were five weeks of 
high-to-extreme hazards. There were 650 fires, while a ten-year 
average is 680. One million hectares burned in 
southern-full-response zones. About $85 million was spent on 
fire suppression. There was 16 evacuations involving 2,500 
people. There were 20 road closures. There was 48 fire starts in 
one single day, which resulted in 13 large-escaped fires. 
 
In 1998, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were 20 weeks of high to 
extreme hazards. There was a record of 1,266 forest fires. 
Similar spending in 1995, but only 400,000 hectares were 
burned in the southern-full-response zone. There were 17 
evacuations but only involving 650 people this time. There was 
225 fires dealt with in three days and no major escape fires. 
 
Last year while there was only 419 fires, the fire program 
continued its high level of performance by minimizing the 
number of large-escape fires to just five and reducing the area 
burned to just 5,000 hectares out of almost 20 million hectares 
that are intensively protected. 
 



1496 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation that I’m introducing to create a 
Forest Fire Contingency Fund will build on the province’s 
record of excellence in forest fire management. In addition to 
maintaining the preparedness system and other operational 
improvements made to Saskatchewan’s fire program, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the new fund will bring more stability to the 
forest fire budgeting process. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the main purpose of the fund is to pay 
expenditures relating to large-escaped fires, which can be 
responsible for 60 to 80 per cent of the total fire management 
costs in difficult fire years and 95 per cent of the area burned. 
 
The level of costs associated with large fires is often 
unpredictable because of uncontrollable factors, such as weather 
conditions, terrain, and moisture in the fuel. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, establishing a fund separating 
the cost of large fire suppression from other fire program costs 
will result in more stable government spending projections, 
reducing the chance that funding for priority areas of the 
economy, health care, education, and agriculture will need to be 
redirected during bad fire seasons. 
 
The fund, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will also promote accountability 
for the fire program, both in terms of escaped fires, and their 
costs. The fund will increase the transparency of how fire 
suppression costs are being allocated. The Provincial Auditor 
will audit this program to ensure that taxpayers’ dollars are 
being used wisely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fund will allow for timely payments of 
suppliers without the need for SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management)) to seek additional 
funding through the special warrant, or reallocating funding 
within the department in order to payment. 
 
For all of these good reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the fact 
that protecting communities and valuable forest resources from 
wildfire benefits the provincial economy and increases 
employment opportunities for Northerners and other 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
I now move second reading of The Prairie and Forest Fires 
Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to join into the debate on Bill No. 44, The Prairie and 
Forest Fires Amendment Act regarding a new fund, by the 
sounds of it, to I guess to more stabilize the payment as the 
minister had spoke about regarding the forest fire problem. 
 
It’s interesting that it’s coming about this year and this Bill is 
being introduced this year, as this year it seems to be quite a 
problem especially to the west and I believe that our northern 
region is very, very dry also. Talking to a number of our MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) from the northern part of 
the province, and they’re speaking how not only the drought has 
affected the agriculture sector along the west side and moving 
east as we’re lacking rain, I guess, but it also covers a large 
portion of the North and how tinder dry that is up there. You 

know, it just takes a flash of lightening or some careless use of 
smoke, cigarettes or combustibles to create some large 
problems. 
 
Now this Bill looks on the surface as if it’s just creating another 
fund that money will go in that in the need will then be paid out 
for runaway fires or escaped fires — large-escape fires, I guess, 
is what it deals with. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think when 
we go through this Bill we look at it; on surface it looks to 
make some sense. We question that the money wouldn’t just go 
into the forest firefighting fund and not just have to create a 
new fund. 
 
But those are some of the questions we want to be asking of 
parties that this will be affecting — interested parties — 
regarding that. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time I will move 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 44, The Prairie and Forest Fires 
Amendment Act. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce amendments to 
The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Act to implement 
policy decisions made and announced in June of 2000. Those 
policy decisions were based on a report regarding a new 
funding distribution strategy for the Associated Entities Fund or 
AEF prepared by the then Department of Municipal Affairs, 
Culture and Housing. 
 
The AEF, Mr. Speaker, is a fund established by the government 
to distribute a portion of gaming profits to benefit 
Saskatchewan people and communities. For example, the AEF 
provides up to 2 million per year for annual and summer grants 
in support of community programs and services targeted 
towards vulnerable children, youth, and families. 
 
The AEF provides funding for the construction and renovation 
of community cultural facilities. The AEF provides funding to 
selected exhibition associations to help mitigate the reductions 
in local revenue the casino operations might cause. And the 
AEF provides up to 1.5 million over the next two years for 
problem gambling prevention initiatives. 
 
Some of the decisions regarding the distribution of AEF 
funding cannot be implemented without amendments to the Act. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to review the key components 
of this Bill. 
 
In its present state, a percentage of funds paid into the AEF are 
allocated for the Metis economic development. The funds are 
paid to the Clarence Campeau Development Fund, or CCDF, 
and are then distributed and managed in accordance with the 
terms and conditions of the agreement between the Metis 
Society of Saskatchewan and the province. 
 



June 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1497 

 

Mr. Speaker, government has negotiated with the Metis Society 
in preparing these amendments and has agreed to the creation of 
a Metis development fund separate from the AEF, and has 
further committed to pay to that fund the amount of 2 million in 
each of the three fiscal years ending with the 2002-03 fiscal 
year. 
 
It’s very important to note, Mr. Speaker, that the provisions that 
will accomplish this were negotiated and are being presented to 
the legislature today with the full support of that organization. 
 
In addition to providing Saskatchewan Metis people with a 
stable source of funding for economic development, this new 
arrangement also demonstrates our government’s commitment 
to working co-operatively in order to achieve a greater degree 
of prosperity for all citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you will note, this Bill also sets out in detail the 
terms and conditions for the establishment of the new Metis 
development fund and provides for a very significant degree of 
transparency and accountability, including full access to the 
records by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
These provisions were also developed with the input and full 
co-operation of the Metis Society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the report on a distribution strategy for the AEF 
also identified a number of improvements to be made to the 
existing administration of the AEF. The name Associated 
Entities Fund itself does not adequately identify the purposes 
for which the fund was created and has little or no significance 
to the recipients. 
 
In addition, there was a concern that the present composition of 
the board does not provide adequate representation. 
 
Several issues have arisen regarding existing adjudication 
processes for the distribution of the community component of 
the fund, including its overall effectiveness and objectivity. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, as the legislation currently reads, the 
requirements for preparing the financial statements for the AEF 
are not consistent with The Tabling of Documents Act, 1991. 
 
(11:30) 
 
So in response to all of these issues, Mr. Speaker, we are 
proposing amendments that will change the name of the 
Associated Entities Fund to the Community Initiatives Fund; 
increase the number of members on the Community Initiatives 
Fund board of trustees from six to eight; confirm that the 
monies being paid to the MDF (Metis Development Fund) 
comprise a portion of the 25 per cent of gaming proceeds 
allocated to the Community Initiatives Fund; make the 
reporting requirements for the Community Initiatives Fund 
consistent with The Tabling of Documents Act, 1991; and to 
give the Lieutenant Governor in general authority to make 
regulations for the purposes of the Community Initiatives Fund 
to improve the effectiveness and transparency of the 
adjudication and decision-making processes for money granted 
from the Community Initiatives Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe each of the amendments will help to 

improve the overall efficiency and effectiveness of the newly 
named Community Initiatives Fund, and will help to ensure that 
all Saskatchewan residents continue to benefit from the 
proceeds of gaming activity in our province. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I believe these amendments are in 
the best interests of all the people of Saskatchewan and should 
be supported by all the members of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill, The 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise today on this particular Bill, especially after a couple of 
weeks where Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming and the gaming 
industry have been in the news quite a bit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This goes a long ways, Mr. Speaker, in changing the original 
Act in how the funds were distributed, dealing with liquor and 
gaming revenues, Mr. Speaker, and those revenues that are 
controlled by . . . or overseen by the Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are new stakeholders being included into those revenues 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like 
to thank my colleague from Cannington for interrupting him but 
the visitors we have in the east gallery are on a very tight 
schedule, and I would like to introduce them to you and through 
you to the Assembly. 
 
There are 26 grade 5 and 6 students from the Christ the King 
School in Shaunavon, accompanied with their teachers, Mrs. 
Weiseth and Ms. White. And also I’d like to say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the member from Regina Dewdney also attended 
Christ the King School. He said he graduated from grade 6 
there and it was the toughest three years of his life. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask you and all members to 
join me in welcoming the group from Shaunavon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

(continued) 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I was saying, this Act brings a number of new stakeholders 



1498 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2001 

 

into the revenue stream that this Bill represents, Mr. Speaker. 
And it will be interesting to determine how the new 
stakeholders and the previous stakeholders will interact and 
what the concerns might arise from that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I guess some of the questions that need to be asked dealing with 
this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, is how the distribution of the 
funds will be accomplished? Will it be the fixed term amount of 
money or will it be a percentage of the revenues that pass 
through the Associated Entities Fund or now to be changed to 
the Community Initiatives Fund, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that in the Bill that the minister has laid out 
that a fixed amount of funds will be distributed for a three-year 
period commencing in the year 2000 and ending in the year 
2003. 
 
So part of these funds, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will be distributed 
retroactively, which is not a normal course of events, Mr. 
Speaker, but certainly not unheard of in dealing with this 
particular government; that they would either make things 
retroactive or deem them to have or not have happened, as the 
case may be, to suit their purposes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m just wondering, Mr. Speaker, dealing with these funds, 
particularly on the fixed amounts, what was the criteria in 
establishing $2 million as the appropriate amount of money to 
be designated to the Metis fund, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And further, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it says that the minister shall 
pay into the fund any additional amount directed by the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council, but it doesn’t describe any 
criteria why additional funds may be necessary, Mr. Speaker, or 
on what basis they might be distributed, what would the reasons 
be? Simply left up to the minister’s discretion, Mr. Speaker, 
whether or not any additional funds would be provided. 
 
And we have to keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, that the funds 
coming through the Community Initiatives Fund come from all 
the people of Saskatchewan, including the Metis people of this 
province. And I’m sure that they are as concerned about 
accountability of their tax dollars as anyone else in this 
province is, Mr. Speaker, and are as concerned about the criteria 
by which these funds are being distributed to all of the 
stakeholders, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Accountability is very important and a good portion of this Act 
deals with accountability, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to see 
that the minister has included in that, that the Provincial Auditor 
has a role to play in this. Because we saw, Mr. Speaker, on the 
First Nations Fund, that the government missed that in the Act. 
That the First Nations Fund was not being audited by the 
Provincial Auditor, even though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
Provincial Auditor was asking and has been asking for a 
number of years that he be allowed to do so. Stating that these 
are funds that are provincial government funds, therefore they 
belong to the Crown and it’s his duty, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
audit all funds expended by the Crown within the province of 
Saskatchewan and outside that go through the Consolidated 
Fund, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the Community Initiatives Fund, it 
talks about the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations or 

the Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority, but it doesn’t deal 
with specifically the First Nations Fund, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and the accountability in that particular area which has been a 
concern in the past, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the Provincial 
Auditor stating that he needs to have access to do accounting to 
do the audit in that particular area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would certainly encourage the minister if it hasn’t 
happened already, to ensure that that does happen, that the 
Provincial Auditor will be auditing the First Nations Fund, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Because there are many stakeholder groups that need to be 
consulted in how this will impact on them, Mr. Speaker — how 
these funds will be distributed, what the criteria is for that 
distribution — that we need to be able to contact, Mr. Speaker, 
and discuss this with them, therefore I would move that we 
adjourn debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 22 — The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2001 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker — getting a little accent in 
there. Yes indeed I do live in the southern end of the province 
and therefore once in a while a little Cajun slips into my accent, 
Mr. Speaker, as I do indeed have relatives that live in 
Louisiana. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency) is a quasi-government agency that has a 
lot to do with the property taxes in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
SAMA has been designated to outline the process and the final 
assessment of all properties in this province for the purposes of 
setting the property tax rate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they go through various machinations to determine what 
the value is. There’s a great deal of concern, Mr. Speaker, 
though about that entire process as there seems to be some 
inconsistencies across the province when it comes to assessing 
the same kinds of properties — that in one area you may have a 
property assessed at X and in another area it may be assessed as 
Y. 
 
In particular, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have seen a huge rise in 
the assessment of some types of properties, particularly hotels, 
Mr. Speaker. And this has caused a great deal of concern for 
those hotel owners because their taxes may have doubled, they 
may have tripled, they may have gone up five times as much, 
Mr. Speaker. And this is very arbitrary. They can appeal but 
because of the way SAMA has established the assessment 
values, it’s extremely difficult for them to get any changes 
made, Mr. Speaker. 



June 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1499 

 

This needs to be dealt with to equalize and to make fair the 
payment of property taxes. The value of property taxes, Mr. 
Speaker, is directly related to the assessments. And I know that 
the members opposite have a great deal of difficulty in 
understanding that, Mr. Speaker. They think the entire concept 
of property taxes is based on the mill rate. Well in part it’s 
based on the mill rate, Mr. Speaker, but the mill rate tax 
collection is based on the assessed value of the property. 
 
Now I believe that the members opposite are having a great deal 
of difficulty understanding this concept, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
after listening to the member from Regina Qu’Appelle in his 
statements the other day, stating categorically that nothing had 
changed because the mill rate was the same. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, indeed something had changed. The amount 
of taxes that the property owners were paying had increased, 
even though the mill rate had remained the same. The reason 
was is the assessment had changed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Unless perhaps it is that the members opposite are simply trying 
to ignore that fact, Mr. Speaker, because they want to say the 
mill rate is the same; you know, we’re doing such a good job 
the mill rate remained the same. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the assessment has gone up and the amount 
of taxes being collected has increased. 
 
So for the individual property taxpayer, they don’t care 
specifically what the mill rate is, they don’t care specifically 
what the assessment is — they care about the number of dollars 
they pay on property taxes at the end of the day. 
 
And the members opposite are completely ignoring that fact, 
Mr. Speaker, and what’s happened because of the rules that 
SAMA has brought in place, it’s not working fairly. There has 
been huge shifts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in particular in the last 
year, shifts to such entities as the hotels. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, SAMA needs to seriously review how it 
does its assessments, how it deals with properties, how it deals 
with evaluating properties across this province. We need to 
move, Mr. Deputy Speaker, more towards a line that is related 
to the revenues that those properties can generate because 
market values . . . SAMA doesn’t seem to be following them, at 
least not very closely. As properties rise and fall in the 
marketplace, you may be tied very much to a high market 
tidewater at a certain point for an extended period of time, 
which in no way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, relates to the 
revenue-generating capacity of that property. 
 
So we need to do some very serious reviewing of this 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, to determine whether or not it’s going 
to reflect the needs of the people of this province; whether the 
new SAMA regulations will provide for the people of 
Saskatchewan a fair and level playing ground for the payment 
of property taxes. Not only, Mr. Speaker, between the various 
corners of this province, they need to be fair and level with our 
neighbouring jurisdictions. Because when a company or a 
business or even an individual are looking to purchase a home, 
they take a look at all of the issues that affect their ability to 
pay, Mr. Speaker. Their ability to profit and their ability to pay. 
 

And property taxes is one of those issues. That’s why, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, over the last number of years there was some 
concern about the property tax issues between White City and 
Regina, because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the playing field was not 
level. Therefore a good number of citizens made the 
determination that for property tax purposes, it was beneficial 
for them to reside in White City rather than some of the other 
neighbouring communities including the city of Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(11:45) 
 
On a larger sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker, companies make that 
same evaluation. What are the property tax costs doing to 
business in Saskatchewan versus doing business in Alberta 
versus doing business in Manitoba or in North Dakota and 
Montana, Mr. Speaker? All other things being equal, those are 
part of the considerations. 
 
So on this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, we need to take a very 
serious look at how this Act is going to impact on property 
taxpayers. 
 
Certainly it has an impact on SAMA, but the really important 
question is, is how is SAMA going to impact on the property 
taxpayers of this province? Is it going to be done in a fair and 
accurate manner, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or is it going to again 
negatively impact certain areas of our economy such as what 
just happened to the hotel industry? 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, to give the stakeholders of this 
province and the opposition time to discuss with them the 
changes that are being proposed on SAMA, I would move that 
we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 24 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 24 — The Urban 
Municipality Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise in the 
House today to speak to the many and varied amendments 
contained in Bill No. 24, a Bill that attempts to address the 
concerns of municipal councils throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the main thrusts of this Bill is dealing with the voluntary 
amalgamation of municipalities. I’m glad to see that the 
members opposite are admitting the voluntary joining of 
neighbouring municipalities in the spirit of co-operation is the 
only direction to go for in the future of rural Saskatchewan, not 
forced like they’ve tried in the past. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the residents of this province are more 
than up to the challenge of getting together to save money and 
become more efficient. There’s never been any doubt about 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It took a long time for this 
government to see the light and use a common-sense approach 
rather than the top-down approach that they favour so highly. 
 



1500 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2001 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the constituency of Arm River there’s a 
good example of how municipal government amalgamation 
process works. The RMs of Arm River and the RMs of Willner 
have had joint offices for decades now and have worked very 
well. They share the costs of the office, including the wages of 
a competent administrator who looks after both rural 
municipalities. 
 
Over the years they have discussed the possibility of joining 
their two municipalities with an eye toward saving costs on 
road maintenance equipment, operation of a storage and repair 
shop, and many other associated costs. Of course the stumbling 
block in all of this has been the lack of a vision within The 
Urban Municipality Act to allow for such a joining of municipal 
government. 
 
I firmly believe that these two local governments could serve as 
a good, future example of how the process can be done, 
especially in the light of how close they are to actually 
beginning the process. I know of at least one village in my 
constituency that is leaning towards amalgamating with a rural 
municipality . . . municipal government in hopes of saving 
money and allowing the village a clear say as how it is to be 
done is good. With these kinds of ideas being considered by 
local councils, the will is there and all it needs is due process to 
proceed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the amendments proposed in this 
Bill, it looks like there are aspects of it that will help local 
governments to begin the voluntary process of amalgamation. 
But we must keep a watchful eye on this government to ensure 
that these provisions are exactly what they appear to be. 
 
People in rural Saskatchewan are slightly suspicious when they 
see that the same government, which only months ago were 
leaning in the area of forced of amalgamation in light of the 
Garcea report which recommended a drastic cut in the number 
of municipalities in Saskatchewan, now placing amendments on 
the Act which adhere directly to concerns — and I mean angry 
concerns — of the people out there in Saskatchewan. 
 
I can recall going to a meeting in Outlook, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
where there were over 500 constituents at it when Mr. Garcea 
was presenting his report, and everybody that got up and spoke 
on it was against forced amalgamation in that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amalgamation amendment makes it 
possible now, I see, for a village of less than a hundred people 
to be dissolved by ministerial order as opposed to the old way 
of needing an order of council provided by the cabinet. In my 
constituency, many villages fall into that category so it affects 
many of them. 
 
One good thing is it can streamline the order for the ones that 
want to be done. The only thing that worries me and worries 
mayors that have talked about this is that maybe the minister 
will make it . . . will do it in order of council . . . or will do it 
basically just with a stroke of a pen, just saying all towns under 
a hundred have to be done without consulting with it. And 
that’s what the towns are asking for. And that’s just the 
questions that have been raised to me. I see the minister shaking 
his head, which is good. 
 

But these are concerns that were raised when I passed the Bill 
out to them. So I said I will pass them on to make sure that 
before any of this happens, that they are consulted; that it is 
their wish that they want to go into the municipality — that 
they’re not forced. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe the amendments also 
include a process by which two or more municipalities may 
hold discussions previous to any amalgamation attempt. Of 
course in the negotiation process it has to be considered when 
we look at all the aspects of amalgamation, how it effects the 
taxpayers and the local governments involved. 
 
We would hope that in this process of discussion, the 
government has allowed each participant more than ample time 
by which they can begin the process of amalgamation in the 
most co-operative way possible. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, also the municipalities now have the 
ability to divide into wards for electorial purposes by way of an 
appointed municipal wards commission. 
 
I’m a bit concerned about the ward boundaries review process. 
This allows up to nine years between reviews or when new land 
is added to the municipality. Perhaps we should be including a 
process by which an interim review can be conducted if ward 
boundaries become an issue of immediate concern. I’m not sure 
how accountable the commission would be by only being held 
to an ad in the newspaper rather than filing a report with the 
minister. 
 
There’s no doubt that streamlining the amalgamation process 
and its results are important. But at the end of the day, there still 
must remain accountability to the taxpayers. And while the 
entire thrust of these amendments is to place more control in the 
hands of the local government so they can determine their own 
future, ultimately, it is the provincial government of the day that 
the people look to, to ensure that these new rules and 
regulations are followed correctly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill goes on to talk about the authority 
that municipal councils will be given to establish community 
advisory committees. Committees that will be able to provide 
input into the new amalgamated council from individual 
communities within the affected municipalities. 
 
It is interesting to note that this government is more than willing 
to allow this process within local governments. But on the issue 
of health care in Saskatchewan such a committee is rare and, in 
most cases, ignored. If the members opposite stand by the 
whole idea — advisory committees made up of average citizens 
— then perhaps they should look at this idea on the broader 
scale. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, also this Act gives municipalities the 
authority to limit the number of business licences granted in a 
certain class while limiting the number of similar businesses as 
well as deciding how much they will charge for these licences. 
 
Again some concerns have been raised to me about government 
at any level randomly deciding the fate of a businessman or 
businessperson or an entrepreneur whose risk is his own, and 
who ultimately may refuse an opportunity to develop a thriving 



June 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1501 

 

business based on the mood of a council on that particular day. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this sounds an awful like, like a present 
government policy of picking winners and losers in our 
economy and investing, you know, large sums of money. And I 
won’t even go into the ventures; they’ve been listed here 
numerous times. 
 
As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, municipalities now have the right 
to levy special purpose taxes specified in a reconstruction 
agreement. I would guess, as long as these special purpose taxes 
are respected and are just taxes for special purposes, then most 
would agree that this would form part of any reconstruction 
agreement. 
 
But I would be suspicious of any new form of taxation that this 
present government would suggest because we all know this 
government knows how to tax people and, indeed, they’re very 
good at it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s also a dispute resolution contained 
in this Act which is supposed to settle inner municipal disputes 
in regards to public utility services from one municipality to 
another. Previously, the minister was required to settle such 
disputes. Now if we have two sides in a dispute which can look 
at appointing . . . and if further needed, it can be settled by the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, indeed, there are times when utility 
services can’t come into question, and it’s up to councils and it 
can put a strain on future relations between the two councils. 
 
And there are a few other amendments in here that I know some 
of my other members are willing to look at. So with that, I will 
move to adjourn debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on that. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 23 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 23 — The Rural 
Municipality Amendment Act, 2001, be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to join in on Bill No. 23, The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act. 
 
It’s good to see the Act come forward as there is a number of 
Acts regarding municipal legislation. And after going through 
the firestorm that we went through last year at about this time 
regarding amalgamation — and some people would coin it as 
forced amalgamation, I may be one of them — when it was 
talking about going down to a certain amount of municipalities. 
And some people would say that that wouldn’t be forced but, 
when you set up how many municipalities there are going to be, 
unless they were all voluntarily going to jump into that map, it 
really did look like forced amalgamation. 
 
So I do give the government credit for coming in and, I guess 
maybe, first of all, taking a step back from that and looking at 
some legislation changes that will help foster amalgamation 

both in urban/urban to urban/rural, rural/rural and that’s what a 
number of these Bills are talking about. 
 
This one from rural to rural is very important. I’ve talked to a 
number of RMs that have joined services. And we’ve probably 
talked about it before, but a number of RMs that have joined 
services, they share administrators; they share equipment; 
they’ve done everything except the formal joining of the RMs. 
 
And this Bill talks about municipal districts. In other words, 
joining them into districts which, you know, that was one of 
the, I guess, the hard parts to understand what was going on last 
year with the minister at that time. And it should be noted, duly 
noted, that since that minister was no longer with Municipal 
Affairs, we’ve gone through two other ministers. 
 
So it’s been a very tough time in the last year for municipalities 
to deal with this subject, because not only have they had to deal 
with the emotions of the subject, they’ve also had to go through 
three different municipal ministers, and so the continuity just 
probably . . . has been very, very difficult. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I was talking about how 
they’ve joined, one of the . . . probably the most difficult things 
that I’ve heard from a number of the municipalities — and I 
know of a couple of resort villages that are going through the 
process — is the governance. It’s how they set that all up. This 
Bill just touches on it a little bit, and I know it’s touched in 
other Bills. But there are some real concerns with that. 
 
There are a couple of concerns with this Bill, Bill No. 23, 
regarding the clarity of some of the language that is used. Some 
of the clauses are worded very unclearly and it makes it very 
difficult for municipalities. And even on our side of the House, 
we had one member read it one way and another member read it 
the other way as far as voting and whether they can vote in 
more than one district, once the districts are formed, even 
though they have land in two or three districts. 
 
So there’s some of those issues that we would need clarification 
on as well as some of the RMs and ratepayers in those RMs 
would need clarification on also. 
 
One other concern that has been raised is section 362 which 
discusses the RM’s ability to provide discounts to those who 
pay their taxes promptly. And I know myself, as a landowner in 
the RM of Lajord, when the tax notice comes out and you see 
the different rates that you will pay, and the earlier you pay, the 
less amount. And unfortunately I haven’t been able to hit that 
. . . the amount that is least charged by the RM. I’m usually 
down to the 4 per cent or the 3 per cent instead of getting the 
bonus 5 per cent. 
 
But regardless, the municipality was able to set that. And this 
legislation is a little . . . raises some concerns with some of the 
RMs as to whether they’d still be able to set their own 
maximum rate discount. 
 
So there are some concerns with this Bill. And I think until we 
are able to deal with more of the municipalities, more of the 
RMs, even though a lot of the legislation — and I look through 
it and it refers to the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) organization that is in favour of a lot of 



1502 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2001 

 

this — we too would like to talk to some of the ratepayers that 
this will be affecting. 
 
Although I know their councillors probably have touched upon 
some of the legislation, we would like to follow it up with some 
of the ratepayers as well as the RMs before we let this Bill pass 
forward into Committee of the Whole. 
 
So right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move that we 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 23. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(12:00) 
 

Bill No. 25 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 25 — The 
Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2001 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. It’s my 
pleasure this afternoon to rise and make a few comments in 
regards to Bill No. 25, An Act to amend The Northern 
Municipalities Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Certainly, on this side of the House, we’ve always been in 
favour of amendments that would improve the ability of local 
governments in this province to be able to provide more and 
better services to their constituents. As we’d like to think on 
this side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a responsibility 
of those who are elected to do just that, provide services to the 
constituents, whether it’s their local municipality, or even to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Although we’ve heard quite often in the last few days, several 
ministers get up on the government side of the House and say it 
is not their responsibility to be keeping an eye on what their 
departments are doing. And we’ve heard that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, from the minister from Crown corporations, we’ve 
heard that from the minister who is responsible for Liquor and 
Gaming — it’s not their responsibility. 
 
Well one of the governments in this level of government, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in this House, the local governments, the local 
municipalities, have certainly looked with great favour on being 
provided an opportunity to be able to do just that — take 
responsibility for the people who’ve elected them and put them 
in place in order to provide the services that are necessary to 
operate municipal government in this province. 
 
Now we see here an Act to amend how northern municipalities, 
north of the so-called magic northern line, are having the 
opportunity to operate. Local governments, who over a great 
many years have seen their responsibilities reduced 
significantly, more specifically by NDP governments. 
 
We certainly can hearken back to the time of the 1950s when 
the government of that time under the ineffective and inept 
Tommy Douglas decided that the people of northern 
Saskatchewan should not be afforded the opportunity to be able 
to make management decisions on behalf of their communities 

as equally afforded that they should have had, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we wonder why, over the last several decades, that this 
weak and ineffective NDP government, who has had several 
opportunities of being in power, could not have corrected this 
much earlier. 
 
Instead what we see now, an Act that’s coming forward that we 
would like to think — but we’re not being able to see clearly in 
here — an opportunity for local government in the North to be 
able to . . . who are elected, elected officials in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And one of the things we 
noticed in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
people who are elected take their responsibilities, their 
fiduciary, very seriously. In fact, the enthusiasm in northern 
Saskatchewan for people who want to participate in the 
electoral process is second to no one, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In fact, to inform that House that what has happened, we found 
out that in the town, the northern town of La Loche, is that 
during the municipal elections last year, 54 people — 54 people 
— Mr. Deputy Speaker, vied for a position on town council. 
This is the type of enthusiasm, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is out 
there in northern Saskatchewan to be able to go and participate 
in the operation of their northern communities. 
 
But instead what do we see from this government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? We see a second Act — a second Act — that’s being 
brought forward, brought forward today where, in all reality, 
the opportunity for development in northern Saskatchewan will, 
in all likelihood, be passed on to an appointed board — an 
appointed board — Mr. Deputy Speaker, by this weak and 
ineffective NDP government — a government that is so afraid 
of the electoral process that they do not trust locally elected 
officials in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we see that this Act is 
so full of holes and we have a great deal of concern about it, 
we’re still gathering information from the communities in 
northern Saskatchewan is that . . . I think it’s important that 
today rather than do anything too rash that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
 
The officials that I have with me this afternoon are, to my right 
is Mr. Ernie Spencer, the assistant deputy minister. To my 
immediate left is the director of policy, program and 
development branch, is Mr. Hal Cushon. Two chairs to the right 
of me is Doug Matthies, who is the general manager of 



June 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1503 

 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation. 
 
And directly behind me is Mr. Jack Zepp, who is the director, 
administrative services branch. Directly behind Mr. Spencer is 
Laurier Donais, who is the senior manager of financial services, 
administrative services. And in the back chairs, in the back 
behind the bar, is Louise Greenberg, who is the director of 
inspections, the regulatory managements branch; and Al 
Syhlonyk, who is the manager of Crown lands resources from 
lands branch. 
 
Those are the officials, Mr. Chair, who are with me this 
afternoon. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I want to thank 
the minister’s officials for being here today. 
 
I have one quick question that’s being asked in my area for 
some constituents. The Stomp Pork Farm, in conjunction with 
the new generation co-op, in the area of Leroy, has proposed 
setting up, I believe it’s two or three new barns in new locations 
in the Leroy area. And people are asking when were the 
environmental impact studies completed on these new locations 
because construction is beginning very quickly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member opposite, in the 
process of working with the development of the hog industry in 
Saskatchewan, has been the practice now for several years, we 
engage, as you may appreciate, a number of different 
departments in doing work around determining and ensuring 
that we meet all of the environmental standards. The folks that 
are involved in this work are people from the Department of 
Environment and Resource Management; we have people from 
the Department of Agriculture who are involved in that process; 
we have a sign-off from Sask Health are involved in that whole 
process. 
 
Now in any occasion where we have growth or expansion of the 
hog industry — people from Sask Water would be the other 
group of individuals who would be involved in that process — 
we engage them in making sure that all of those kinds of 
reviews are done, so that at the end of the day when the 
decision is made to proceed with a project, that we have a 
sign-off from every one of those departments. 
 
I should say to you that we went a little bit further in the area of 
not Mr. Stomp’s but in the Big Sky operation, in the area from 
which I come from, partly because there is a large lake or water 
body from which the water upstream comes into the area. In 
that particular area we involved an advisory committee of men 
and women who pay attention to make sure that the kinds of 
regulatory issues that we talk about, that each of the 
departments are responsible for, are in fact achieved. And I 
would report to the House or to the committee and to you, 
Madam Member, that it’s been a very successful process if I 
might say. 
 
There were a number of individuals who initially were quite 
concerned about the expansion and growth of the hog industry, 
as I’m sure there will be questions and concerns in your area the 
minute that you go to grow it. And often people aren’t sure, 

particularly lay people who aren’t involved in the day-to-day 
practices, aren’t sure whether or not there is due diligence on 
each of the projects. 
 
So we engage that kind of a process and to say to you, in a long 
way to your question, that we think that the departments are 
meeting those kinds of expectations. There needs to be a 
sign-off on every one of them and where there are issues — 
where there actually are issues — people are presenting them 
and we try to engage the departments that are responsible to 
help answer some of those questions. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess my 
question is, from what you’ve said, is I’m assuming that all 
those studies yet have not been completed for the new barns in 
the Leroy area or the new generation co-op and can they 
proceed with construction without having those studies 
completed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, that there would 
not be approval, there would not be a sign-off to proceed with 
the building of the projects until all of the due diligence was 
completed by each of the departments. 
 
And I don’t know at what stage that’s at right now but I will get 
for you, Madam Member, is an undertaking as to where they are 
with their development work and provide it for you so that if 
you do get inquiry around it that you’ll be able to speak to it. So 
we’ll get that information for you. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My other area of 
questioning is in concerns with the CSAP 
(Canada-Saskatchewan Adjustment Program) program which I 
believe the applications are now out and available. Do you have 
the total sums of money that were allocated to each of three 
prairie provinces for this program? 
 
(12:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I’ve been 
searching for the news releases from Manitoba and Alberta just 
to try to find what amount they provided. It looks like 
Manitoba’s share of the 500 million is about 36.9 million — the 
provincial funding of 36.9 million — and the federal portion is 
about 55.2 million. That’s Manitoba’s. 
 
And it looks like Alberta’s share is the 126 million, and the 
provincial funding is 84.5 million. 
 
In Saskatchewan’s case, our share, I believe, was 118 million 
. . . or sorry, 72 million, and the federal share was 118 million. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know there’s 
been concerns expressed that this was a program that was 
supposed to address emergency needs. And I know I heard 
yourself saying, at different times, that you were in a bit of a 
dilemma. You had to sign the CFIP (Canada Farm Income 
Program) program in order to access the emergency funds, 
which would be the funds for the CSAP program. 
 
And yet it isn’t fairly allocated — I don’t feel, and a lot of 
farmers have expressed this same concern — for the provincial 
needs or the numbers of farmers, because of course 



1504 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2001 

 

Saskatchewan is looking at more farmers and a greater need, 
having a greater sector of oil and seeds. 
 
So did you feel that this was a fair method of allocating the 
funds? And did you address this to your counterparts in 
Ottawa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the member 
rightly identifies . . . And I know through her own discussions 
that she’s had with the agricultural community of which she 
represents, a great deal of discussion about how there is an 
unfairness in the way in which the allocations are made. And 
that’s absolutely correct. 
 
And we’ve taken the position and we’ll take the position again 
that we need . . . In our discussions over the next several 
months, in the review of the entire safety net process, we’re 
going to be encouraging and pressing for a change in the 
formula. Because clearly when you have a large industry like 
we have in Saskatchewan today and we have more farms that 
are — and huge, huge grain and oilseed industry — and at the 
end of the day when it comes to making the allocation, they 
don’t apply the allocation based on need. 
 
And so in this province we’re going to be taking that . . . in fact 
in the next couple of days this is going to be one of the pieces 
that we’re going to be sharing again or discussing with the 
all-party committee that we’re meeting with in Ottawa on 
Tuesday. And I believe a member from your . . . the critic of 
Agriculture from your party will also be there and I know that 
he will be addressing a similar issue, as I will be, as it relates to 
the current formulas that we have today. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. A little closer to 
home then, provincially, I’m also having concerned farmers . . . 
that it also isn’t being allocated fairly or to meet the need within 
the province. And in particular I’m talking about farmers on the 
eastern side of the province, where they were flooded, so their 
incomes were extremely low, if at all. And yet it’s based on 
NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) calculations, and 
therefore it’s based on your net income. 
 
So the farmers on the eastern side of the province are finding 
that they will get little to no payment from the CSAP program. 
And again, so that we’re, even on a local level, provincially, 
we’re missing the need. 
 
So has the government ever considered allocating that money 
on an acreage-based payment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Madam Chair, to the member. I think 
when you take a look at the way in which the payments are paid 
out, I think both in Saskatchewan and Manitoba, we’re using 
the net sales approach in our formula. 
 
I think in Alberta what they’re using is they are using the 
acreage payment. And I think in our . . . from Saskatchewan’s 
perspective, we believe that the more fair and equitable way of 
doing it is to looking at what your net sales are, because we 
have a huge variety of different land types across the province 
and it would be fairer, in our view, to pay it out based on the 
quality and productive level of your land. 
 

And that’s been the rationale that we’ve been using to make our 
payments. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess it still 
puzzles me as to again, this is considered an emergency fund to 
meet needs. You have agreed that it’s not . . . basically you’re 
saying on a local level you think that we should be meeting the 
highest sales. But on a national level, it’s unfair for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So on a national level, if it’s unfair for Saskatchewan to award 
Alberta more money, and of course their income is higher due 
to their cattle sales being very healthy right now, and our grain 
sales are much lower, so therefore Saskatchewan is allocated 
less money. 
 
And yet on a provincial level this becomes fair. That seems to 
be quite a conflict of views. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Madam Chair . . . or Mr. 
Chairman, to the member, we wouldn’t disagree with the 
member at all when she talks about the fact that you have today 
in Canada disparity about the way in which the process is paid 
out. We agree with you in that process. 
 
But when you take into account the five-year averages today, 
under which our program is administered today, of which 
farmers have the option . . . And we look at the net sales. What 
we’re doing in fact is recognizing that there’s an equity here 
amongst producers because it’s based on what, at the end of the 
day, they produce. 
 
If you paid it out on an acreage payment, you’ll have some 
farmers who of course have larger tracts of land and of course 
they would then be paid out at a different level. And you have 
productive levels of land today that are far different across the 
province. 
 
And we think . . . And the policy we’ve been using by and 
large, is to try to use or measure at least a payment process 
which gives more equity to the producer. And that’s why we 
use the net farm sales or the average of the net farm sales in our 
calculations. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I guess in 
that area we sort of have to agree to disagree because it is a 
capped program, so therefore if a producer had more land and it 
was done on an acreage-based payment it would still be capped. 
So therefore they wouldn’t receive phenomenal sums of money 
as opposed to the smaller farmer. 
 
Moving into a different area, in The Western Producer a 
number of days ago, on May 17, it says that you will be meeting 
with the Standing Committee on Agriculture, and you 
mentioned that earlier in the answer to one of your questions. 
And I believe that meeting will take place on June 5. And it 
mentions in the article that you plan to take a number of farm 
leaders with you to Ottawa. Could I ask who those leaders 
would be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the meetings 
are in fact on Tuesday so we’re leaving on Monday night and 
the presentation to the standing committee is on Tuesday 



June 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1505 

 

morning. 
 
I’ve been working over the last several months, since I’ve 
become actually the Minister of Agriculture, with five farm 
organizations in consultation to help me with some of the work 
that we’ve been doing, not only around this particular trip that 
we’re taking to Ottawa together but in our discussions earlier in 
the year when we were talking about emergency aid and the 
kind of emergency aid that we thought Saskatchewan producers 
should be . . . we should be lobbying for. 
 
And those five groups that we’re including or I have included in 
these discussions, include these: the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool; 
the National Farmers Union; APAS (Agricultural Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan); the pro — is it Pro West? — the 
Sask Rally Group; and SARM are the five organizations that 
I’ve had at the table with me now for probably better than 10 
months in a variety of different discussions that we’ve been 
working on. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is the province 
paying for these leaders to accompany you to Ottawa? And 
once they’re there, have you made arrangements with the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture for them to have an 
opportunity to actually speak with them? Because my 
understanding is you do have to pre-arrange that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The process, Mr. Chair to the member, is 
that the standing committee are in fact the people that are in 
charge of who is permitted to speak or not speak. And we took 
it upon ourselves to invite the farm organizations and groups 
because they, in fact, were not invited by the standing 
committee. 
 
And so our correspondence to the standing committee in Ottawa 
was that we felt that it would be important to have our 
producers, producer organizations, there. 
 
I think that that will be the case for Manitoba as well. I believe 
that they’re bringing some of their farm organizations and their 
producer groups. 
 
I can’t answer for Alberta yet; although I do know that the 
minister’s going to be there. 
 
We will be picking up the costs of the members who will be 
travelling with us. However I expect that if there’s going to be 
any ability for those organizations to speak, they would have, 
they would have needed to be advised that by the standing 
committee. 
 
And the way in which the agenda, I believe, is established, is 
that there are six of us who are going to have the ability to 
speak — three of the ministers from each of the three provinces 
and then the agricultural critics from each of the three provinces 
would have an opportunity to speak. And that would take about 
an hour from what I’m told. 
 
We’re dedicated . . . or designated about two hours, of which 
then the standing committee, the standing committee would be 
responding to us then. We would be responding then to the 
standing committee, to the questions that they might have of us. 
 

But it’s not my understanding that the members who are going 
to be accompanying us will be allowed or permitted any 
opportunity to speak at the committee level. Now that doesn’t 
preclude the fact that when the committee’s not meeting — 
both before and after — that some of our farm groups or leaders 
won’t have an opportunity to rub shoulders with some of the 
members of the committee and/or have a discussion with the 
press that are there. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In speaking with 
the Clerk for the Standing Committee on Agriculture, I 
understand that you have three hours for the three Prairie 
province ministers and their corresponding critics. 
 
Now in taking on the initiative to bring along the farm leaders 
and yet not having any confirmation from the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture that they will be allowed to speak, 
have you arranged other meetings for them while they’re there 
so that they could perhaps speak to some of the Members of 
Parliament or other areas where perhaps they would have some 
impact? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. Mr. Deputy 
Chair, to the member, I have not taken it upon ourselves to 
arrange a host of meetings for the members of the committee 
who are attending with me. 
 
But I can tell you that individual members have made some 
arrangements on their own. I met with the committee last week 
. . . Or maybe it was early, actually earlier this week, I met with 
the committee members and they had advised me that there are 
a number of people whom they’re going to be meeting with 
while we’re in Ottawa, and those arrangements by and large 
have been looked after on their own. 
 
I know that the president of SARM is speaking to one of the 
committees, I believe on Monday morning. And other members 
of the committee that are going with us will be speaking 
individually to some of the members that are on the committee. 
I know that. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m going to move 
on to a totally different area again now, and that’s the area of 
ethanol. Up until now it’s been handled through your 
department, and just recently your government announced a 
new study to be done in this province on ethanol, headed by the 
member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. What money will be 
made available to this member to conduct his study on ethanol? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member. I 
think that for a couple of years now, we’ve been talking a great 
deal about the importance of trying to grow the value added in 
the province as it relates to agriculture. And when you look at 
the kinds of development that’s occurred in the province, on the 
value-added side, we have a great deal of optimism and there 
have been several and many successes. 
 
But clearly, one of the areas that we think that there can be 
tremendous progress made over the next several years is to put 
a great deal more energy and resources into the area of ethanol 
growth. 
 
(12:30) 



1506 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2001 

 

And so I’m extremely pleased and I have to say excited about 
what opportunities exist for us. We can take for sure the 
example that’s in your riding and try to expand other 
opportunities like it or others that are in the province today 
where people are talking about the value of ethanol, particularly 
when we see the cost of fuel and petroleum in our province 
today. 
 
The member that’s been named to work on this particular piece 
will not only be . . . will not be working in isolation of the 
development of the project. The Department of Agriculture and 
Food will be closely associated to the work with the member. 
 
I know that because his mandate will be conducted through the 
Department of Economic Development, that won’t preclude all 
of the other areas of which there’ll be need for him to 
participate in discussions with. Because, as you can appreciate, 
the Department of Agriculture has huge opportunities in this 
area, so we’ll be much tied to that. My officials that have been 
doing a great deal of work in the past several years around the 
ethanol piece will be very much involved in that process. 
 
I know that there are resources, and there have been both 
financial and people resources that have been invested from the 
Crown investments side into what we might do with ethanol 
into the future. 
 
So it will be a collective piece of work or approach that will be 
undertaken by the member including Economic Development, 
Agriculture, Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The person from 
the Lanigan Pound-Maker Agventures, of course, is Brad 
Wildemen, and it’s interesting that you’re asking him to 
participate in this. I know he’s made presentations to your 
government for a number of years. I would venture to guess 
more than five. 
 
Jeff Passmore of Iogen, which is an eastern company, said that 
he’s questioned cabinet ministers here for nearly two years on 
why Saskatchewan is the only province west of New Brunswick 
that puts an excise tax on ethanol produced. And I know Brad 
Wildemen has supplied the government with volumes of 
information, and given them contact numbers and resources in 
which to look into. 
 
What have you been doing with that information that you now 
need to do a study that’s going to take an additional six months, 
which is an additional six months that the industry will be on 
hold? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say, Mr. Deputy Chair, to the 
member that she’s correct when she says that there’s been a 
great deal of work in discussion and conversation that’s gone 
on, particularly with people like Mr. Wildemen, who serves 
also on our ACRE committee on the economic development 
side and on the resource development side, because he brings to 
the table a great deal of expertise as it relates to the 
development of ethanol into the future as well as the industry 
itself, the livestock industry in the feedlots. Because there’s a 
huge interest, at least, and more than that on this side of the 
House, to look at how we’re going to grow the livestock 
industry in the future in this province. 

Now we shouldn’t misconstrue the notion that over the next 
four or five months that the member who’s going to be working 
on the project, on the ethanol project, will be focusing only his 
attention to ethanol growth in areas similar to what we are 
doing today in Lanigan. But we’ll be looking at the broader 
piece around how we can develop strategies in growing the 
ethanol industry. And we’ll be talking to people like Mr. 
Passmore, I know, to a larger degree. And there are new and 
innovative ways today that are occurring into the whole 
industry of a new technologies as it relates to ethanol and the 
production of natural fuels. 
 
And so our member, who will be working on that particular 
piece, we say will be taking into account all of the methodology 
that’s in place today, looking at the most modern, new 
technology and then trying to ascertain how we’re going to 
develop in a Saskatchewan industry as it relates to value added, 
whether some of it can be and will be attached to the livestock 
industry which we have today in your constituency, can we 
attach some of it to other industries in the province today to 
generate ethanol? And that will be his target, I believe, over the 
next couple of months. 
 
So we’re not going to spend a lot of time studying a lot of what 
we already know. But it will be looking at the technology that 
we have today — how you can expand that technology, how 
you can integrate it in a value-added fashion — and we’ll be 
using the expertise and technology, particularly in the livestock 
side of production of ethanol with people like Mr. Wildemen. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You had 
mentioned that the announcement of this new study had quite 
pleased and excited you previously in one of your answers. And 
quite honestly, as you describe it, it very much concerns me 
because it seems to have a broad, very fuzzy mandate, 
something that should have been done over the past 10 years 
rather than starting to look at it now; when you should be 
looking at the specifics now rather than the whole broad area of, 
perhaps, maybe we could have value added. You’ve given lip 
service to value added for a number of years. We should be 
down to the specific plans and it doesn’t sound like that’s going 
to be the case. 
 
Husky Oil has showed a great deal of interest in ethanol. Has 
anyone from your department actually contacted Husky Oil and 
looked into dollars and cents? Are they going to be interested in 
picking up this type of production and will it be worthwhile for 
our province? Has anyone contacted Husky? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member that I have 
had personal discussions with the folks from Husky Oil. I know 
that the minister responsible for Energy and Mines has had 
discussions with the people from Husky. 
 
And I can say to you that the member from 
Regina/Qu’Appelle/Lumsden who is undertaking the bigger 
piece on ethanol today will be having, or may have already had 
a conversation with the people from Husky as well. I believe he 
has. 
 
And so this is not that we haven’t been in touch with each other; 
we do have some issues that we’re continuing to work through. 
And in the bigger piece of the development of this project, we 



June 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1507 

 

know that at the end of the day we’re going to find some 
solutions of which we’re going to be able to assist each other in. 
 
Clearly when we go to develop this kind of an industry you 
need to have a market. And you need to have somebody who is 
going to market on your behalf. And for sure the assumption of 
the Mohawk retail industry in this province by Husky has been 
extremely important. We know that in our discussions with 
them — and I think I can say this without breaching any 
confidence — is that they have interest in developing the 
ethanol industry to a larger degree in Saskatchewan, taking 
some of their own retail outlets today and enhancing what 
they’re able to do in terms of sales. 
 
And clearly when you take a look at what the cost of fuel is 
today in Saskatchewan, at I think 83.9 or 84 cents today at the 
gas pump, this whole issue today of producing ethanol and 
integrating it into the fuel system is very economical. And not 
only do we have, in my view, an opportunity to provide a 
additional new source of energy in our province but we also 
have the opportunity to expand today what the value-added side 
of ethanol can do. 
 
And I only use your example again of what has happened in 
Lanigan, because it has the excellent complementary process 
that we have today in growing the livestock. And on this side of 
the House, as I’ve said in this ministry, we have a huge interest 
in taking what we have today — to some degree I might say a 
fledgling livestock industry in comparison to what’s happening 
in other parts of the world and growing it, or even for that 
matter, in other parts of our country — and taking that and 
growing it to a larger degree. 
 
And for sure, I might say, that the role that the member from 
Regina/Qu’Appelle/Lumsden and people like Husky and people 
like Brad . . . Mr. Wildemen will play in the next several 
months around this whole piece will be extremely important. 
And those undertakings we’re already undergoing. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Brad Wildemen 
and other . . . there are other people that are interested in setting 
up a similar facility that Brad has set up at Lanigan. They were 
pleased and excited when the budget was read . . . the 
2000-2001 budget was read. A lot of them were here that day. 
And in the budget address and I just want to quote page . . . I 
believe it’s 39: 
 

The government is introducing a five-year ethanol 
incentive that begins in the year 2000. It will rebate a 
portion of the fuel tax to the fuel wholesaler on eligible 
ethanol-blended fuel, produced and consumed in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
How much money have we spent on that to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, to date we 
haven’t expended anything on this particular project yet. And 
the reason for why we haven’t done that is that it was 
conditional of course upon an agreement that would be signed 
between Pound-Maker and Husky. And that agreement has not 
yet been signed because the volume today that’s produced out 
of Pound-Maker makes its way into the US (United States) 
market. 

And so we have not yet had an opportunity to exercise our 
opportunity to provide the kinds of financial resources to the 
commitment that we made, because the product today is not 
staying in our province but is being sold to other markets. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thanks, Mr. Minister. And that opens up a 
whole . . . another sector of questioning but I will get to that 
another day because I have some other members who have 
some timely questions that they wish to ask. 
 
The one remaining question I would like to ask though — and it 
is a concern to the operation in Lanigan and to the other 
interested member or people in Saskatchewan who would like 
to set up a similar operation — they’re very concerned that with 
this new study that’s going to be done, is there a possibility that 
we will be setting up an ethanol plant here in Saskatchewan that 
will be a new Crown corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair, to the member. 
That it would be a hasty expectation or a response on my part to 
suggest for a minute that we have any kind of a methodology in 
place today that would look at what structures should look like 
when we’re developing the industry. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite that over the years 
we’ve had a number of opportunities to be involved in 
partnering with the private sector or producer organizations to 
assist them in the developing of particular initiatives. And so, I 
mean, we shouldn’t be ruling out the involvement of any of the 
opportunities that may be necessary down the way. 
 
And as I said earlier, we have a strong interest here in growing 
this industry, have a strong interest in advancing the ethanol 
opportunities in our province along with the livestock industry. 
 
So as much as you may be looking for some definition in this 
response, I can’t provide that because we need to take a look at 
what kinds of opportunities are available, what kind of 
financing we’ll be requiring in the various different projects that 
will be assumed, and who can be the partnership players in 
getting the industry to where I think we need to get it to. 
 
So as we move along over the next several weeks and months, 
we’ll be able to, I think, more definitively answer that question 
as we include all of the partners that need to be involved in that 
process. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, as you are 
aware, on the west side, primarily on the west side of the 
province at this point anyway, there are severe drought 
conditions. The livestock industry, of course, is the first people 
to be affected by that situation. Recent rains in the last week or 
so may have helped to a limited degree in the grains and 
oilseeds sector and specialty crops, but in a lot of cases the 
situation for livestock producers is very, very serious. 
 
And I’m wondering what your department is doing, first of all, 
in monitoring that situation, and when we can expect your 
government to move with initiatives in that area, specifically for 
cattle producers in terms of feed supply and water supply for 
their herd. 
 
(12:45) 



1508 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2001 

 

As you know cattle producers are now, a lot of them are looking 
at very seriously — and it already has begun — selling down 
their cow/calf pairs. And that takes a great deal of time to 
rebuild that kind of . . . rebuild the herd when that starts taking 
place. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, in terms of monitoring and in terms of 
program development, where are we and at what stage are those 
discussions at now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To the 
member, I should say to the member first that I’ve been 
watching very closely what’s been happening on the west side 
of the province given the kinds of weather conditions that 
you’ve had over the last several months, and the low amount of 
runoff that you’ve had, and of course the lack of water supply 
that appears to be or is in that area. 
 
So we’ve been in close contact and work with our 
Environmental Canada people to see what the precipitation data 
has been. And we’ve been monitoring on a weekly basis the 
crop report and the moisture content and topsoil content in the 
area. 
 
I’ve asked, as I’ve shared with some of your members in the 
past week, or week and a half, some direction that we want to 
be taking and looking at around what we might be doing here. 
 
And I should say to the member as well that this past week we 
had an opportunity to meet with the stock growers here, who 
represent the livestock industry in the province, to ask them 
what kinds of direction we might be taking to assist in this 
entire process. And of course as you can appreciate, this won’t 
be an easy resolve because some of the producers in the 
province have in fact taken on their own responsibility of 
managing their livestock and have made arrangements in a 
variety of different ways to managing. 
 
But we know that there are things that we need to be looking at, 
and these are some of the things that we’ve been looking at, if 
there are things that we might be able to do in the tracking of 
the markets and also around the tracking prices of livestock 
around the province. We said that we’re going to be doing some 
work around making sure that farmers and producers know 
where there is hay in the province, if they need to provide the 
hay. 
 
We’re also saying to producers today that if there needs to be 
some involvement on the part of the province in the movement 
of livestock from one part of the province to another, that we 
should be looking at ways in which we might be able to do that 
with them. 
 
Also saying to them that if there are . . . I’m going to be saying 
to them if there are things that we might be able to do to assist 
with the pumping of water or to reduce the rates for which 
producers today have rented some equipment are the things that 
we can do around that area. 
 
So these are some of the discussions that we’ve been having 
and putting together today for producers in the province. 
 
Now I know, as I said earlier, that there is some trepidation here 

of course when we talk about what kinds of incentives or 
initiatives you can put into place and some of that guidance was 
provided to us this week. Because as I say to you, there are 
some producers who have already looked after what needs to be 
done, do it on a regular basis, on an annual basis because they 
know that there isn’t any control around the weather conditions. 
And because they’re entrepreneurs, knowing that from time to 
time they’re going to face these kinds of issues, that they need 
to find solutions to them on their own, and many have. 
 
But having said that, there are a number of things that we’re 
looking at, as I’ve identified, to see what we might be able to or 
see if we can be of some asset to some of those ranchers that 
you’re talking about. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I don’t 
know whether you’re aware of it or not, but just moments ago 
Alberta announced a program for their livestock producers. 
They have announced a rather significant program, as a matter 
of fact, for their livestock producers. 
 
It is a program that will be an acreage-payment-type program in 
nature. They will provide $4 per acre under the native forage 
component of their farm income assistance program. This is a 
program that will help in a very significant way the producers 
— livestock producers — in Alberta. 
 
They are looking at this and have been monitoring their 
situations, similar to what we have been for some period of time 
now. And they have acted this afternoon, I understand. I have 
the briefing information with me here now. 
 
They will be paying that out as soon as possible. And they’re 
doing it, as I said, under the farm income assistance program. 
There will be . . . Land that is eligible for it will be under: 
fenced native forage designated for livestock grazing in this 
year of 2001; a native forage designated for hay production; 
land registered under the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Program) permanent cover program; grazing leases within the 
province of Alberta; specialized areas grazing leases within the 
province of Alberta. And they’ve also put in a modest program 
for honey producers as well. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you do and should know that Alberta 
producers have now a program in place to benefit their 
livestock industry. They haven’t at this point done anything 
with regard to crops and oilseeds areas, but apparently they are 
considering it as well. 
 
They are looking at other assistance type of programs for their 
livestock industry as well. So, Mr. Minister, I would suggest 
that you and your department move these discussions along as 
quickly as possible to ensure that this program be put in place 
as quickly as possible, if you’re indeed looking at it. 
 
Alberta’s problem has been in place for some period of time, 
and yes, I’m aware that they have been perhaps even more 
affected by a drought than we have. At least last year and into 
. . . but now the drought is very large and very real on the west 
side of the province, and we are getting many calls from 
livestock producers saying that we need to put in place a 
program of this nature as quickly as possible. 
 



June 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1509 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I would ask you to comment on how soon we 
can expect the discussions that you and your department have 
been working on, will be completed, and how soon we can 
expect an announcement after that, in Saskatchewan, with 
regard to a livestock assistance program? 
 
The areas that are . . . primarily is the southwest and the west 
side of the province that is affected, and the concerns surround 
native grazing lands, obviously, leased land, and any projects 
with respect to water. Virtually all the dugouts on the west side 
of the province are dry or will be dry soon. Feed supplies are in 
very, very short supply. Cattle producers are shipping their 
cattle to other areas for feed supplies, and they’re bringing in 
large quantities of feed at this point in time. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, the time to act is getting very, very near. 
Alberta has acted this afternoon, and on behalf of cattle 
producers in this province I’m wondering how soon we can 
expect action from your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say, Mr. Chairman, to the 
member opposite, that I share exactly the same kinds of 
concerns that he has as it relates to the livestock industry in our 
province. And I’ve said to the member opposite that we too 
have been paying attention to what’s been happening to the 
moisture content and to what’s been happening with the levels 
of moisture across the province and some of the hardship that 
producers are facing, particularly in the livestock industry. 
 
And it’s true that the Alberta government — although I have 
not yet seen the press release because it’s obviously relatively 
warm and has just been released — but I have had some 
discussions over the last couple of years with the Alberta 
ministers because the ministers of Alberta have been 
experiencing . . . And when you take a look at the kinds of 
precipitation that’s been occurring across the two provinces 
over the last couple of years, you can see that the Alberta 
drought has clearly been far more influential in terms of 
difficulty than it has been in Saskatchewan. Not to play down 
the issue. 
 
But I say to the member opposite that we’ll continue to advance 
the notions that I’ve already highlighted for you that we’re 
planning on working around, and will continue to complete our 
discussions and work with the livestock industry in the 
province. 
 
I know that from our meetings on Wednesday what the 
livestock industry has said to us is that we should proceed very 
carefully and cautiously down this path. And we’re going to 
continue to take advice from them to determine what exactly it 
is that we’ll be able to do at the end of the day. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. In 
following the questioning of my colleague from Kindersley, and 
making the minister fully aware of the difficulty that the lack of 
moisture has presented in the southwest in particular, we’re at a 
point frankly in that area where rain right now will not help the 
pastures of the southwest part of the province. The native grass 
needs early spring moisture and at this point it’s gone 
backwards to the point where native grass probably is not going 
to recover sufficiently for grazing, which bring us to a very 
unique situation. 

I was just notified about it in the last hour and that is grazing 
co-ops that are operating in the southwest. With native grass not 
being in abundance, in fact, in kind of a critical condition right 
now, these co-ops face a very unique and special circumstance. 
 
As co-ops of course, they’re operating on a marginal basis; 
they’re non-profit. They make . . . they charge their members 
just enough money to pay the costs associated with it. But with 
the grass difficulties they’re facing this year they may not be 
able to either keep their cattle in the pasture, in the co-op 
pasture. And if they do they run the risk of destroying the grass, 
basically, for next year. However, if they take the cattle out to 
save the grass, they will not raise enough money to pay the 
costs associated with it. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what I would ask is this: have you or your 
department looked at some way of mitigating the costs for 
community co-op pastures in the face of these difficult drought 
circumstances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I’d say to the member that 
we’ve been looking at this very issue that he raises with us, and 
clearly I can give the undertaking this afternoon that we’re 
looking at how we might be able to adjust some of those rates to 
ensure that it offsets some of the difficulties and issues that 
you’ve raised here with me this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I have one final 
question I wanted to ask the minister about drought related 
issues in the southwest. 
 
We have had discussions, informally and formally, over the last 
couple of months and the issue of water is of particular concern 
to the cattle operators of the southwest. They’re all familiar, 
frankly, with the one-third assistance program available through 
the PFRA, but that program does not extend to individuals who, 
because of drought, have had to haul water for their cattle 
throughout this past winter, and in some cases are hauling water 
even now. 
 
And I was wondering if the department, as part of their drought 
relief strategy, would consider the costs associated with hauling 
water and buying water for cattle. Not just pumping it, because 
if there’s no water resources nearby, all the relief in pumping 
won’t help if there’s no water there. And some of the other 
provisions that are being considered will be of no effect in those 
particular and peculiar situations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Chair, to the member, that we, 
in our approach of looking at what we might find as solutions, 
and clearly in our discussions this week with the livestock 
associations, they’re telling us that we should be looking for 
longer-term solutions. And there’s no question that we should 
be. 
 
And so our discussions will include what you’ve just raised 
with me this afternoon in our deliberations as to see how we 
might be able to find some way of sorting this out. Because 
clearly the point that was made earlier by your colleague on 
your side of the House about the notion of preserving the 
livestock industry is hugely important here, particularly on the 
cow-calf side. 
 



1510 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2001 

 

If we’re going to be growing this industry in Saskatchewan, 
then we need to make sure that we can protect the cow-calf 
industry. And in many situations that we’re talking about here 
today, these are exactly the people of whom we’re needing to 
find some kinds of options for. 
 
And so my undertaking to you will be to continue to look at 
what kind of solutions we can find for the industry. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Have a pleasant weekend everyone. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 13:00. 
 
 
 


