















































Hansard: April 25, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 735 
 April 25, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present petitions on 
behalf of some of my constituents who are concerned about the 
loss of their community-based ambulance services. And the 
petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 

And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Cudworth and Prud’homme. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
about two of the government’s Crown corporations, SaskPower 
and SaskEnergy. Both recently announced significant rate 
increases for residential and business customers. 
 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to the Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, most of the signatures are constituents of mine 
from Lucky Lake, Birsay, and Beechy, although I do have 
signatures from Hudson Bay, Saskatchewan, as well. And I’m 
happy to present them. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today as well regarding the EMS (emergency medical 
services) report which we believe will have a detrimental effect 
on rural Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are all from Rose 
Valley and Archerwill. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people in my area concerned about the high energy costs. The 
prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 

Signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Melfort, Tisdale, and Kinistino. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
conversions of some paved highways to gravel. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel, commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents, and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 
 

And the petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Briercrest and Drinkwater. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens very 
concerned about the ambulance services in this province. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Rose Valley and Archerwill. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
the people in Swift Current and area who are concerned about 
their hospital facilities in Swift Current. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today this position — petition rather — has been 
signed by people from the city of Swift Current, from Maple 
Creek, from Beechy as well. 



736 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2001 

 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of the citizens of the Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency who are concerned about their ambulance service. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by the citizens of Radville, Gladmar, and 
Lake Alma. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present 
a petition concerning the retention of the Hafford hospital. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take necessary steps to ensure the Hafford 
hospital remains open. 
 

And signed by the good citizens of Hafford, Richard, and 
Speers. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here from 
citizens concerned about huge profits — SaskPower, 
SaskEnergy. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition has been signed by the good citizens from Craik, 
Bladworth, Saskatoon, Regina, Aylesbury, and Langham. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of concerned citizens. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 
 

The petitioners come from the communities of Mozart, 
Wynyard, and Wishart. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the 
high energy costs. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood, Saskatoon, Medstead, Lloydminster, and Meadow 
Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition also 
signed by folks from Saskatchewan concerned with the high 
energy costs and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to the Saskatchewan 
consumers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the folks from Spiritwood 
and Leoville. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 

To discontinue use of public money for funding events that 
are pornographic; and 
 
Petitions that are addendums to sessional papers nos. 3, 4, 
5, 10, 58, 65, and 110. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 29 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: in the fiscal year 2000-2001, 
how much revenue did the provincial government take in 
from the 1 per cent fire prevention tax on insurance 
premiums, and how much funding was then provided to the 
office of the Fire Commissioner? 



April 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 737 

 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 29 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: was SaskTel’s decision to initiate 
IQ&A Partnership approved by cabinet and, if so, what is 
the number of the order in council authorizing this 
investment; (b) was SaskTel’s 1999 decision to acquire the 
remaining 40 per cent of IQ&A Partnership approved by 
cabinet and, if so, what is the number of the order in 
council approving this acquisition; and (c) was SaskTel’s 
decision to wind down IQ&A Partnership approved by 
cabinet and, if so, what is the number of the order in 
council approving this decision? 
 

And then there’s a whole series of additional questions along 
this line, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 29 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: what specific policy changes have 
each of CIC, SaskPower, SaskTel, SGI, and SaskEnergy 
implemented in response to the October 15, 1998 report of 
the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations on 
Channel Lake? 
 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 29 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: how many rural municipalities 
across Saskatchewan have paid for their portion of RCMP 
services to date, and please provide a list of those RMs that 
have paid. 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 29 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Crown Investments: what 
does the government mean by the phrase, quote: “due 
diligence” and what objective standards are there to 
determine when due diligence has been achieved? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Merci, M. le Président. Mes chers 
collègues, je vous présentez mon ami, Raymond Mathieu de 
Bombardier. Bienvenue, M. Mathieu en Saskatchewan.  
 
Id like to ask all my colleagues, and to you and through you, 
Mr. Speaker, to recognize my friend, all the way from St. 
Laurent, Quebec, Raymond Mathieu from Bombardier. 
Welcome, Mr. Mathieu. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to welcome a citizen of the province in your 
gallery; a former Speaker of the province who I think will be 
well-known to all members of the Assembly, John 
Brockelbank. John it’s very nice to have you with us this 
afternoon. 
 

I had the pleasure of serving with John in the Assembly; a 
pleasure which I very much . . . an opportunity which I very 
much enjoyed. 
 
And I’m sure all members will want to join me in welcoming 
John back to the Assembly and recognize that this is a member 
who served our Assembly over a span of time that exceeds two 
and a half decades. So we really appreciate you being here, 
John. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the legislature, 29 
students who are seated in the west gallery. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Vollet. They’re from historic 
Davin School which is located not that many blocks away from 
the legislature. And it’s my pleasure to often welcome the 
students of Mr. Vollet here at the legislature. And I would ask 
all members to give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and to all members through you, my cousin, 
Peter Cline, who’s sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And 
Peter is a farmer at Zelma, which is our ancestral home. 
 
And as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, Peter ran unsuccessfully 
for the Liberal Party on a few occasions. And fortunately or 
unfortunately, depending on your point of view, he didn’t quite 
make it. But he has managed to make it to the Legislative 
Assembly today. And so I’d like all members to join me in 
welcoming Peter here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s my pleasure today to introduce Ms. Tanya 
Petrova, a guest visiting us from Bulgaria. Ms. Petrova is the 
executive director of BARDA, the Bulgarian Association of 
Regional Development Agencies and Business Centres in 
Bulgaria. 
 
She’s here in our province to learn more about economic 
development initiatives that we support through the provincial 
regional economic development authorities. BARDA is an 
umbrella organization of independent regional development 
agencies and business centres in Bulgaria that work to develop 
small business and regional economies. 
 
Ms. Petrova will spend the day in Regina and then will travel to 
Saskatoon tomorrow before beginning her journey home on 
Friday. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Please join with me in welcoming Ms. Petrova to Saskatchewan 
and give her a display of warm Saskatchewan hospitality. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 



738 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2001 

 

members on this side of the House, I do wish to welcome the 
honoured guest. We hope you enjoy what you’ll learn here 
today and have a good time when you’re here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Shaunavon Co-op Association 
 

Ms. Higgins: — More good news in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — The Shaunavon Co-op Association generated 
record sales for the year 2000. During the co-op’s annual 
meeting, it was announced that sales climbed to just under the 
$15 million mark last year. 
 
The co-op, along with enjoying sales increases, also maintains 
its generous level of community support in 2000, contributing 
almost $14,000 through product and cash donations to local 
groups and organizations. 
 
The co-op general manager, Don Declerq, stated and I quote: 
 

The Shaunavon Co-op is strong and healthy, and like any 
business in our community, will only be viable as long as 
we are supported. 

 
This government agrees, Mr. Speaker, and with the support of 
local residents, along with our government, rural Saskatchewan 
will continue to thrive into the future. It is success stories like 
this that prove the effectiveness of this government and our 
policies. Working together is an essential aspect of the success 
in this province, and we are committed to doing just that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Administrative Professional Day 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we say thank 
you to those in our offices who handle all of the mail, make 
travel arrangements, field tricky phone calls, and basically 
organize our lives. I’m referring to our administrative assistants. 
 
The work done by our administrative assistants is being 
recognized today, even though that work has changed 
dramatically over the years. Our assistants train staff, do 
research, and serve on committees. They are an integral part of 
our workplace and everyone in this room would probably not 
function very well without them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party caucus, I 
would like to extend a sincere thank you to all of our 
administrative and constituent assistants on this very special 
day. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, it also gives me great pleasure 
to stand before the House today and address and thank some of 
the people who keep our busy lives in order. I am referring as 

well to the celebration of Administrative Professional Day. 
 
Today is the national day to celebrate the workplace 
contributions of administrative assistants, executive assistants, 
medical secretaries, marketing assistants, secretaries, staff 
assistants, and all other administrative professionals. 
 
During the information age, Mr. Speaker, administrative 
professionals are doing more and more for us all. Behind every 
successful office, there is an efficient team of administrative 
support staff making those of us fortunate enough to have 
support look good. 
 
Though we are thankful for the work of our administrative 
professionals every day, we do not often get a chance to express 
and say how essential their work is to us. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, today is a day we can openly and officially express our 
gratitude to administrative professionals. 
 
Today is also the perfect time to acknowledge teamwork, Mr. 
Speaker. Teamwork is an integral aspect to the success of any 
business or organization. We work as a team and know that no 
one individual is more important than the whole. 
 
On behalf of all my colleagues, I wish to express our gratitude 
and appreciation for the work of our administrative 
professionals, secretaries, and, most importantly, our 
constituency assistants. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Poem — The Unknown Soldier 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
tell the House about a constituent of mine who recently won a 
national poetry contest. Leah McDonald of Elrose wrote the 
poem “Who is the Unknown Soldier?” and won a Veterans 
Affair Canada writing contest. 
 
Last Friday, Leah, a grade 12 student, was honoured with a 
public reception in Elrose and was presented with the certificate 
and prizes by the Minister of Veterans Affairs. 
 
Today she is in Ottawa where a few hours ago she had the 
honour of attending a wreath-laying ceremony at the Tomb of 
the Unknown Soldier with Prince Charles and the Prime 
Minister. 
 
I would like to read Leah McDonald’s winning poem, “Who is 
the Unknown Soldier?” 
 

He is the one who led the way 
so the general could make it home; 
She is the one who saved the child 
and was left to die alone. 
 
His dreams were cut off 
by his untimely death; 
Her innocence shattered 
by her last shallow breath. 
 
He is the voice 
that echoes our pride; 



April 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 739 

 

She is the eyes that 
for our freedom cried. 
 
He is the rain 
that waters our souls; 
She is the river 
holding secrets untold. 
 
He’s in the wave 
crashing Normandy’s shore; 
She’s on the wind 
over Dieppe once more. 
 
He’s in the song 
that Paschendale sang; 
She’s in the bell 
from which freedom rang. 
 
His death was a pledge 
prayers can not suffice; 
Her life, a gift, 
at the ultimate price. 

 
I know that with one voice we’ll extend our congratulations to 
Leah McDonald of Elrose for this national prizewinning poem. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Volunteer Week 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we all know, 
Saskatchewan people are amongst the most dedicated and 
giving people in the world when it comes to serving their own 
community. Many cultural, sports, health, and community 
improvement organizations enjoy support from volunteers. In 
some cases these organizations would cease to exist without the 
support of our volunteers. 
 
And this week, April 22 to the 28, we will celebrate those 
accomplishments during National Volunteer Week. 
 
Among those volunteers who improve the quality of life in 
Saskatchewan are the SaskTel Pioneers. The SaskTel Pioneers 
is a volunteer organization made up of more than 4,000 past and 
present SaskTel employees. In order to celebrate the 
International Year of Volunteers, which is this year, Mr. 
Speaker, the SaskTel Pioneers have pledged to work a total of 
60,000 volunteer hours. 
 
This year the Pioneers who chose the prevention of child abuse 
as their corporation’s social cause have chosen to volunteer for 
the Pipestone Parenting Plus program and for the Provincial 
Association of Transition Houses of Saskatchewan. 
 
SaskTel Pioneers will volunteer their time to help children and 
families who have had to escape abusive situations and who are 
staying at shelters across the province. 
 
Please join me in congratulating SaskTel Pioneers for their 
dedication to improving the lives of the people of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you to them and to all volunteers who 
greatly enrich our lives. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University of Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today in a 
speech to the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce the president of 
the University of Saskatchewan said that his institution is in 
serious trouble. Provincial operating grants to the University of 
Saskatchewan are among the lowest in Canada; behind 
provinces like New Brunswick, Manitoba, and Newfoundland. 
 
Last year the Maclean’s survey rated the University of 
Saskatchewan dead last in its category, and 13th out of 15 in 
terms of dollars spent per student. In constant dollars we are 
putting less money into the university today than we were a 
decade ago. 
 
The university president says there will have to be significant 
tuition increases as the only way to counteract declining 
government funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t just municipalities that were shut out of 
the recent high-spending budget. We all know this 
administration is no friend of local government; it is less easy to 
understand why the university has been shut out by the 
provincial government. 
 
In the last election both the Liberal and the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) platforms stressed post-secondary education, 
yet now the reality comes through. Our university is declining 
and students will be forced to pay significantly higher tuition 
fees to try and prop it up. 
 

Good News for Biggar 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, there’s good 
news for the town of Biggar which I would like to share with 
members of the Assembly. This is a good news story about 
co-operation, about environmental protection, and about the 
preservation of scarce natural resources through recycling — 
worthy and necessary contributions. 
 
Just recently Biggar gained its own used oil filter and container 
ecocentre which opened at the Biggar recycling centre. This 
business is one of more than 30 now operating in our province 
under the support of the Saskatchewan Association for 
Resource Recovery Corporation or SARRC, not to be confused 
with SARCAN, recycling operations for drink containers. 
 
These are all owned and operated by local owners and operators 
in their communities. SARRC is a non-profit corporation 
formed by the oil and oil filter industry in Saskatchewan to 
develop and maintain a province-wide, used-oil recycling 
program. 
 
In Saskatchewan we discard about 20 million litres of used oil a 
year but not all of that is collected and recycled. An 
organization like SARRC and the business in Biggar managed 
by Wayne Oesch will do a great deal to see what we could do to 
move towards total collection. 
 
Businesses like this, Mr. Speaker, will meet the highest 
environmental standards and which perform vital service to the 



740 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2001 

 

community are a welcome addition and I’m glad to see one 
come to Biggar. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Student Exchange With Quebec 
 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Sunday evening I had the privilege of attending a social 
function sponsored by the Strasbourg Rec Board. The 
community gathered to welcome 21 high school students from 
Charlesbourg, Quebec. The students arrived last Friday and are 
being hosted by families in the community. 
 
The evening started with a delicious chicken supper followed 
by an entertaining program in which both students from 
Strasbourg and Quebec participated. A quiz show consisting of 
three teams made up of local and visiting students matched their 
wits on Canadian trivia. That was followed by a number of 
musical performances with again both visiting and local 
students performing for the people that had gathered in the 
community hall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, exchanges such as this . . . This exchange visit 
was initiated by Mr. Paul Bedier, the local French teacher, who 
had organized an earlier trip for students from Strasbourg to 
Quebec. 
 
Mr. Speaker, exchange programs such as this will greatly 
benefit Canadian unity since it allows young people to get to 
know one another. And I’d like to congratulate Mr. Bedier and 
the citizens of Strasbourg for doing their part towards Canadian 
unity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today the Minister 
of Labour told CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
Radio that his department has had the review and audit of the 
Workers’ Compensation Board since last October. For seven 
months this report examining the administrative policies and 
practices of the WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) has 
been collecting dust. 
 
And while the minister has been sitting on this review, four top 
management staff were fired and the chairman of the board who 
resigned was paid a huge severance and existing staff members 
planned an outrageously expensive farewell party for this 
person, only to have it cancelled at the last minute by the 
minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, businesses who fund the Workers’ Compensation 
Board and workers who require these services want to know 
what the results of this review are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why won’t the minister release this report? What 
is he hiding? And why is he allowing the people at the board to 
determine while he was . . . while he had the Dorsey report in 
his hands? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Indeed I reported 
previously that I have the Dorsey report in my possession. The 
Dorsey report was commissioned by the former minister of 
Labour. I received the report, I guess technically, the day that I 
was sworn in, February 8. It took me some time to review the 
Dorsey report along with a whole host of other concerns that I 
as Minister of Labour have. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have committed that this government will 
be — I will be — releasing the Dorsey report to the public at an 
early opportunity. The Dorsey report is in the works and I look 
forward to making it a very public document relatively soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s answer is not good 
enough for the people of Saskatchewan. It’s certainly not good 
enough for the injured workers and for the employers who fund 
WCB. 
 
Mr. Speaker, James Dorsey was contracted to review, audit, and 
report on the WCB’s administrative policies and practices at a 
cost of $96,000. It was part of his contract to submit his final 
report to the Minister of Labour by last September, and the 
minister confirmed his department has had this report since 
then. So why spend almost $100,000 on a report, then not 
release it and not take action on it? 
 
It sounds vaguely familiar to another report the NDP 
government is not commenting on at this time. In fact, the 
minister told CBC Radio exactly that: that he is still studying 
the study. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the minister is still studying the 
study. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is unacceptable that the Minister of Labour 
continues to hide this report from the public. Mr. Speaker, will 
the Minister of Labour quit hiding and immediately table the 
review of the Workers’ Compensation Board? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 
across the way for that response, or that question. 
 
The Dorsey report was commissioned by this government, Mr. 
Speaker, to look at the whole operation of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. And it was to look at the administration 
thereof and to recommend improvements in how it is that the 
Workers’ Compensation Board operates. That is how it spends 
the premium dollars to provide, to provide income replacement 
and other services to injured workers, of which there’s about 
32,000 injured workers in a typical year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting that the members opposite would ask the 
question of the cost of the Dorsey Report, Mr. Speaker, because 
I want to share this. In their beloved Alberta, Workers’ 
Compensation premiums this year went up an average of 14 per 
cent. In Saskatchewan, Workers’ Compensation premiums went 
down an average of 2 per cent. It’s the third year in a row of 



April 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 741 

 

decrease in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Confidence of Saskatchewan People in the Future 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. Mr. Speaker, according to a survey 
in today’s paper, only 22 per cent of Saskatchewan’s residents 
expect the province to be better off five years from now. 
 
That’s a scathing indictment of this government’s performance. 
And is it any wonder, when you look at the NDP record; the 
longest waiting lists in Canada, the worst job growth in Canada, 
the worst out-migration in Canada. That, Mr. Speaker, is the 
NDP record, and it’s destroying the confidence of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party believes that 
Saskatchewan has a bright future and that future begins the day 
we get rid of this NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier. 
Why is the NDP destroying Saskatchewan people’s confidence 
in our province, and in its future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d be very 
pleased to answer on behalf of the government. And I want to 
say if the criteria for making members opposite happy is the 
defeat of this government, they’re going to wait a long, long 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Now, what I, what I want to say, 
Mr. Speaker, is I’ve travelled this province speaking to 
chambers of commerce, tourism boards, people in communities; 
there’s a lot of optimism. But I want to tell you, it’s quite clear 
where the negative attitude is centralized, and it’s in members 
opposite. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, given the difficulties that their 
federal counterparts are having in Ottawa, and Mr. Day only 
having the majority support of his caucus, it leads me to the 
question is that maybe the gloom and the unhappiness is 
because that Leader of the Opposition doesn’t have the support 
of all of his caucus either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, for the umpteenth 
time, here they are again blaming the Saskatchewan Party for 
their problems. But, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t read the 
newspaper today. Mr. Speaker, The StarPhoenix, front page, 
“Surgical wait list system in crisis.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next headline, “Fewer cops an option.” That’s 
here in the city of Regina. 
 

Another Regina story in today’s paper, “Owner moving 
business to Alta.” Why? “Fed up with taxes in Saskatchewan.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, back in Saskatoon “Public school board hits 
homeowners with $33 tax hike.” And then, Mr. Speaker, in The 
Leader-Post, “Mayors blast tax increases.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the papers today are just full of stories about the 
failures of this NDP government. Mr. Speaker, it’s their record. 
It’s the NDP record. When is this Premier going to take 
responsibility for his party and his government instead of 
destroying the confidence of Saskatchewan people in their 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I guess the Leader of 
the Opposition wants to trade newspaper headlines, so I shall. 
“Sask. exports to grow”, “Saskatchewan job prospects to bloom 
for spring”, “Regina’s job economy looks good”, “Labour 
market said to be tight.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the facts. The economy of this 
province has grown year over year for the past decade. We’ve 
got the lowest unemployment rate. Businesses are looking for 
people to come to work in the jobs that they have available for 
them. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that 90 per cent of the 
people who graduate from the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology) campuses who find jobs 
here in Saskatchewan don’t have the negative attitude that that 
Leader of the Opposition does — not by a long shot, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
one thing this government doesn’t have is they don’t have the 
fiddle while Saskatchewan is burning. They’re doing everything 
else wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in today’s paper, the owner of Precision Machine 
Works in Regina is moving his business to Alberta. He cites 
four reasons for doing this — the Saskatchewan Party is not one 
of the reasons. He says the expanded PST (provincial sales tax) 
is driving him from the province, increased property taxes, 
skyrocketing energy bills, and a lack of skilled workers due to 
high income taxes. 
 
So who’s to blame, Mr. Speaker? In every case it’s the NDP 
government that is to blame. Is it any wonder, is it any wonder 
that less than one-quarter of the people of this province are not 
optimistic about our future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is this government going to stop driving 
businesses and people out of the province of Saskatchewan? 
When is the NDP going to stop destroying the confidence of our 
people in our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I just jotted myself a little 
note. In the last week and a half, I have visited the communities 
of Rosetown, Nipawin, Tisdale, Melfort, Weyburn, Humboldt, 



742 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2001 

 

and Indian Head. You know what I found in each of those 
communities, Mr. Speaker? An optimism about the future of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I attended to the trade fair in Tisdale, 
Saskatchewan. Literally hundreds of people engaged in 
economic activity in the trade fair in Tisdale, Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, there is an optimism across the province. Is there 
any wonder, Mr. Speaker? The leading Canadian economists 
and the chartered banks — what are they, Mr. Speaker? Bullish 
on Saskatchewan’s growth. That’s what’s happening in here. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I refer you again — the Leader of the 
Opposition is quoting from newspapers today — I want to go 
back to a quote of his in a newspaper in this province, Friday, 
April 6, 2001, the Regina Leader-Post. Quote: 
 

If the Saskatchewan Party wins the next election, 
Hermanson said the population outflow would be stemmed 
within a year or two and the province would then grow, if 
the weather and the national economy cooperated (Mr. 
Speaker). 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hospital Waiting Lists 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
If the NDP is looking for someone to blame for the gloomy 
attitude of Saskatchewan people, all you have to do is look in 
the mirror. In the last provincial election, the NDP promised to 
reduce hospital waiting lists that had grown to be the longest in 
Canada. Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s what appeared in the front 
page of today’s StarPhoenix. It says, “Surgical wait list system 
in crisis.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon’s hospital waiting list has mushroomed 
to over 13,000 people. And according to a consultant hired by 
the government’s own health advisory council, the waiting lists 
are growing out of control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain what action the NDP is 
taking right now to stop the explosion in Saskatchewan’s 
hospital waiting lists? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This report, 
which was released yesterday around the operating room times 
in Saskatoon, was commissioned by a group that was started by 
the Department of Health. The Health Sciences Advisory 
Council is working with the Saskatoon District Health and the 
University of Saskatchewan College of Medicine to address 
some of the issues that relate to the operating waiting room lists 
in Saskatoon. 
 
This is a problem that we’ve been working at for a while. This 
is part of the solution, Mr. Glynn’s report. But this government 
is also continuing to work on the plans that relate to establishing 
information for everybody around waiting lists in the province. 
We’ve also added money into the whole system to address 

some of these things. What we have to do is work very carefully 
with the professionals to make sure that we get the right 
solutions to the problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, again to the minister. Mr. 
Speaker, again to the minister. The report of their own 
committee is suggesting that immediate action is necessary in 
order to deal with the NDP’s massive hospital waiting list. 
Health expert Peter Glynn is saying in his report to the NDP’s 
Health Sciences Advisory Council and I quote: 
 

The situation cries out for leadership. The issues are of 
such severity that only urgent action will give any hope of 
reversal. 
 

And what’s the NDP’s response, Mr. Speaker? We’re going to 
study it some more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what action will the minister take right now? 
What urgent action as is recommended will the NDP take in 
order to bring an end to these severe waiting times? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Health Sciences 
Advisory Council requested this report to deal with what is a 
very difficult issue in Saskatoon. The University of 
Saskatchewan Board of Governors and the Board of Directors 
of Saskatoon District Health will be meeting within the next 
couple of weeks jointly, together with authors of the report and 
other professionals, as they develop an action plan to introduce 
a system in Saskatoon that will work. They are working very 
carefully with the professionals, with the surgeons who are 
involved in the process. 
 
We want to do it right. We want to do it with the people 
involved so that we will provide better health service for all of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Policing Services 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Municipal Affairs minister. This morning’s headline in The 
Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker, reads, “Fewer cops an option, City 
council to debate eliminating eight police jobs.” Especially 
frightening when at noon today we hear that car thefts in Regina 
have gone up another 11 per cent. 
 
The article goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that the city of Regina 
is considering cutting eight police positions to avoid a mill rate 
increase of two and a half per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP in the last election campaigned to lower 
taxes and to hire 200 more police officers. But now we see that 
people are having to choose between higher taxes or fewer 
police on the streets. 
 
I find it ironic that the minister who constantly reminds us that 
he once wore the red serge would lead municipalities to this 



April 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 743 

 

choice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister increase revenue-sharing grants 
to municipalities or will he insist on forcing cities like Regina to 
fire police officers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to answer that. 
Those decisions have not yet been made, Mr. Speaker. But I do 
want to remind, and I’m happy to have the opportunity to 
remind the members opposite and the people of this 
community, that the commitment by this government to 
municipalities is very, very strong. 
 
Let me just remind, let me just remind the members opposite 
that the city of Regina received an additional $3.5 million in 
this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker. The total, including all the 
targeted programs, the targeted and unconditional programs, 
amount to $17.43 million, Mr. Speaker. That is a commitment 
to this community to assist them in the serious decisions that 
they, like all other people, have to make across this province. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that part of the gloomy situation we 
face is thanks to the people opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it seems like 
he doesn’t quite know what’s going to happen in the city of 
Regina. I imagine he’s studying that too as we do everything 
else. It’s getting close to June; you better do a lot of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe the Minister of Justice has some thoughts 
on this issue. The Minister of Justice has repeatedly said the 
NDP will fulfill their four-year promise to hire 200 new police 
officers, new police officers, Mr. Speaker — let’s underline 
new; 200 additional and we should underline additional officers 
— over and above the number of officers in 1999. 
 
With retirement rates in Saskatchewan police forces, if 
municipalities are forced to cut police positions there will 
actually be fewer officers, Mr. Speaker, fewer officers on the 
street than before the NDP over there made this promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does the man who should have been premier 
try to meet his goal of 200 new officers when his government 
turns around and forces municipalities to cut police positions? 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Justice find it in his budget to 
replace any police positions cut because of the NDP’s insistence 
on freezing revenue-sharing grants to municipalities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to 
respond to the member’s questions. Actually I thought that he’d 
forgotten all about me, but it’s a pleasure to remind the member 
of this government’s commitment to policing in this province. 
 
(14:15) 
 
He talks about new police officers to the municipalities and 
indeed to the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) across 

this province too. He should know, he should know, before the 
last election there was no provincial funding going directly into 
police officers and into the cities and into the RCMP. We now 
have 45 new ones as a result of this budget. We have the 
highest number of RCMP officers in this province ever. We 
have more police officers in the RCMP than in fact our 
complements suggest. 
 
We have the largest, single commitment to policing services in 
this province ever in this budget. And the member should be 
supporting that not voting against it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question’s for the Education 
minister. Last month the Finance minister delivered his latest 
budget and reaffirmed the NDP’s commitment to make big 
government bigger and keep taxes high. 
 
Then we were subjected to the Education minister blabbing on 
about how the NDP’s budget was going to keep education taxes 
from going up. Well, Mr. Speaker, as usual the Education 
minister’s bluster turned out to be a lot of hot air. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s another headline in Saskatoon’s paper 
today. It says the Saskatoon Public School Board is being 
forced to increase education taxes again this year because of a 
reduction in funding from the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Education minister tell the people 
from Saskatoon that property taxes were going down and then 
force the Saskatoon Public School Board to raise taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, again the members 
opposite are misinformed as to their information. 
 
First off, the grant to the Saskatoon Public Board increased 4.6 
per cent this year despite having an overall increase in their 
global assessment by close to 21 per cent. So we did not cut 
back the grant to the Saskatoon Public Board. We increased it 
by 4.6 per cent to the highest level ever — to $42 million. 
 
The fact is if you look at that report, if you would have checked 
into the report, you would have noticed that last night as well 
the Saskatoon Public Board dropped its mill rate from 20.59 to 
17.22. I wish the members were better informed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, maybe the minister doesn’t 
understand the relationship between high assessment and mill 
rate. Just because you lower the mill rate, if your assessment 
went up, you’re going to pay more taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in Saskatchewan strongly believe in the 
province of Saskatchewan. They just don’t believe in your 
government. And we have had to listen to this day in, day out. 
And the people — you’re wondering why they have no faith in 
your government. It’s the same . . . 



744 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2001 

 

The Speaker: — I would just remind the member to direct her 
comments and questions through the Chair. The member may 
continue. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the same old story. The 
Liberal leader and his new NDP friends say one thing and then 
they do something totally different. That’s why people don’t 
trust the NDP government. First the NDP promised to cut taxes 
and then they turn around and raise taxes instead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Education minister explain why he 
promised the Saskatoon taxpayers he would lower property 
taxes and then increase the education portion of it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m looking at the Sask 
Party platform, their vision for education from the last election. 
And you know what they said in education for a new 
millennium? They said, launching a comprehensive K to 12 
review. In fact their platform is ripe with more studies and 
reviews. 
 
But when it comes to the bottom line, would they increase 
funding to education? No. When we looked at their bottom line, 
Mr. Speaker, they said, we would freeze the rate of funding to 
K to 12 education to the rate of inflation. 
 
Well in fact, Mr. Speaker, this government has increased grants 
to school divisions by 16 per cent in the last two years, when 
inflation has been sitting at 4 per cent. If we would have 
followed their plan, every single school division would have 
been required to raise taxes instead of lowering mill rates, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Impact of Tax Increases for Small Businesses 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, another example of tax increases thanks to this year’s 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question’s for the minister of Municipal 
Government. Robert Ducan is someone who is trying to make 
Saskatchewan a better place. He moved to Saskatchewan to 
start a hotel in Val Marie. 
 
Last year he helped organize Val Marie residents to patch their 
own highways. And this year his business is being nailed with a 
$30,000 tax increase. And what’s the minister doing about it? 
Absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. No increase in revenue 
sharing; no plans to address this massive tax hike. In fact, 
Robert Ducan says the minister failed to offer any solutions at 
all to crippling tax hikes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this minister attacking small hotel owners 
like Robert Ducan with these massive tax increases? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well I appreciate the question from the 
hon. member, Mr. Speaker, and I share his concerns, as I share 

Mr. Ducan’s concerns as well. And I’m sad to hear that he feels, 
and people feel, I haven’t done anything. 
 
I met with the people in southwestern Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. I listened to their concerns and, as we speak . . . as I 
speak here now, Mr. Speaker, and even by the time I had 
returned, there was already a review being done of the 
assessments in that particular area. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time, I’m not sure what the 
opposition would expect me to do. First you listen, then you 
investigate, and then you take whatever action may be 
appropriate that’s within your jurisdictional powers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 221 — The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2001 (Appointment of Directors) 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 
221, The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2001 
(Appointment of Directors). 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please, order. I would ask 
members on both sides just to lower the level two or three 
decibels. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members, as 
President . . . Order . . . as President of the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association for the legislature of Saskatchewan, 
I’m pleased to table the 32nd annual report for the year 2000. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
government I’m very pleased to table the answers to written 
questions 92 through 99. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 92 to 99 are hereby 
tabled. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m honoured today to rise to move second reading of The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2001, an Act that will enhance 
investor protection and ensure Saskatchewan law remains 
current. 
 
The amendments in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, are part of this 
government’s ongoing efforts to keep securities legislation up 
to date and consistent with other Canadian jurisdictions. Current 



April 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 745 

 

legislation requires dealers and salespeople to register every 
year. These amendments, Mr. Speaker, will allow for a 
permanent registration system, which will eliminate the 
requirement to reapply each year. As well the Bill will eliminate 
the requirement for underwriters to register as a separate 
category under the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, new provisions in the Act will also enhance 
investor protection. The Act will now prohibit anyone with the 
intent of making a trade from making a statement, which 
contains a misrepresentation. 
 
The amendments confirm that the commission can provide 
information about market participants to other regulators and 
law enforcement agencies. However, Mr. Speaker, regulations 
will now set out the terms and conditions under which such 
information can be disclosed. Mr. Speaker, this will ensure that 
the commission can provide information to regulators for the 
purposes of conducting investigations across provincial 
boundaries. 
 
In addition, the commission will be able to share information in 
the context of national electronic planning systems. This 
database will house information about all securities registrants 
in Canada and will permit firms and individuals to apply for and 
maintain registration in all provinces and territories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certain provisions of the Act are being repealed 
and will be re-enacted in the regulations. This will allow for the 
consistent development of important areas of securities 
regulation across the country. For example, Mr. Speaker, the 
first trade provisions and details respecting insider reporting 
periods will be re-enacted in the regulations. 
 
Moving certain provisions from the Act to regulations assists in 
the coordinated development and implementation of national 
reporting systems based on electronic filing of information over 
the Internet. 
 
Several provisions in the Act require that documents be 
delivered to security holders by prepaid mail. These specific 
requirements are replaced by a general delivery requirement 
that documents be delivered or sent, enabling documents to be 
electronically delivered. These changes are consistent with the 
principles in The Electronic Information and Documents Act, 
2000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The amendments will also extend the period for which 
disciplinary action can be brought against a former registrant 
from one to two years. The Securities Commission has 
requested the change due to increasing complexity of cases. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the amendments will enhance 
investor protection, modernize the existing Act, provide for 
consistency with other securities regulation in Canada, and 
ensure that the commission has the mechanisms to continue to 
participate in national initiatives in this important area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of an Act to 
amend The Securities Act, 1988. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to reply to 
the minister’s comments concerning Bill No. 2, The Securities 
Amendment Act, 2001 which repeals the registration renewal 
requirement for dealers and salespersons and replaces with an 
annual report requirement. 
 
Also repeals the underwriter registration requirement and the 
requirement that registrants give the commission notice of 
certain changes, and introduces a provision, which would 
permit the commission to provide personal information about 
market participants to other regulators, law enforcement 
agencies, subject to complying with regulations, which will thus 
supply the conditions in which the commission may share the 
information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill raises some concerns and questions in the 
opposition’s minds and the people of Saskatchewan’s minds. I 
guess one question, Mr. Speaker, is does this Act reduce and 
streamline regulation and the red tape, which is a very high 
concern for small businesses in Saskatchewan? 
 
According to a recent CFIB (Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business) member survey, government regulation 
and paper burden ranks fourth, a full 60 per cent of response 
concern over more government regulation and a paper burden. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, also permitting the commission to provide 
personal information raises concerns, first of all, to handling of 
confidential information not only of the business community, 
but also for the protection of the consumer. 
 
And in light of these concerns, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Party would like to consult more widely with stakeholders 
concerning this Bill and I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — Yes, why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hart: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of guests in the 
galleries this afternoon that I’d like to take this opportunity to 
introduce to you and to all the members of the Assembly. 
 
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. Ray Hilderman, 
president of the Saskatchewan Canola Growers Association, 
and also Mr. Rob McGregor, the second vice-president, along 
with Lanette Kuchenski, their executive director. 
 
And also in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. Zenneth Faye, 
chairman of the Saskatchewan Canola Development 
Commission, and their executive director, Mr. Roy Button. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to introduce 
someone in the east gallery, a former member of this Assembly, 
Mr. Gordon MacMurchy, who represented the seat that I now 



746 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2001 

 

represent. 
 
And I’d ask all members to welcome these guests this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — With leave to respond to 
introduction of guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the member opposite with respect to acknowledging 
our canola producers here in your gallery. They are very much 
part of what has assisted us to diversify the agricultural base in 
our province. 
 
I want to as well acknowledge Wayne Hovdebo, Gordon 
MacMurchy and another Mr. Hovdebo, as well . . . (inaudible) 
. . . our galleries. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming our guests to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 – The Class Actions Act/ 
Loi sur les recours collectifs 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased today to rise to move second reading of The Class 
Actions Act, an Act that will significantly benefit individuals 
and families seeking relief as a result of mass injuries. 
 
Examples of mass injuries, Mr. Speaker, would be a mass 
product liability case such as a silicon gel breast implants case, 
a mass environmental injury, or a mass injuries through 
negligence such as airplane crashes. 
 
In the absence of class actions legislation, actions that involve 
multiple parties are governed by the rules of court that allow for 
representative actions. Historically, these rules have been 
narrowly interpreted so that representative actions are not 
allowed unless each person who’s injured suffers an identical 
loss. 
 
Mr. Speaker, class actions legislation is based on plaintiffs 
having common, not identical, issues of fact and law. A class 
action may be allowed even if the class members’ damages will 
have to be individually calculated or class members are seeking 
different remedies. The proposed legislation will help 
consumers and other plaintiffs launch a class action in situations 
where they would now be discouraged from pursuing individual 
claims due to the potential high cost of litigation. 
 
Class action legislation also sets out rules for the consistent, 
uniform, and transparent treatment of such cases and ensures 
that a judge has sufficient discretion to ensure that the rights of 

absent plaintiffs are protected. Under this legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, the judge must approve the type and contents of the 
notice to plaintiffs, the agreement for payment of legal counsel 
for the class, and any settlement agreement. 
 
In 1996, the Uniform Law Conference of Canada adopted the 
Uniform Class Proceedings Act. The Uniform Law Conference 
commission has recommended legislation that is consistent 
across the country as many of the situations that give rise to 
class actions will not be limited to one province, but will give 
rise to claims in several jurisdictions. 
 
It’s important to note this legislation also provides for a 
certification procedure to protect the interests of absent class 
members and protect defendants. 
 
Certification process is a court proceeding to determine whether 
the cause of action is appropriate subject matter for a class 
action, if there’s an identical group of claimants, if the claims 
raise a common issue, if the class action is the preferable 
procedure, and finally if the representative plaintiff will 
adequately represent the interests of the class. 
 
The certification procedure will also permit the court to 
establish the parameters of a class action, Mr. Speaker: to 
describe the class, the nature of the claims, the common issues, 
and other provisions the court may consider appropriate. 
 
The legislation also sets out rules for the conduct of class 
proceedings including the role of the court and a provision 
allowing residents of Saskatchewan who share the 
characteristics of the class to opt out of the proceeding and 
non-residents to opt into the proceedings should they wish. 
 
The legislation also permits the court to determine what sort of 
notice must be given to members of the class. The court decides 
the method and the contents of the notice. 
 
Finally, the legislation includes provisions respecting remedies 
that may be ordered by the court and respecting termination of 
proceedings, appeals, limitation periods, and costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, class actions help to address problems that arise in 
the area of mass wrongs that have been difficult to resolve 
through the traditional civil litigation process. They offer a 
more efficient way to litigate mass torts. For example, a lawsuit 
based on widespread environmental damage can be much more 
effectively litigated when all those who suffered damages are 
represented in one claim. The expense of pursuing a claim, 
based on a mass wrong, would be a significant barrier to many 
people. 
 
The primary benefit of the proposed class action legislation is to 
enhance access to the courts by reducing the costs borne by 
litigants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act contributes to a justice system that 
operates in a way that is fair, certain, and efficient for 
proceedings where a number of plaintiffs have the same or 
similar claims against the same defendant or defendants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to move second reading of An 
Act respecting Class Actions. 



April 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 747 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
class action in courts is something that has probably went 
across most of North America, if not all the jurisdictions in 
Canada. Clearly, we’re one of those areas that up until now has 
not had the opportunity for our citizens to participate in class 
actions. 
 
There are benefits and there are some potential problems, Mr. 
Speaker, when you are dealing with class action suits as the 
one-size-fits-all may not necessarily suit everyone. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is a fairly important Bill, a very involved 
piece of legislation. Before a person can pass judgment on this, 
whether it has benefit or whether it will have a negative impact 
on the people of Saskatchewan, it’s important that the people 
who will be affected by this legislation, our citizens and those 
who must deal with it, and particularly the members of the Law 
Society, they need an opportunity to review this piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, and make recommendations on it. 
 
They need to be able to talk to the Minister of Justice and 
government members. They need to be able to talk with the 
members of the opposition, Mr. Speaker. Since this legislation 
is just new before the Assembly, these people have not yet had 
the opportunity, the stakeholders have not yet had the 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to respond to our queries on these 
particular issues. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
Subvote (IA01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs to 
introduce the officials in the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This is rather interesting here because we are doing 
two sets of estimates, two ministries, and one department. So 
the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs and I are divvying up 
the duties and I get the very great privilege and honour to 
introduce the officials. 
 
And so I would like to welcome the officials who are joining us 
today and who will be providing us with their usual highly 
professional, very skilled advice as well as deal with the 
estimates. 
 
(14:45) 
 
I would like to first of all introduce Mr. Brent Cotter, deputy 
minister of Intergovernmental Affairs and deputy minister of 
Aboriginal Affairs; Mr. Paul Osborne, assistant deputy minister 
of trade and international relations; Mr. Al Hilton, assistant 
deputy minister of federal-provincial relations; Donovan 
Young, acting assistant deputy minister of Aboriginal Affairs; 

Glen Benedict, executive director, Indian lands and resources; 
and finally but no means the least, Melinda Gorrill, director of 
administration, without whom we couldn’t function terribly 
well. I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome 
them to the Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to welcome the 
ministers and their officials. And I guess the first question I 
would have is why do we have two ministers for one 
department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was assured 
that we were going to be dealing with Intergovernmental 
questions first but I think that really, since I’m the second 
minister to be added to this portfolio that I should probably 
answer the question because in point of fact we do have two 
ministers and I’m very pleased and very proud that we have two 
ministers. 
 
I think that Premier Calvert very accurately identified that it is 
imperative that we focus in a strong and respectful way upon 
the needs, concerns, and opportunities that are presented to this 
province by building and developing stronger relations with 
First Nations, Metis, and off-reserve people and ensuring that 
they have the same kind of good focus by government as all 
other people in Saskatchewan have. And for that reason the 
Premier decided to highlight our considerable respect and our 
considerable awareness of the needs and accomplishments of 
Aboriginal people by appointing a separate Minister of 
Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well I can 
appreciate that. I guess the question I have as Intergovernmental 
Affairs critic, is why the split in the department and why could 
Intergovernmental Affairs not be handled as well by the same 
minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well it probably could be possible to 
handle it with one minister. But what that would mean would be 
that, given the great number of meetings and events that it is 
necessary for both of us to attend, that one or another aspect of 
our portfolios might be overlooked. 
 
And I want to repeat again that the Premier decided, and I think 
quite wisely, that it was imperative to accord First Nations, 
Metis, and off-reserve people the respect that they deserve in 
this province. They are a growing part of the demographics of 
this province, and it was decided that at this point in our 
province’s history, we should be highlighting that and 
establishing a separate, stand-alone ministry. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, well I guess I fail to see how 
having them together takes away from the importance of 
Aboriginal Affairs. It seems strange that we have to now have 
. . . I guess you could explain to me — do we have two separate 
administrations or do you work together as ministers? Or how 
exactly is this split? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think what the 
addition of a separate minister for Aboriginal Affairs does is 
recognize an increasingly important factor in Saskatchewan life, 
in our economy, in our community, and our political life. And 
that is that we have an increasingly large Aboriginal population. 



748 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2001 

 

It seems to us on this side of the House that this represents both 
our greatest challenge and our greatest opportunity. Challenge 
in the sense that it is critically important that we respond to the 
interests and concerns of Aboriginal people and the province 
and that we do everything we possibly can to ensure that there’s 
full participation of Aboriginal people in the economy, in the 
life of this province. And we know we have some work to do 
there. 
 
It’s also our opportunity. Because the extent to which this 
province will be successful will be the extent to which we are 
able to ensure that Aboriginal people play their full, complete 
role in our society. 
 
So by recognizing that importance, by recognizing that 
dimension to our province, by having a separate minister, we, I 
think, identify that the Aboriginal population, the proportion 
that they represent in our society and the challenges and 
opportunities they present, we recognize that special, that 
special significance by having a separate, by having a separate 
minister. 
 
And I think we look forward to ensuring more and more 
partnerships, more and more participation, more and more 
success in fully integrating Aboriginal peoples into the life of 
this province, into the economy and into the politics of this 
province. I might add that both Alberta and Manitoba have done 
the same thing, I take it, recognizing the same phenomena. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Minister Axworthy. I don’t have a 
problem with your explanation and I fully agree that we do have 
to address the Aboriginal concerns in this province and the 
critic for Aboriginal Affairs will address those concerns with 
you. 
 
My question was: what is the split in administration? Do you 
have a separate administration for Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Aboriginal Affairs? Or do you have the same 
administration? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I’m sorry. To the member opposite, I guess 
I was so caught up with talking about the importance of having 
two separate ministers that, I guess, I didn’t hear the fine point 
of your question. 
 
In point of fact there is one administration. There are two 
ministers and one administration. We have our deputy minister, 
whom I’ve already introduced earlier on, and then there are 
three parts actually to this department. 
 
Provincial Secretary, which includes office of the protocol; 
there’s the office of French-language co-ordination and so forth, 
that’s one part; there’s Intergovernmental which deals with all 
the important issues of relating with Ottawa and the other 
provinces as well which the member for Saskatoon Fairview 
heads up; and then the Aboriginal Affairs part of that which I 
head up. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you tell 
me then why expenditure and salaries has increased greatly if 
there is no more . . . if there is not additional administration to 
run two separate departments or two separate ministries? 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I understand 
the member’s question, she’s asking why then has there been an 
increase in the administration budget of the department. Is that 
right? 
 
That can be accounted for by just identifying that one of my 
ministerial assistants has been identified as being within the 
Department of Intergovernmental Affairs, bearing in mind that I 
now have both those responsibilities. So there’s not actually any 
extra money spent on an administration, it’s transferring a part 
of a position from one department to another. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well then I trust if 
we look in the Department of Justice, we’ll see a decrease in 
salaries. Is that what you’re telling me? 
 
The expenditure by type is . . . I would hope that we are not 
paying one ministerial assistant $600,000. We see 1.516 million 
to 2.118 million, under salaries, expenditure by type. Could you 
please explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member now is asking 
specifically what extra staff have been, have been added to the 
department and the numbers break down in this way. 
 
The member will know that just recently I made an 
announcement about immigration policy and coordinating our 
immigration efforts on behalf of the province. That adds 10 
people to our staff. 
 
And we’ve also appointed a head of international relations 
which has been there for some considerable period of time, but 
having filled that, it’s also the case that three and a half 
positions have been added to — in fact the Provincial Secretary 
can talk about this — to the Lieutenant Governor’s office, to the 
office of French language coordination, and to the . . . and to 
Government House. And then the one position in administration 
reflecting a minister’s office. 
 
So there are fifteen and a half new positions in the whole . . . in 
the department; 10 fall under immigration. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You said that you 
had announced that you were coordinating the immigration 
department. How is this different than what you have been 
doing in this department today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. . . . what are you? Deputy Chair 
today I guess? No, Chair. The efforts the province had 
committed to immigration in the past have been committed in 
the Department of Economic Development . . . Economic and 
Co-operative Development. And the member will know that 
from the business community, and indeed many others across 
the province, there was a recognition that we needed to do more 
to attract immigration to the, to the province; that in particular 
there was some labour skills, shortages, that needed to be, to be 
addressed. 
 
And that the member will also be familiar, I’m sure, with 
problems of accreditation — physicians, engineers, who are in 
the province, who are unable to perform their professions 
because of accreditation problems. You probably have heard 
that from a number of constituents. 



April 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 749 

 

So there’s a process of, first of all, taking the responsibility for 
immigration from Economic Development and placing it in 
Intergovernmental Affairs and ensuring that it is a much more 
integrated, a much more, a much more complete process. 
 
And I might say that when, when realized we will have a 
director of the division. We’ll have three immigration advisors 
who will promote Saskatchewan to potential immigrants. And 
the member can appreciate what a significant task that is when 
you’re looking at potential immigrants from around the world. 
And we’ll also assess provincial nominee program applications, 
which ensures that we are doing our best to bring economic, 
economic immigrants to the province. 
 
There will be a policy person. A person who will work full time 
on these accreditation issues which are significant to people 
who are presently here and to the retention of immigrants who 
have arrived in Saskatchewan. As is another position which will 
be focusing solely on settlement and integration issues. 
 
The member, I’m sure, will be familiar with, with people who 
find it difficult for various reasons to integrate into the 
Saskatchewan community. It might be language. It might be 
culture. It might be a whole range of activities. And we’ll have 
one person focusing on those kinds of issues. And there’ll be 
support staff to that department too. 
 
(15:00) 
 
So we look for great things from the department. We look to 
ensuring more immigration to the province. We look forward to 
ensuring that we keep more immigrants here in Saskatchewan. 
Of course time will tell, but that is the focus of this new 
department and this new initiative. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, minister. My question then is if 
this responsibility is moved from Department of Economic 
Development, is these new positions or what happened to the 
people that were handling this in immigration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Three of the positions moved and 
there are nine new ones. There’s an extra commitment of 
$400,000 into immigration as a result of this process. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Minister. Do you have some kind 
of a process to see if what you plan to do, within a year’s time 
or whatever, has produced results and the addition of nine new 
people and $400,000 is warranted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Yes, we do. The taking of the 
immigration function from Economic Development, placing it 
in IGA (Intergovernmental Affairs), and the expansion of the 
department has been as a result of significant amount of 
consultation with stakeholders, with the business community, as 
well as with the settlement support groups across the province. 
It’s been welcomed by them. 
 
In fact, just last week, I met with the settlement support 
community from across the province and they’re looking 
forward to expanding their role and to working with us to 
ensure that this new process works. 
 
But it’s critically important for us to ensure that we make sure 

that our investment in this activity bears fruit. We can do that 
anecdotally, but we’re in fact ensuring that there is a 
multi-evaluation process to make sure that we are doing what is 
needed to attract immigration to the province and to ensure that 
immigrants who come to the province, in fact, do stay here and 
contribute to the economic development of our province. 
 
We all know the importance, the impact of immigration to the 
province historically. We know that the numbers of immigrants 
have not been very high over the last few years. We’re looking 
to turn that around and to ensure that we meet some labour 
shortage skills and that we ensure that those immigrants who 
are here, in fact, do stay here and continue to contribute to the 
province. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you please 
tell us what countries you are targeting or how you’re going 
about achieving your goals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The approach that we’re taking with 
regards to targeting immigration and targeting our efforts — 
because quite plainly in what lies behind your question is we 
could hardly, we could hardly do a good job attracting 
immigrants from every single country of the globe — is to 
consult with the business community, to assess their needs, and 
to work with them to attract the kinds of immigrants the 
business community needs. It’s us responding to the needs of 
the community at large, rather than us telling the business 
community how we would function. 
 
So we will consult with the business community to identify 
their needs and identify with them which countries to focus, to 
focus on. And of course we will continue to evaluate that over 
the years. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Minister Axworthy. Could you 
then explain why would this not have been amalgamated into 
Economic Development, the intergovernmental part, as opposed 
to creating another ministry aside from Economic 
Development. It seems to me that you should be working with 
them, not as a separate identity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question, 
if I may say so, it’s a question that we should all ask: why are 
we moving something from one place to another and why are 
we expanding it? 
 
The reason for the immigrant program to be in 
Intergovernmental Affairs rather than Economic Development 
is because it encompasses more than just Economic 
Development. That’s plainly an important part of our 
immigrant, or our immigration policy of focus. But the issues of 
settlement, for example, the issues of accreditation, are wider 
than issues which might more appropriately fit within 
Economic and Co-operative Development. So there are wider 
issues. 
 
There are also intergovernmental issues. As you will know, 
immigration is primarily a federal responsibility, so it was felt 
most appropriate that Intergovernmental Affairs be the host 
department for this new immigration program. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I guess if we 



750 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2001 

 

read down the list of what Intergovernmental Affairs is 
responsible for, we have federal-provincial relations, 
international relations, constitutional relations, trade policy and 
immigration. It seems to be that most of these are very closely 
integrated with economic development and other departments. 
And in light of the fact that we would like to get taxes down 
and hold the line in Saskatchewan, it would seem that we 
should be moving to amalgamate departments, not expand 
them. So I think that would be something I would hope that 
your government would take into consideration. 
 
I’m just wondering, the new positions that you’ve created. Are 
these positions filled, and were they advertised? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — To date . . . well, in the near future 
we’ll be appointing an acting director of the immigration 
division who will be . . . is basically being reclassified. 
 
We’ve advertised for . . . we’ve appointed one clerical person 
for whom the position was advertised. The other positions will 
be advertised and will be filled in the normal process for all 
government employees. And this will take place in the next 
short while as we continue to consult with the stakeholders and 
as we move our division along. 
 
So we will have shortly an acting director and some clerical 
support. The rest will be filled in due course and each of them 
will be advertised. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d just like to ask 
you one . . . on one final issue. There was a recent decision — 
I’m reading from a SaskTel Mobility letter: 
 

A recent decision of the CRTC requires all 
telecommunication service providers in Canada to 
contribute a percentage of their revenues to a national 
subsidy fund. 
 

Would you like to explain this to us please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises a question which 
is of significant importance to the province and it is about really 
how do we ensure that services are available in smaller 
communities and in rural Saskatchewan in similar . . . at a 
similar price and similar quality to the cities. 
 
And one of the concerns that this government had when 
SaskTel became . . . came under the jurisdiction of the CRTC 
(Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission) was to ensure that it could still have some 
flexibility to support development of services in rural 
Saskatchewan. And indeed it really was at the behest of this 
government that the CRTC agreed there should be a focus on 
. . . a focus which brought with it some financial commitment to 
ensure that the interests of rural Saskatchewan and northern . . . 
of rural Canada and northern Canada were better respected and 
were addressed. 
 
So what we have here is a levy taken from the phone companies 
which is then enabling . . . which then enables them to support 
development in a rural and indeed in less-populated parts of the 
country. It’s a national fund, it’s a national fund which this 
province fought for because of our commitment to ensure that 

services — quality services — are available in rural 
Saskatchewan. And I think we can see this as a really 
significant victory in our interprovincial relations, if you want; 
in our relationship between this province and the federal 
government in the sense that the federal government’s 
regulatory powers now include, now include SaskTel. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I guess I just 
fail to see how this can be positive when we’re going to turn 
around and charge everyone in Saskatchewan now 6.25 a 
month. That’s the system access fee of $4, and now we have the 
new system administration fee of 2.25. My question is: where 
does this money go, and what is it used for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, the way in which it 
benefits the province is that SaskTel contributes 4.5 per cent of 
its revenue to this national fund, which is then . . . and the fund 
is then distributed according to need across the country. 
 
In order to effectively support and minimize telephone 
telecommunications costs in rural and remote areas for 
Saskatchewan residents, SaskTel has to find about a hundred, or 
previously had to find about a hundred million dollars. It 
presently, as a result of this national fund to which it 
contributes, is able to draw $10 million from that fund, and so 
in fact the province telephone . . . I mean the supports to rural 
and remote residents has been provided in such a way that the 
province saves $10 million. 
 
So in other words, this fund has enabled the province to draw 
$10 million from it to support telephone costs and programs in 
rural and remote areas. So it’s been a net gain of about $10 
million. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So the net gain is to 
the province, but it’s not to the people that are using the service 
because the people that are using the service are now having to 
pay more. There’s an additional $2.25 system administration 
fee in Saskatchewan on top of the $4 fee that was there. 
 
So the people that are using the service, the residents of 
Saskatchewan, are paying more but you’re telling me the 
government is spending less. So how does this work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The end result is that residents, 
telephone users in rural or remote areas will pay less than they 
would have done before as a result of the fund. And this is a 
program which is supported by SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), which is supported by 
regional libraries, which is supported by small communities 
across the province. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood would now like to ask some questions. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to ask the 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs perhaps to clarify and 
explain the role of his department. I have an understanding that 
his department would coordinate efforts between the provincial 
government and other levels of government and so on, but I’m 
not exactly sure on what his involvement is when other 
departments enter into negotiations with, say, the federal 
government and that sort of thing. 



April 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 751 

 

And I wonder if the minister could clarify his role for myself 
and for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, the member’s question 
focusing on the role of the Department of Intergovernmental 
Affairs and its relationship with other government departments 
is, I think, a useful one. It gives me the opportunity to clarify 
that for him and for those who may be watching this on TV. 
The . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Don, your mother’s 
watching, I’m sure. 
 
The role of the Department of Intergovernmental Affairs is 
essentially to promote Saskatchewan’s interests in relationships 
with other provincial governments, with the federal 
government, and with governments overseas — that’s the 
general function. 
 
And within that context, of course, the department will be 
involved in many areas of activity which are also in . . . which 
are primarily in other departments . . . departmental 
jurisdictions. 
 
So what the department does is it assists in coordinating these 
functions. It has significant experience in negotiating with other 
governments and presenting Saskatchewan’s case to other 
governments. And I’d point out that the matter we’ve just been 
discussing of the national fund in the telecommunications sector 
for remote and rural residents is a good example of success of 
that negotiating strategy. 
 
So it coordinates and it provides its expertise and support of 
initiatives across government, it reviews agreements to ensure 
that they fit within our priorities and our policies, and it also 
serves to advance the interests of other departments. 
 
You might also have seen just today I think that legislation in 
North Dakota which was potentially damaging to the province, 
which would have added a duty to exports, agricultural exports 
from Saskatchewan through North Dakota, was defeated in the 
North Dakota legislature. And other legislation in Montana 
which was equally difficult, that would have proven equally 
difficult for us, was . . . died, essentially went away. 
 
This doesn’t happen just by chance. It happens because 
ministers work with their counterparts in the United States. 
Minister Serby worked with his counterparts in Washington to 
bring to bear the pressures . . . or bring to bear the interests of 
the province on North Dakota and Montana. 
 
And the Department of Intergovernmental Affairs . . . I dealt 
with both executive branches in Montana and North Dakota as 
did Minister Serby. So you see an example of how a 
coordinated approach across government can actually achieve 
the goals we want in what is sometimes a very difficult area — 
trying to stop another jurisdiction from passing legislation. 
 
I think you can imagine how we would respond if somebody 
told us to stop passing legislation which we think would be in 
the province’s best interests. So there’s an example of a 
coordinated effort involving Intergovernmental Affairs which 
achieved the goals we set out to achieve. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the minister for his 

answer. And I’d like to ask him then what role has your 
department played in the negotiations with the federal 
government in the area of agriculture, in negotiations of some 
of the farm support programs that the federal government is 
imposing upon us, and generally what type of coordination is 
there between your department and the Department of 
Agriculture on these issues when we’re dealing with the federal 
government in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In regards to the role of 
Intergovernmental Affairs in dealing with the federal 
government over agriculture, primarily the role of the 
department has been one of supporting the Department of 
Agriculture and agri-food, both in its preparation and in its 
lobbying activities. 
 
There of course are opportunities for lobbying across the 
departments of government. That needs to be coordinated in 
some way. Some opportunities for investigating where the 
federal government might be most responsive, how we might 
get them to move in the direction we want them to move is 
something that the expertise of the Department of 
Intergovernmental Affairs can assist with. 
 
And also, in order to move the matter from just being a matter 
of ministers of Agriculture to the level of Premier/Prime 
Minister and premiers/Prime Minister, that requires 
coordination efforts and work with other provinces, and that is 
the kind of thing also that the department did in the whole 
agriculture piece. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, would it be your opinion that the 
Department of Agriculture, provincial Department of 
Agriculture seems to go it alone more often than other 
departments when they’re dealing with Ottawa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — As I mentioned, the Department of 
Intergovernmental Affairs has a supportive, coordinating role 
and as such played that role in the negotiations with the federal 
government over agricultural aid packages this year and in 
previous years. 
 
I think you can appreciate, and I think we all appreciate the 
pivotal importance of the federal government providing its . . . 
fulfilling its responsibilities to agriculture in this province and 
indeed across the country. And it can be anticipated that that 
relationship between the Department of Agriculture, 
provincially, and the Department of Agriculture, federally, will 
be an important and busy one. That is the case and our role, as I 
say, has been one of support, coordination of logistical and 
strategic advice, and so on. And we would anticipate that would 
be . . . that would continue. 
 
The same kind of situation would arise if, for example, dealing 
with a national transportation policy, anything of that sort, that 
that might be something which would flow primarily out of the 
Department of Highways. We would provide again the same 
kinds of support, coordination, advice roles. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the minister for his 
answers. I would take from his response then that we could 
allocate some of the blame and the lack of response we are 
getting from the federal government in the recent letter that the 



752 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2001 

 

Premier received, I would say then, would suggest then that the 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs had a small role to play 
and therefore we could allocate some of the blame and lack of 
action in that area. 
 
However having said that, I think my colleague from Humboldt 
would like to continue this discussion. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Never leave an opportunity 
to go by to get a little dig in. 
 
I’d like to thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank the minister and her 
officials for being here today. Most of my questions will be 
addressed to the minister responsible for Aboriginal Affairs. So 
I’m pleased to be able to stand today and to ask some of these 
questions on behalf of both First Nations people and Metis 
people throughout the province who have brought some of their 
concerns to my attention. In addition, I will have some 
questions in direct reference to the budget for the minister. 
 
And, Madam Minister, I would like to start in fact by 
referencing my remarks as they pertain to the budget outlined 
this year. Madam Minister, in the budget estimates there is an 
additional $180,000 for support for Aboriginal organizations 
and issues. 
 
Could you please outline what these organizations are and what 
are their functions? And I wonder if you could possibly give me 
a breakdown on monies that would be distributed to First 
Nations people and monies that would be given to Metis 
people; if I could get a breakdown between those two, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I hope I’ve understood your question 
correctly. And I’m going to try and answer it, and if I don’t 
have it right, we’ll just keep at it until we get the very specifics. 
 
I heard you say how much money do we give to First Nations 
and to Metis people? And I hope I’m not being unduly technical 
when I answer this, but in fact virtually no money goes to 
individuals. 
 
What we do do is to provide grants to organizations who 
support the work to advance the various goals and initiatives 
that we have with respect specifically to the Metis and 
off-reserve strategy. And I would like to . . . You talked about 
$180,000. Specifically, there’s $125,000 that is going to the 
Aboriginal Employment Development Program and $60,000 to 
the urban management authorities. 
 
And the increase, I’m going to just quote here or read out what 
it is. The 125,000 — which I mentioned earlier — is to further 
enhance and expand the AEDP program (Aboriginal 
Employment Development Program). And this funding is 
needed to secure 12 new partnerships with public and private 
sectors, as well as economic development related initiatives 
with the Regina Health District and with Federated 
Co-operatives Limited. 
 
(15:30) 
 
The provincial funds — because I’m sure this is the next 
question you might be asking me — the provincial funds are 
used by the recipients to offset their initial costs related to 

implementing the communications, planning, and coordination 
of new partnerships. And these partnerships, as we know, will 
lead to the employment of potentially hundreds of new 
Aboriginal employees, with the employers paying all of the 
costs of wages, training, and salary . . . salaries, rather. 
 
Now the 60,000 that I mentioned a little earlier is to further 
develop and expand existing First Nations public authorities in 
urban service program delivery in Saskatoon, Regina, Prince 
Albert, and in Yorkton. The provincial funding will be used for 
planning, consultations, and development, and it is essential for 
levering federal funding which covers the majority of the 
operating and program delivery costs. 
 
I hope that I’ve answered your question as specifically as you 
were asking it. If I haven’t, please just give it to me again and 
we’ll try to get it right. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, in 
your comments you made reference to funding going to First 
Nations organizations, as I can understand it. 
 
So what I would ask you now is that any funding that would go 
through to Metis organizations, where do they acquire the 
funding from? It’s my understanding that they do get a certain 
portion of gaming money through the First Nations Fund. And 
I’m wondering if there is any other money from the province 
that goes through to Metis organizations in any way or form. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Okay. As you are aware, Madam Member, 
the constitutional and fiduciary relationship with Metis people 
in this country is with the federal government. 
 
However having said that, because Metis people are citizens of 
this province, we recognize that it is important to provide 
certain funds to assist in various initiatives that they undertake. 
So we do have a bilateral process and we have budgeted 
specifically under the bilateral, $125,000; that is primarily for 
negotiations and relationships between the Metis Nation of 
Saskatchewan and the province of Saskatchewan. So that’s 
125,000. 
 
Under the tripartite arrangement, there’s budgeted $285,000. 
That goes for activities to support relationships between the 
MNS (Metis Nation of Saskatchewan), the province of 
Saskatchewan, and the Government of Canada. 
 
And then finally you referenced gaming funds. I’m very pleased 
to inform you that we do . . . that $2 million goes directly into 
the Clarence Campeau Development Fund. That money is used 
for economic development for Metis people, and it’s done 
according to a set of very strict investment criteria that have 
been developed through mutual negotiations. And we have two 
provincial officials who sit on the board of the Clarence 
Campeau Development Fund Board. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So I have had a 
number of grassroots Metis people bring to my attention that 
they have some concern with not only funding that goes from 
the province through gaming to Metis organizations, I’ve also 
heard from First Nations people who are concerned about the 
money in the First Nations Fund. 
 



April 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 753 

 

I would just ask you at this time, Madam Minister: in respect to 
the clawback, I guess we could call it, in the First Nations Fund 
due to the SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) 
incident, has all of that money been paid back at this time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you. The answer is no. The more 
specific answer is that one-eighth of that money was recovered 
the end of March. There are seven more quarterly payments that 
will be recovered. They are approximately $170,000 each. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, just recently I received an order 
in council statement that there would be, through an order in 
council, well over $2 million, I believe it was, that would be 
issued to the First Nations Fund. So could you tell me what that 
money has been used for, or what it will be used for, and 
explain this order in council for me, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I believe the answer that you’re looking for 
with respect to the breakdown of the First Nations Fund and the 
payment which was $2,017,965 was the OC (order in council) 
that you’re referring to. That is broken down as follows: SGC 
(Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation) profits of 1.34 million; 
SIGA of 2.09 million less the 1999-2000 overpayment of 1.25 
million. And if I’m correct, that adds up to the slightly more 
than $2 million order in council that you’re referring to. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess what I’m 
asking, and I would appreciate a bit of discussion on this to 
clarify for me and for other people that are inquiring about this 
issue, it is the understanding of the people of Saskatchewan that 
there would be a commitment to pay back the money owed to 
the province that was . . . I don’t know how to put this nicely, 
but basically it was simply owed to them due to the SIGA 
incident, and that that would come out of First Nations Fund 
until that time. Then it seems to me that there should be no 
monies going into the First Nations Fund in order to ensure that 
that amount was paid back, and there was some transparency 
here in regarding responsibility. 
 
So I’m just wondering if you can, if you can make a statement 
for me that would explain why this money in the amount of 
$2,017,000 would be going into the First Nations Fund at this 
time, if in fact we’re waiting for some of that money that’s 
owed to come back? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — When I answered your question a few 
moments ago, I didn’t refer to the $169,000 clawback because I 
had answered that in the first question. That was also included 
in part of that 2 million order in council that you saw. That’s the 
clawback, and that’s the arrangement that we have arrived at in 
order to deal with what you, quite correctly identify, as a very 
unfortunate incident. 
 
We will be having that clawback of . . . well it’s 170,000 
approximately over eight orderly payments. One payment has 
been made so far. As you know, Madam Member, the First 
Nations Fund goes to support very important economic and 
social initiatives in First Nations communities. And we take the 
position that it is important to have that money repaid, but it is 
also important that it is repaid in a way that does not victimize 
innocent bystanders. 
 
And so because we have control over the funds, and because we 

are doing it in an orderly, and indeed in a gentle way, we see 
that we . . . that the First Nations communities will be able to 
continue with the very valuable and very worthwhile economic 
and social programs and services that they offer, while at the 
same time we will be able to recover that money from what is 
admittedly an extremely unfortunate set of circumstances. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and that is a good 
explanation, and I appreciate it very much. It clarifies just how 
the process is in place, and I would have to agree that it is wise 
to do this in a fashion that would not cut off the needed money 
from grassroots people. 
 
Madam Minister, my next questioning . . . I would like to 
predicate with comments that would pertain to your 
responsibility and your relationship. And it’s simply this: in 
respect to your ministry obligations, what is the relationship and 
the responsibility attached to that relationship between the 
minister, yourself, and First Nations and Metis people? 
 
So what in fact is your total responsibility as a minister in 
relationship to your workings with Metis and First Nations 
people? And I guess I would reference that in a sense to . . . in 
regards to accountability issues, transparency issues. 
 
And I’ll let you answer it at this point and I’m going to be 
probably going on with further questions around this question. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Again, Madam Member, I hope I’m going 
to be answering your question with the level of detail that it 
deserves and that you’re asking for. 
 
First of all, in my role as minister, it is my responsibility to 
ensure that Aboriginal Affairs works with Saskatchewan’s 
Aboriginal people and organizations to develop and implement 
policies and programs that advance our common interests. And 
also to ensure that Aboriginal Affairs can work to increase the 
participation of Aboriginal people in the social, cultural, and 
economic identities of the province. 
 
And we’re doing that by showing respect for Aboriginal 
cultures and identities, by facilitating and partnering with 
Aboriginal organizations and institutions and the federal 
government to ensure functional and accountable First Nations 
and Metis governance structures. And finally, we’re focusing 
on practical matters in a strategic and coordinated approach 
that’s advanced across government, between governments, and 
through our relations with Aboriginal organizations. 
 
You referred specifically to accountability and transparency in 
your question. I would like to mention to you that when we give 
grants, in every grant that we give to organizations, every grant 
has an accountability clause and a follow-up report is required 
to verify that the organizations did what they said that they 
would do. 
 
And it is our experience that Aboriginal organizations are 
extremely accountable. We are very pleased with the reports 
that they provide and we believe that the accountability clause 
that we have in those grants answers the concerns that you are 
perhaps raising. 
 
(15:45) 



754 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2001 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, it 
was brought to my attention by members of the Piapot Reserve 
that there was $177,000 that went through the provincial 
government to Piapot, and I believe that they indicated to me 
that it was through the First Nations Fund. 
 
They are having a great deal of difficulty understanding where 
the money is being spent — not only provincial money but 
where federal money is being spent. They have addressed this 
issue with the federal authorities and basically have been put off 
as far as a meeting with one of the federal authorities go and 
they’re waiting for that yet. 
 
But in the meantime, you know, their questions are simply this: 
how can they know exactly where the money has gone because 
they claim that there was a lot of social development needs, 
etc., as well as health needs and so on, on that reserve that are 
not being met. And basically they’re being told there is no 
money, that all the money is spent. 
 
They fail to realize . . . from what some of them are saying, they 
fail to realize any benefit from that money. And so they’re 
asking whether or not they can depend on you as minister to 
look into these matters for them. 
 
They are asking that they be able to see an audit done of the 
spending within the last year or two. And it is certainly their 
knowledge and my understanding that the Provincial Auditor 
here does not have the right or the ability . . . not the ability but 
certainly not the right or the authority to do a provincial audit 
on these funds. 
 
So my question to you is: have you received any letters in 
reference to these concerns from people from the Piapot 
Reserve? 
 
Have you any way that you could make available for them an 
audit that is done by whether . . . I’m not too sure who does it, 
but I would imagine it may be KPMG. Is that audit available to 
the public and is it a detailed audit so that these people can be 
assured and know how the money is being spent that is, in fact, 
meant for social development and health issues pertaining to 
people on-reserve? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much. This seems to be 
my day for dealing with issues from Piapot. This morning at 
8:15 I was meeting with a group of people about Piapot, but that 
was a slightly different issue. 
 
With respect to your specific question, have I received into my 
office letters talking about fiscal accountability at the Piapot 
Band, the answer is no I haven’t. And I certainly though don’t 
want to be seen to be stonewalling you or your very legitimate 
concerns that you’re raising. What I do want to ask is if you 
could perhaps, outside estimates, provide me with more detailed 
information about the concerns that are being raised with you. 
 
I can make the commitment that I certainly will follow up to the 
extent that it is possible. I am very mindful though of federal 
responsibility in this issue. I am very mindful that we put funds 
into the FNF (First Nations Fund) and then they go to the bands. 
We don’t actually have a role in terms of auditing those . . . 
what the bands actually do. 

But I don’t want to dismiss your concerns. I am prepared to 
communicate with the appropriate authorities and to get a 
response from them. I think, though, that this is probably a 
matter that you and I should sit down and I should get more 
detailed information from you so that I can deal with it in a 
responsible manner and ensure that I’m not taking on 
responsibilities that are more properly the purview of the 
federal government. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, I appreciate those comments. I 
guess when I asked you earlier a little bit about your role and 
your responsibilities as minister in relationship to the First 
Nations and Metis people, I wanted to know in fact whether you 
feel that you have an obligation under your ministry, your 
portfolio, to take those concerns on behalf of people that are of 
First Nations ancestry or Metis ancestry here, to take those 
concerns and relay them to the federal authorities on this. 
Because they seem to be getting really very frustrated with not 
being able to have answers to the point where they’re asking if 
they can see an audit and possibly have forensic audits in place. 
And I’m not too sure. 
 
In fact the Minister of Justice is here; Intergovernmental Affairs 
minister, possibly he could answer whether or not these people 
have a right to have access to those audits. Could you answer 
that for me, please, Mr. Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, the member from 
Humboldt. First of all, I want to start out my remarks by saying 
that it is imperative that we understand, recognize, and respect 
the autonomy of the various Indian bands. 
 
I also am concerned that I think . . . I don’t know what your 
detailed and specific concerns are with respect to Piapot, so I 
think that it is important that you and I arrange an early meeting 
— perhaps even this evening or right after we finish with 
estimates — so that I can get more detailed information and 
find out what your specific concerns are. And as I have said, I 
will undertake to ensure that they are passed on to the 
appropriate authorities, whoever that may be. 
 
I also do want to tell you though, since I think what you’re 
trying to get at is what’s the exact nature of my job, I do see 
that the ministry of Aboriginal Affairs can provide a very useful 
role. And this is what I told SARM just a few hours ago. My 
ministry can provide a very useful role in terms of mediation 
and facilitation to resolve issues of concern and to move it 
forward so that we can ensure that we are dealing in a respectful 
manner with First Nations, Metis, and off-reserve people in this 
province. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, in 
the Provincial Auditor’s report there’s observations that were 
made by the Provincial Auditor, and this is not the first time 
that these observations were made. And I guess he is simply 
stating to the people of Saskatchewan that in chapter 9 he says, 
we again report that the trustees of the First Nations Fund have 
prevented us from carrying out our responsibilities to the 
Legislative Assembly. As a result, the Assembly does not 
receive sufficient information to hold the government fully 
accountable for its use of the public money the Assembly gives 
to this fund. 
 



April 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 755 

 

We have not audited the fund since the Assembly established 
the fund. The fund has received $22.2 million since it was set 
up in 1997. 
 
And the mandate of the fund is to carry out economic 
development, social development, justice, health, and other 
initiatives related to First Nations people. 
 
I guess I would ask, Madam Minister, if you can tell me just 
how it was determined that the Provincial Auditor would not 
have the right to audit the First Nations Fund and who came to 
that determination? Who were the parties that agreed to that? 
And if you could answer that for me at this time I would 
appreciate that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Madam Member, I appreciate the concerns 
that you’re raising on behalf of the Provincial Auditor. I think 
though that we need to do some full quoting from the Provincial 
Auditor’s report. And I’m going to read from the 2000 Fall 
Report, Volume 3 because in point of fact, we did: 
 

On November 13, 2000, the (then) Minister of 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs (now an 
independent member in this Assembly) informed . . . (the 
Provincial Auditor) by letter that he had again requested the 
Chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations . . . 
to provide . . . (the Provincial Auditor’s) Office with the 
necessary access . . . (so that the Provincial Auditor could) 
fulfill . . . (his) duties. 

 
On December 1, 2000, the Chief of the FSIN informed . . . 
(the Auditor) that the FSIN and the Trustees . . . (were) 
willing to co-operate with . . . (the Provincial Auditor.) 
(And) . . . Chief (Bellegarde) also reaffirmed FSIN’s 
authorization to KPMG to provide . . . (the Provincial 
Auditor with) access to their files and to co-operate with 
. . . (the Provincial Auditor). 
 

And I’m going to quote directly from page 247 of the auditor’s 
Fall Report and the auditor says there, quote: 
 

We think the Minister’s efforts and the FSIN’s willingness 
to co-operate with us will allow us to fulfill our duties to 
the Legislative Assembly. 

 
So, I guess, in answer . . . short answer to your question, we 
believe that our office has provided a useful, facilitative role in 
this function, and this issue has been resolved satisfactorily for 
the Provincial Auditor. I guess we’ll have to wait until his next 
report to find out. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, in 
reference to your willingness to intervene on behalf of Metis 
people and First Nations people, if they should have any 
problems with funding accountability, etc., I’m really quite 
happy to hear that you’re more than willing to do that. 
 
In fact, it’s quite a refreshing stand to take in spite of the . . . or 
rather, in regards to the minister . . . the last minister that had 
this portfolio because I brought a number of issues to his 
attention and he certainly was not willing, and certainly did not 
appear to be very supportive of Metis people who . . . and First 
Nations people who were questioning some of the practices that 

were going on. 
 
Madam Minister, I received another letter brought to your 
attention also, from Mr. Ken Nelson, president of the Delisle 
local no. 173. And this was in . . . regarding matters relating to 
the 2001 Metis Nations of Saskatchewan election. There are 
allegations by Mr. Nelson and I know that he took these . . . he 
and other Metis grassroots people took their concerns, and there 
was an appeal board which they could present all of their 
concerns before. The Metis Electoral Commission and the 
Metis Nation of Saskatchewan senate, it was said, during these 
elections abused their power to maintain their stranglehold over 
the citizens of the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Now certainly that’s not my contention, but it is the contention 
of a number of people . . . thousands of people out there. There 
still is a lot of questions surrounding the practices of these 
elections, and in view of the fact that you have received a letter 
from Mr. Nelson, I’m wondering whether or not you have 
responded to him. And is it possible for you, for instance, to 
recommend, possibly through your ministry, in view of the 
many, many disturbing accounts of corruption and fraud that we 
are hearing, is it possible for you to recommend that the Metis 
elections be organized and conducted by the Chief Electoral 
Officer of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I think you were sitting in on a meeting I 
had a little earlier, so I’m going to give you . . . First of all, I’m 
going to start out with a quick answer, Madam Member. 
 
No, it would not be possible for me to recommend that their 
elections be conducted by the Chief Electoral Officer of 
Saskatchewan. And the reason for that, Madam Member, is that 
we are very mindful of proper jurisdictions here and the 
relationship with Metis people, quite properly we believe, 
should primarily flow with the federal government. 
 
So if there were going to be an elections body that would assist 
the Metis nation in their election process, it should not ought to 
be the Saskatchewan office of the Chief Electoral Officer. It 
should be the federal office. So I’m very much aware of those 
kinds of processes. 
 
But having said that, Metis people are citizens of Saskatchewan 
and so they have the right to expect a fair election process. And 
I have communicated that with the president of the Metis nation 
of Saskatchewan, indeed, in a letter that I sent him today. I did 
specifically say that I want to ensure that he and his executive 
deal with the concerns that people are raising with the processes 
that have been established for such purposes and, very 
specifically, to address these concerns as expeditiously as 
possible. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I move that we report progress 
to the Department of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 

Subvote (SP01) 



756 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2001 

 

The Chair: — Order. The next item before the Committee of 
Finance are the estimates for the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation and I would invite the minister 
responsible to introduce her officials with her this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 
like to introduce to you and members of the committee five 
officials from Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
who are here with us today. 
 
Beside me, John Law, the president; behind John would be 
Debbie Koshman, the vice-president, finance and risk 
management. Immediately behind me would be Garth Rusconi, 
who is vice-president of accommodation services; behind Garth 
is Paul Radigan, the director of finance; and right beside Garth 
would be Rob Isbister, acting vice-president of commercial 
services division. And I would like to thank them for coming to 
appear before committee today. 
 
Mr. Peters: — To your staff here, it’s good to have you here. I 
would like to start with . . . can you tell us of any changes in 
policy or direction for Saskatchewan Property Management in 
the coming year, in terms of operations and other similar 
changes in the coming year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), as the 
member opposite would know, is dedicated to providing a 
diverse array of accommodation, transportation, warehousing, 
distribution, and purchasing services to a wide range of public 
sector organizations. We have people providing important 
services in more than 200 communities throughout 
Saskatchewan. And along with SPMC’s regular course of 
business this past year, continue to see many positive and 
innovative changes at SPMC. 
 
The corporation is now into year three of our five-year strategic 
business plan that was developed in 1999. And that will 
continue. The plan lays the groundwork for where the 
corporation wants to be for the new millennium. This past year 
saw the development of four strategic priorities based on our 
strategic business plan. Our strategic priorities provide a 
positive and focused course for our corporation over the next 
few years. Our corporation will place a focus on our customers, 
viable lines of business, our people, and investing in assets that 
support strategic objectives. And of course advancements in 
technology would be a part of that as well, Mr. Chairman. 
 
So I think when we’re saying if there’s a new direction 
undertaking this year, it’s the continuation of those things 
outlined in the business plan in the vision brochure that I gave 
you, the member opposite, last year. And we will continue in 
those four strategic priority areas. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Can you tell us 
how much space in Saskatchewan is currently leased by 
Saskatchewan Property Management, and how does this 
compare to last year or recent years? Is there any major 
increases or decreases in leasing properties? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chairman, this year our space is, 
in the lease area, and continues to be about roughly 30 per cent 
of the total portfolio. So this year our lease space is about 

249,100 square metres. And at this time last year in our 
portfolio, in the lease area, we had about 257,000 square 
metres. So just a slight reduction in the amount of lease space. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Can the minister 
tell us what is spent on lease space in a given year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chairman, in the budget year 
2001-2002, our lease expenses would total about $39.6 million. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. How much of this 
lease space is currently vacant? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chairman, I can only say at this 
point that our total space . . . we average about 3 to 4 per cent, 
which is well within the industry standard for vacancy rate. But 
I don’t have the breakdown of the leased to our own space, and 
I will certainly get that for the member opposite as soon as we 
can have that available. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister, that would be 
very much appreciated. 
 
Is there any lease space that is currently vacant that is subject to 
long-term lease agreements? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chairman, the member asks do we 
have any long-term lease arrangements, and I would believe 
he’s talking about hold-over arrangements from the time where 
we got into arrangements with individuals for a very long term. 
 
The major focus of SPMC over the last number of years, and 
particularly since this government has been in power, is to look 
at those and, where we can, reduce the amount of space in that 
way. And so at this time there may be some smaller spaces 
within larger buildings, but if you’re talking about a long-term 
leasing of a building we’re not aware of any at this time. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Of the current 
leased office space, what percentages would be in the city of 
Regina, Saskatoon, P.A. (Prince Albert), and Moose Jaw, those 
four major cities? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chairman, just by the nature of 
program and department activity, it’s reasonable to assume that 
there’s going to be a lot of leased space in those areas. 
 
We don’t have the exact amounts by location but we’re 
certainly willing to get that for the member opposite, and we 
will bring that to his attention as quickly as possible. But also 
fair to say that throughout Saskatchewan departments provide a 
variety of programs and services and we try to accommodate 
them in those centres to the best of our ability in a leasing way, 
or perhaps in bringing departments together to provide 
efficiencies. But we will get that information for them. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you. Madam Minister, how much leased 
office space in Regina is currently vacant? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 
opposite for the question. We believe it’s probably lower than 
the 3 to 4 per cent that I indicated earlier, but the exact amount, 
I will get that information to him. We didn’t break down the 



April 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 757 

 

lease information per location, and so we will do that for the 
member. But it’s safe to assume it’s less than the margin that 
we talked about earlier. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, Madam 
Minister. I would also like to welcome the officials from 
SPMC. 
 
And I have a number of questions that I would like to ask, and 
they’re all aviation related. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I wonder why. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I wonder why also. 
 
My first question, Madam Minister, is: how many planes do we 
have in the SPMC aviation department, wing, or whatever we 
wish to call it from SPMC, and where are they based out of? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I thank the member opposite for the 
question. And I think that SPMC officials are favourably 
disposed to the member with all the good work he did on the 
Echo Valley Centre and the ability to save that centre and to see 
it viable into the future. 
 
To the air ambulance question, or to the air question, we have 
two air ambulances — they’re two fixed-wing Cheyenne 
aircraft that operate through the air ambulance centre in 
Saskatoon, and we have three here. Two are, again, Cheyenne 
aircraft and the one is the King Air. 
 
They’re used for supports to executive government and to the 
programs and consultations that are required for the work that’s 
needed for government to take its work to the people. And we 
have one of the Cheyenne that is always used as a backup for 
the ambulance services as well. 
 
So the answer would be a total of five. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Madam Minister. 
And yes, I did do some work with some of your officials on the 
Echo Valley and very much appreciated working with people 
like Mr. Lawand his staff. 
 
My question, my next question relates to some information. I 
believe I read in the paper, and maybe it’s just speculation, but 
it was indicated, Mr. Chair, that there’s a plan in process to 
purchase a new King Air. And I would like to know if this, in 
fact, is correct; and if there is, in fact, any plan of replacing any 
of the five other aircraft or, if there is a new one, if it is to 
replace one of the others or will be in addition to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, and I thank the member 
opposite for the question. The new plane that is being purchased 
is a King Air 200 air ambulance plane. It’s in partnership with 
the Department of Health and they’ve acquired this plane for 
ambulance services. 
 
It will replace the old Piper Cheyenne II that was purchased in 
1978. So this is an aging aircraft and not reliable. And certainly 
by that age the expenditure for any replacements is becoming 
very costly, as would the operating be. The plans are then to 
mothball the Cheyenne, and so that it would be sold once we’ve 

taken out the equipment that’s been in place. 
 
And the new plane will be available probably by June or July. 
And right now, as we speak, it’s currently being fitted with the 
required modifications and medevac equipment, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chair. 
Madam Minister, can you give me a cost of the new King Air? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — The value of the new aircraft once it 
has been totally outfitted would be approximately $6.2 million. 
And some of that will be offset when we have the sale of the 
old Cheyenne II, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
my next question is very much related to that 6.2 million — 
does that include life-cycle spares, all the test equipment? I 
understand life-cycle buying and I’m just wondering if 
life-cycle costing is put into this 6.2 million. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Through you, Mr. Chair, to 
the member opposite, if we’re talking about the life-cycle 
costing over the cost of the whole lifetime of the aircraft, no, 
that would not be included. 
 
But what does come with this, with the purchase of the new 
plane, would be a warranty that covers parts and the ongoing 
requirement of those parts, some ongoing warranty work that 
would be done on the aircraft. It covers the training of the pilots 
and free parts for the first 1,200 hours of operations. So those 
would be the additional coverage that we would get with the 
purchase of the new aircraft. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
my next question deals with the usage of the fleet of aircraft, 
and I would like to know from the minister if they have a 
breakdown of costs per mile of the aircraft and/or if it’s broke 
down in costs per passenger mile. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Over the last few years, Mr. Chairman, 
the average cost per mile would be about $4, and that’s for the 
executive air. We don’t have the air ambulance breakdown and 
their costs, but we’ll get that to you as quickly as possible, Mr. 
Chair. So you’re looking at about an average of $4 as costs per 
mile. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
my next question goes right along with that. At $4 per mile does 
that include costing such as hangarage, payroll, insurance, and 
all of the other ancillary costs? 
 
And I guess where I’m coming from on this, if you are a private 
operator all of your cost is based on a cost per mile. It’s a total 
expense that you have to outlay, including the purchase of all of 
the facilities, the payroll, the fuel, and everything. I’m just 
wondering if this is all inclusive and what the costs would be, or 
if there is a formula that has been used to be an all-inclusive 
cost per mile with all of those considerations taken into 
consideration? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. It was taking us a while, 



758 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2001 

 

Mr. Chair, because we were talking about . . . of course, we’d 
had a hangar for a number of years and our accommodation 
costs sort of depreciated over a period of time. But that’s very 
minimal now and all other costs — if you’re talking about 
insurance, the operating, the salaries — all of those other costs 
are in that amount of dollars. And we will endeavour to get you 
a breakdown of those that bring us to the figure of about $4. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Madam Minister, Mr. Chair, I would 
definitely be interested in those figures because I talked to 
charter operators in various parts of the country and wherever 
they have to purchase a building, they don’t have the luxury, in 
some cases, of long-term owning a building because they’re 
going out of business because of competition or whatever 
reasons. So I would very much appreciate those figures. 
 
I know I hear charter operators that figure that doing work is 
unfair, if you wish, in competition with government-run aircraft 
when you come to cost per mile. And so I’m very much 
interested in those figures. 
 
Mr. Chair, to the Minister, this is kind of an all-encompassing 
one also, is I’m very interested in the number of staff employed 
for maintenance and whether they’re specific to the Cheyenne 
and to the King Air, or if they’re cross-trained or if they’re two 
separate entities, and the number of maintenance people per 
aircraft. Or if your formula works out to the number of people 
per hour flown or what kind of a process that’s used to 
determine the number of maintenance workers. 
 
I’d also like the same information for the flight crew, if I could 
please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — In the area of maintenance, we have a 
total of six. We have one maintenance manager in Regina and 
one located in Saskatoon. And they are all cross-trained for both 
aircraft so they would be able to provide that for both kinds of 
aircraft. 
 
In the area of the flight crew, we have seven pilots out of 
Saskatoon. And they would predominately be associated with 
air ambulance services. That’s what is stationed in Saskatoon. 
And we have five in Regina, providing for government services. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Again, Mr. 
Chair, I think you know where I’m coming from. This is the 
cost of the total operation vis-a-vis what it might cost a 
commercial operator to do much of the same work. 
 
So I’m just wondering if, you may not have these figures with 
you, but if I could get them at a later date, a breakdown of the 
total cost per year of the operation of the fleet of aircraft that’s 
owned by the government and even a breakdown of the salaries 
for the key people, your aviators and also your AME (aircraft 
mechanical engineers) type people, your engineers — if I could 
get a breakdown of that. But I’m very interested in a total cost 
of operation. And also at the . . . I don’t know if you have a 
figure like that for right now. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — We don’t at present, Mr. Chair, but we 
will endeavour to get those figures. I think where the member’s 
coming from is saying, and the comment that was made earlier, 
that perhaps somehow we’re trying to subsidize this service, 

and so it’s very unfair for the charter outfits that are operating. I 
think that’s what I was hearing you say. 
 
And we don’t . . . we have a good relationship with the charter 
people in Saskatchewan. For example, in the area of air 
ambulance, there are private operators that assist us and provide 
backup in that way and in the charters as well. But the charter 
services really don’t want to see this as a core part of their 
services, just by the nature of the work of government and the 
kinds of meetings that are attended, the types of things that 
happen when you’re in very serious meetings, for example, 
trade talks. And if there is an opportunity to talk with people to 
further the Saskatchewan goals in those talks, there might be a 
layover experience, so then you would be paying additional 
costs for the layover. Those charters then can’t get back to do 
their core businesses and things like that. 
 
So they’ve suggested to us that this would not be something that 
they see in direct competition with them. And I’ll try and get 
that information over to the member opposite as soon as 
possible. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s 
something that at a later date we can definitely debate at great 
length. But I understand also it’s not in direct competition. But 
that’s why I’m asking the questions vis-à-vis the cost per mile, 
etc., because if we’re operating government aircraft at a cost per 
mile vis-à-vis, what I would have to, if I started a company and 
there’s an unfair playing field, and that’s why I would like all of 
these questions answered. 
 
And my last question, Mr. Chair, is when the government 
aircraft are used by a department, is in fact that rate charged 
back to the particular department using the airplane? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank the member opposite for the 
question. As we talked about earlier when I was giving an 
overview of SPMC and what we provide, all of our services are 
on a cost-recovery basis. And this would operate no differently. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, we would develop that charge-back rate and then 
we would charge that to the departments who were requesting 
that service, as we would do for accommodation and other 
services that we provide. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Madam 
Minister, and your staff, that’s all the questions I have. I’d like 
to turn it back over to the member from Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Madam Minister, in December 16, the year 
2000, SPMC placed an ad in the Regina Leader-Post calling for 
tenders for a large amount of office space in Regina. Why was 
this office space suddenly necessary? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite is 
correct. There was the proposal call for approximately 25,000 
square metres of office space in downtown Regina. This wasn’t 
a sudden need. This is a renegotiating or a process where we 
have together a large number of departments where leases are 
coming due. We would work with those departments to look at 
what their needs are and what they’re requesting of the space 
that they feel would accommodate them. And we would also 
then enter into studies of the marketplace and what’s happening 



April 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 759 

 

in the markets. 
 
And in this instance, we’re working in a partnership with the 
federal government. But I think it’s also important to stress the 
co-operation and the work that we do with the city and the 
city’s planning. 
 
As you would know that there are a number of office spaces in 
the downtown, but our definition of downtown Regina was 
quite a bit looser than the development plan of the city of 
Regina. And they requested of us, we would tighten our 
definition of the downtown boundary and that we would work 
with them on planning of some of our program needs. 
 
So these are departments that have already been in existence. 
They have about that number of square footage of program 
needs from what they’ve been doing on an ongoing basis today. 
And projecting what they might need for the next five to ten 
years. I say that amount of time because we would be looking 
at, again, the marketplace and determining whether we can get a 
good deal in the marketplace over a five-year period or whether 
the responses would come back for a 10-year period of time. 
 
So these are all leases that have come due and we tried to 
coordinate that because we know the impact that that has for the 
city and particularly the downtown of Regina. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
can I ask the minister specifically what will this space be used 
for? Or are there some . . . are there still some unknowns in this 
lease arrangement? Who’s all going to be in those spaces? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I might mention, Mr. Chair, that that 
amount of space, it only really does take a few of our large 
departments to come due and you would be looking at a RFP 
(request for proposal) of this magnitude. And that probably the 
lease space in downtown Regina would be about two and a half 
percent in total; not this particular RFP, but in total about two 
and a half per cent of the lease space in Saskatchewan. 
 
So when we are talking about who requires this space, the five 
agencies that had expiring leases include: Highways and 
Transportation; Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing; 
Women’s Secretariat; Education and Post-Secondary Education 
and Skills Training. Those are the departments who have leases 
that will be coming available and would need to be looked at, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you. Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. 
Chair, I understand that the first need of occupancy is about 
September 1 of this year. Can you tell us over what period of 
time all of this space will be necessary? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I don’t know if it’s a glad circumstance 
or not, Mr. Chair, that all of that space would become needed at 
the same time because of the leasing arrangements but that’s the 
case. And the member opposite is correct. The first occupancy 
would be needed by September, 2001, and many of them would 
need the space as soon as that can be arranged. 
 
We’re negotiating now. And so as quickly as we could get those 

leases into place, those departments would start to move and 
probably be completed over the next year. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, when 
will the government make a decision on to which proposal they 
will accept? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — The member opposite probably, 
because he’s read to us the date of the RFP, would know that it 
closed and we’re now in the process of negotiations. And we 
could see those concluded within the next 10 days or two 
weeks, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, what is 
the Saskatchewan Property Management’s policy in as far as 
awarding these tenders? Does it go to the lowest bidder or are 
there other considerations taken into account? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank the member opposite for the 
question. I think quite often during my time on city council we 
talked about lowest, qualified bidders and what that meant, and 
there are many phrases that we can use for how people do that. 
But when we’re looking at a bidding like this, what we would 
do is talk with all of the departments and we would articulate in 
advance the program needs, and what the department is looking 
at that would best set their needs. 
 
And we would put those criteria out in advance so the people 
who would be bidding on the leases would know what the 
requirements are. Now they would try and meet those 
requirements in maybe varying ways, but once we’re assured 
that they’ve met all of the qualifications, the projects are 
awarded . . . the leases are awarded, Mr. Chairman, on the 
lowest, qualified bidder. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, the 
request for proposal also states that the government would 
consider purchase of needed space. Have the funds for these 
potential purchases been budgeted for in the current year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — In the accounting systems that we use, 
Mr. Chair, if we were to purchase a building, those funds would 
be accounted for in the year that that building is purchased. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What dollar figure 
would you expect your department to be willing to spend on the 
purchase of a new building or of new office space? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — When we’re putting out an RFP, Mr. 
Chairman, SPMC would look at all of the options. It would look 
at the lease option, the lease/own option, the lease-to-purchase 
option, and we would do that based on the net present value. 
 
We would then weigh what’s more economically advantageous 
to the corporation. And we would do that by costing it over the 
life-cycle basis of the arrangement. So we would consider the 
net present value, the market, and we would pay the market 
value, but only if it’s advantageous to the needs of government, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Are you 
suggesting to me that you have no idea what you would be 
willing to spend on that building or that office space? 



760 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2001 

 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chairman, if the member opposite 
had a specific building in mind, it would be easier to answer 
that question. But on an overall basis, I would say yes. We 
would do the detailed analysis work necessary to know what 
would be the best possible arrangement we could conclude if 
we were looking at purchasing a building. And how we would 
do that is we would . . . we always work with the federal 
government if this is the situation — they’re part of the 
marketplace. We might work with the private sector to 
determine what those market analyses are and the values are. 
 
And then when we have someone come forward who presents 
us with an option like that, then of course you also have to 
consider that those buildings don’t come designed perfectly for 
program spaces and arrangements. So then we would also have 
to factor in the cost of converting those spaces. 
 
So it’s difficult for me to give him a figure. I don’t know the 
size of building he’s talking about. I don’t know the location. I 
wouldn’t know what marketplace, what the type of building 
he’s talking about, whether it’s class A space or it’s a class B 
space. 
 
But yes, we would do due diligence. We’d be open and 
accountable in that way and we do work with the private sector 
to determine those values. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
Madam Minister, you also stated in this request for proposal 
that you would be willing to enter into joint-venture 
opportunities for this needed office space in Regina. Can you 
explain the nature of a joint venture? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chairman, when we go out into an 
RFP, what we’re trying to do is provide the private sector with 
the widest range of options available to them. So that might be a 
purchase, it might take the form of a lease, and in some cases — 
depending on the economic opportunities or joint partnering for 
opportunities with the city-of-Regina-identified economic 
development considerations — there might be a joint 
development proposal that might come forward. We don’t want 
to preclude that. 
 
So that might mean that there would be some public sector 
involvement and some private sector involvement in 
development of a building or a space. Traditionally, that would 
be in the form of government taking some portion of that space 
to lease for their needs. Again, it has to make sense within the 
market analysis that we would do and the detailed assessment 
of what the space requirements would be and the costing per 
square foot. 
 
So we would also consider if there was a proposal that came 
forward that we would take an equity position in the building; 
we would look at those options and not discard them. Because 
we want to, in whatever we’re doing, provide space that is 
effective for the departments and their program space but 
efficient and also cost efficient, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Speaker, does 
Saskatchewan Property Management have a policy in place in 
terms of long-term lease agreements? 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to say 
from past experience, we do not want to see long-term leasing 
arrangements that go beyond the business . . . one business 
cycle . . . or one particular business cycle. 
 
So we generally would be looking at a leasing time frame of 
about five years. That provides the greatest flexibility and we 
find the greatest ability to look at the market. 
 
If there’s going to go . . . arrangement that must go beyond that 
five-year cycle, for example, it might be advantageous in the 
marketplace and people would come back and say to us if you 
were looking at a 10-year arrangement the costing is in a 
preferential way for that number of years, then we might 
consider that. But that’s a very serious consideration because 
we didn’t want to see what had happened in the ’80s reoccur. 
 
And so, Mr. Chairman, what we would do, that would require 
SPMC, the people involved in providing all of the information 
to the board and that would be a board decision, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — It being past the hour of 5 o’clock, the House 
stands adjourned until Friday, 10 a.m. And let’s all now go have 
a good dinner. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:02. 
 
 


