















































Hansard: May 04, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 925 
 May 4, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise again 
today to present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens of the 
Cudworth, Prud’homme, St. Benedict area —citizens concerned 
about the loss of their community-based ambulance services. 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as I’ve mentioned, Mr. Speaker, the signators on the 
petition are from the communities of Cudworth, St. Benedict, 
and Prud’homme, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition regarding the two government’s Crown 
corporations, SaskPower and SaskEnergy both recently 
announcing rate increases for residential and business 
customers. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Biggar and Saskatoon, and I’m pleased to 
present the petition on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
to present today from people who are concerned about the EMS 
(emergency medical services) report and the effect the 
ambulance services cutback would have on rural Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Naicam, 
Spalding, and Archerwill. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
conversion of some highways to gravel. And the prayer reads: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel, commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents, and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Balgonie, Moose Jaw, and Caronport. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I again 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens deeply concerned about ambulance services. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And this petition is signed by folks from Wadena and 
Kelvington. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people from Swift Current and area concerned with the state of 
the hospital in Swift Current. The prayer of this petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today the petition is signed by residents of the city 
of Swift Current, of Gull Lake, and of Shaunavon, and Eston. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again to present a petition 
on behalf of the citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 
concerned about their ambulance service. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the petition is signed by the residents of Radville. 
 
I so present. 
 



926 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2001 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of concerned citizens. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Wynyard, Quinton, and Mozart. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise in the 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding citizens that 
are unhappy with the energy rates. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood, Leoville, Chitek Lake and Rapid Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, I rise with a petition to stop further cuts at Assiniboia 
Pioneer Lodge. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this come from 
the communities of Assiniboia, Limerick, Ferland, Kincaid, 
Lafleche, Mossbank and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly: 
 

To overrule the Parkland Health Board’s decision with 
regard to the Blaine Lake Medical Clinic; 
 
And other petitions that were addendums to sessional 

papers nos. 3, 4, 5, 10, 58, and 121. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 35 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Northern Affairs: which non-profit and 
community-based organizations received funding from the 
office of Northern Affairs in the 2000-2001 fiscal year; and 
how much did each of these organizations receive? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 35 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Northern Affairs: which non-profit and 
community-based organizations will receive funding from 
the office of Northern Affairs in the 2001-2002 fiscal year; 
and how much will each of these organizations receive? 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on day no. 35 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Sask Water: did Sask Water provide any 
consulting services outside of Saskatchewan in the 
2000-2001 fiscal year; and what are the details of those 
services in terms of clients. 

 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 35 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management: which municipal drinking water 
supplies failed to meet with provincial standards in 
2000-2001; and what are the compliance rates of all 
municipalities required to provide water samples for 
testing? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have with us today a number of safety patrollers from around 
the province. And as we did last year, I would like to beg the 
indulgence of the House as we introduce these safety patrollers 
and try and get them familiar with who their particular members 
are. 
 
So what I will do is I will ask a particular group from a 
community to stand, or from a couple of communities to stand, 
and I would also ask their member to stand as well. 
 
The safety patrollers, we had a statement earlier in the week, 
Mr. Speaker, talking about their work. And we’re very grateful 
for the work that they do in helping keep their communities safe 
for other children and for themselves. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to introduce to you and 
to this Assembly those students from Carrot River, Hudson 
Bay, and Nipawin. And I would ask the member for Carrot 
River Valley to please stand and greet them. I would ask those 



May 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 927 

 

safety patrollers from Carrot River, Hudson Bay, and Nipawin 
to stand please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. And safety patrollers from 
Estevan and the member from Estevan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. Safety patrollers from 
Gravelbourg and their member from Thunder Creek please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — And safety patrollers from Kindersley, 
Lanigan, Nokomis, and Watrous. And I would ask the Leader of 
the Opposition to please stand and greet those folks. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — From Maidstone and Turtleford; the 
member from Lloydminster please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — And from Martensville and Warman; the 
member from Rosthern please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — And from Moose Jaw, the member from 
Moose Jaw North, please stand and greet them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — And I would like to welcome, on behalf of 
the House, those from North Battleford. Would you please 
stand. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — And those from Prince Albert. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Those of you from Prince Albert, the 
member from Prince Albert Northcote stood and welcomed 
you, but I would also like to note that our Speaker is also a 
member from Prince Albert. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — And those safety patrollers from Regina, 
and I would ask the members from Regina to please stand and 
join in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — And safety patrollers from Rosetown. And 
again I would ask the Leader of the Opposition, the member for 
Rosetown-Biggar. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — And students from St. Walburg, safety 
patrollers from there. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — And the member from Meadow Lake. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — From Saskatoon. And would all the 
members from Saskatoon please stand. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — And from Unity. And would the member 
who represents Unity please stand and welcome Unity. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — And safety patroller students from 
Weyburn, and their teachers, and would the member from 
Weyburn please greet them. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Well again, welcome to the legislature. We 
know that you’re here for the weekend; we hope you have a 
wonderful time. And we hope that you learn something in your 
time at this Assembly. Welcome from all of us. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you to the rest of the Assembly, I too would like to welcome 
and congratulate all the safety patrollers that are filling the 
galleries here today. 
 
I made a member’s statement a couple of days ago on the fine 
work that you do on helping your fellow students get to and 
from school safely. 
 
(10:15) 
 
I think if you sit through the rest of the proceedings here today, 
and as we go through question period, perhaps if you brought 
some of your paddles and whistles, the Speaker may use those 
as we work our way through question period. So I hope you 
enjoy the proceedings and have a good time in the city as 
you’re here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce two people 
who are in your gallery today. Carmelle Beasley who is married 
to my cousin and Roberta MacKinnon. They’re both from 
Manitoba and both of them’s husbands were killed in 
work-related accidents and they’re here to discuss workers’ 
compensation problems. So please welcome them to the 
Assembly today. 
 



928 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2001 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I too want to welcome all of the students that 
are here today, and I want to mention that there’s nothing that 
politicians like better than for somebody to applaud them. 
However, for the rest of the proceeding I would appreciate it if 
you would observe the custom of this House and that is that 
people in the gallery would observe only and refrain from any 
bells and whistles and paddles. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Women of Distinction Awards 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I had the 
honour and privilege of attending the 20th annual YWCA 
(Young Women’s Christian Association) Women of Distinction 
Awards Dinner here in Regina. Mr. Speaker, this awards dinner 
honours those women who have made a commitment to 
happier, healthier, and more productive communities. Surely 
our lives are better because of them. 
 
There was an impressive list of nominees at last night’s banquet 
and our congratulations go out to all of those nominated. On 
behalf of the official opposition, I would like wish each of the 
winners in the various categories sincere congratulations and 
best wishes for the future. 
 
In the health and wellness category, Donna Brunskill; business, 
labour, and professions, Sandra Greenough; arts and culture, 
Kathryn Laurin; community and humanitarian service, Judy 
Kobsar; lifetime achievement, Elsie May Quick; science and 
technology, Jennifer Beriault; sports and recreation, Christine 
Stapleton; contribution to a rural community, Lilliane Sabiston; 
and the Young Women of Distinction Award went to Anita 
Smith. 
 
Once again, our warmest congratulations from all members on 
this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
also recognize the annual YWCA Women of Distinction 
Awards held last night to honour the many women who 
contribute greatly to the well-being of our communities, both at 
home and at work. 
 
And community spirit is very evident during these awards. 
There’s a very special feeling in the air. It’s the kind of 
electricity that accompanies any kind of awards ceremony. 
 
And there’s also the pride of family and friends and the 
acknowledgement of the work done by the nominees and 
recipients. And many of the past recipients as well take time out 
to honour those who are coming after them. 
 
You’ve heard the names, Mr. Speaker, but you may wonder 
what makes someone a Woman of Distinction. Here’s just some 
of the hallmarks of a Woman of Distinction — vision, 
significance of contribution, sustained contribution over time, 
risk takers, innovators, people who challenge the community to 
look at things differently, people who are courageous, 

inspirational, committed to excellence. 
 
These are very high standards, Mr. Speaker, and last night you 
may not be aware that one of these special nominees was Dr. 
Lynda Haverstock who was awarded an Honorary Woman of 
Distinction award. And I’m sure all the members would join me 
in congratulating her on receiving that award. 
 
The awards also offer a fundraising opportunity for the YWCA 
to carry on its many important and worthwhile projects for 
children and women and men in need. So we thank the sponsors 
and the YWCA, and encourage people to celebrate all of our 
citizens’ good work and to support the YWCA. And 
congratulations on another good year of awards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Estevan Youth to Compete 
in Great Canadian Geography Challenge 2001 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Toby Henneberg will 
be representing Saskatchewan at the national level of the Great 
Canadian Geography Challenge 2001. Toby flies to Ottawa 
over the long weekend in May for the competition. Toby is a 
grade 8 student and attends Estevan Junior High where he 
qualified for the challenge. He went on to the provincials held 
in Moose Jaw where he placed in the top 10 of the semi-finals, 
then in the top 5 of the finals, and then on to win the provincial 
challenge. 
 
Toby’s father, Carl Henneberg is the owner of Blacksmith 
Resources and is also chairman of the Canadian Committee for 
the Canadian Petroleum Association of Canada. Toby’s mother 
Lynn is owner of Century 21 Border Real Estate Service in 
Estevan. Both are great constituents and assets in our 
community. 
 
I would like my colleagues to join me and the constituents of 
Estevan in wishing Toby the very best of luck in the Great 
Canadian Geography Challenge 2001. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Supports International 
Labour Organization Convention C-29 

 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan has a moral responsibility to support efforts to 
eliminate the practice of forced labour. In 1999, we were one of 
the first provinces to support federal ratification of the 
International Labour Organization treaty banning the worst 
forms of child labour. 
 
Today I’m proud to say Saskatchewan is supporting federal 
ratification of another ILO (International Labour Organization) 
treaty, and the Minister of Labour will be informing the federal 
government of our support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Convention C-29 is part of the ILO global 
campaign against forced labour. The ratification of C-29 puts in 
place international standards requiring ILO member nations to 
eliminate forced labour. 
 



May 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 929 

 

Mr. Speaker, forced labour denies a worker’s basic human 
rights. Supporting the federal government’s ratification of C-29 
demonstrates Saskatchewan’s strong support for ILO objectives 
that promote core labour standards in the elimination of forced 
labour. 
 
Saskatchewan supports fairness for working people. The 
Labour Standards Act, The Trade Union Act, and the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code all reject practices like 
forced labour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we reaffirm our support for the work done 
by the United Nations, through the International Labour 
Organization to free all people everywhere from the scourge of 
forced labour. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tribute to Dr. Ahab Spence 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today in the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to pay 
tribute to a highly esteemed and respected member of the 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College, the late Dr. Ahab 
Spence. 
 
Dr. Spence was born in 1911 at Split Lake, Manitoba, and 
throughout his 90 years he made numerous contributions to the 
social, cultural, spiritual, and educational lives of many Indian 
and non-Indian people in not only Saskatchewan and Manitoba 
but Canada as well. 
 
The late Dr. Spence had many careers. He was an Anglican 
priest, a teacher, an instructor, a liaison worker, a counsellor, a 
mentor, a husband, father, and grandfather. 
 
He came to SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated College) in 
1980 where he began his third career at the age of 69. He was 
determined to see that First Nations languages would not be 
lost, and for many he was the head of the Indian language 
department at SIFC. 
 
Dr. Spence was truly a respected individual in all of society. In 
1967 he received the Canadian Centennial Medal, which is 
awarded to people providing outstanding service to government 
and local communities. 
 
In 1982 he was awarded the Order of Canada, which honours 
and pays tribute to those who exemplify the highest qualities of 
citizenship, and whose contributions enrich the lives of their 
contemporaries. 
 
In 1995 Dr. Spence received an Aboriginal Achievement Award 
in recognition of his service and devotion to enhance the 
cultural, linguistic, and spiritual education of Indian people. 
 
I ask members of this Assembly to join in paying tribute to the 
late Dr. Ahab Spence for his contribution to the lives of 
Saskatchewan people, and indeed to the lives of all Canadians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Saskatoon Students at the Canada-Wide Science Fair 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to report that 60 young scientists from across the 
province have been selected from their regional science fairs to 
represent Saskatchewan at the Canada-Wide Science Fair. 
 
Saskatoon, my hometown, will be sending five students to the 
competition. They are: Jeffrey Kulyk, James Zheng, Christine 
Rendall, Constance Chan, and Matthew Gruza, who’s a 
constituent of mine who developed the project, 800 Minutes 
and Counting . . . a Long-Distance Timer. 
 
This project, Mr. Speaker, came as a result of his sister’s 
experience while studying in Ontario. She signed up for a 
long-distance package that limited her to 800 minutes per 
month and her brother Matthew developed a computer program 
that used a voice modem and her personal computer to keep 
track of her monthly long-distance usage. 
 
Matthew’s project earned him the gold medal and a travel 
award sponsored by SaskEnergy. 
 
I’d like to congratulate everyone who participated in 
Saskatchewan’s science fairs and wish good luck to all of our 
young scientists at the Canada-Wide Science Fair in Kingston. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Melfort Food Bank Gets New Home 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
people from my constituency have demonstrated once again 
how citizens of Saskatchewan co-operate to accomplish a task. 
 
The building that the Melfort Food Bank was located in is no 
longer usable and they have to relocate. The decision was made 
to raise money to build a new building and within a very short 
period commitments were made by local community 
organizations, businesses, and private citizens that are very 
close to their goal. The old building has been torn down and the 
new building is going up with the help of a volunteer labour 
force. Projected completion date is June 30 of this year. 
 
This was a major undertaking for a community of our size but 
there was a need and when community organizations, 
businesses, and residents were asked they came through without 
faltering. 
 
I would ask the Assembly to join me in taking off our hats to 
the people of Melfort for first understanding the need, then 
determining a solution, and quickly taking action to solve the 
problem. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

SunBridge Wind Power Project 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to stand before the 
Assembly to say that construction is scheduled to start this 
month on the wind power project planned for the Gull Lake 
area. 



930 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2001 

 

This will be Saskatchewan’s first major supply of green power. 
The 17 wind turbines in this $20 million project will be built 5 
kilometres southeast of Gull Lake. Suncor and Enbridge 
submitted the winning bid to construct and operate the wind 
power facility and SaskPower will then purchase the electricity. 
 
The power will be used to supply federal government buildings 
in Saskatchewan and other Saskatchewan customers starting in 
2002. Added to this, Mr. Speaker, our Saskatchewan 
government will purchase a minimum of 10 gigawatt hours of 
wind power each year for 10 years, and this will represent 
approximately 15 per cent of executive government’s power 
needs. 
 
Construction of the SunBridge Wind Power Project is expected 
to be completed in June of 2002, Mr. Speaker. This project is a 
major step forward in developing a viable and cost-effective 
green power industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I might say, Mr. Speaker, that this project, when it’s 
completed, will mean that Saskatchewan has the third-largest 
capacity in terms of wind-power development in the entire 
country. A capacity, Mr. Speaker, that sends us in a positive, 
new direction and helps us to fight climate change. Thank you 
so much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Contamination of Water Supply in North Battleford 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning 
my question is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party official opposition would 
like to extend our deepest condolences to the families of three 
Battleford area residents whose deaths may have been a result 
of the outbreak of cryptosporidium in the water supply. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we also have some questions to ask about the 
government’s handling of the situation. There are now 26 
confirmed cases and at least 150 people exhibiting symptoms 
related to this parasite, yet the first boil-water advisory was not 
issued until about a week after the first confirmed case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is: exactly when did the local medical 
health officer and the provincial government first become aware 
of this very serious problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to confirm 
what my Acting Minister of Health said last night about 
condolences for the families. 
 
We are obviously working very closely with the North 
Battleford officials, both at the city level and with district 
health, also with some federal health officials and then our 
provincial health officials. 
 
In this particular situation, I know many of the officials have 
provided much of the information to the public. But the specific 
question that the member asks opposite, there was one case of 
cryptosporidium that was identified approximately a week 

before the boil-water advisory. 
 
Cryptosporidium does show up relatively often and obviously 
results in diarrhea and some other problems. After that initial 
one, there was some concern that there were some other things 
going on and basically the boil-water advisory was issued, but 
that’s when the officials started knowing about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the local medical 
health officer is saying the first case was confirmed about a 
week before the boil-water advisory was issued, and the 
minister just confirmed that. 
 
But local residents are saying that there was clearly a problem 
well before that. The owner of Canadian Tire said that most of 
his staff fell ill around March 21. That’s over a month before 
the boil-water advisory was issued. He said and I quote: 
 

Everyone knew then that we had a problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly something went terribly wrong with the 
government’s water-quality monitoring system. Why was the 
system so slow to react? Why did it take so long to notify 
people of the Battlefords that their water was unsafe? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, when a particular health 
issue arises within a district the local health officials start 
monitoring and trying to figure out what’s happening. And in 
this particular case they obviously were getting reports into the 
hospital. 
 
We don’t know the full extent of the timelines around this but 
this is why Sask health officials, federal health officials, and the 
local health officials are doing what’s called a epidemiological 
study which is let’s study how this broke, broke out so that you 
can look at it. 
 
What we do know is that when the first case was confirmed of 
cryptosporidium then people were watching and they obviously 
made some other cases. When the medical health officer had 
confirmation there was a problem with the water — before that 
they weren’t sure where this was — then that’s when the 
boil-water advisory was issued and all of the appropriate steps 
were taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, when dozens and dozens of 
people are falling ill, you would think that the first suspicion 
would be that there may be something in the water. 
 
Many people are wondering why did it take so long to issue the 
first boil-water advisory? Clearly there was some kind of a 
breakdown in the system and that has resulted in dozens and 
possibly hundreds of people becoming ill and actually may have 
resulted in the death of three people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask the question again: why did the system for 
maintaining water quality fail in the Battlefords? 



May 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 931 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the local health district and 
the medical health officer would be getting the information 
from their officials in the local area — the staff, the people. 
They were concerned. They knew that some people were ill. 
They did the appropriate testing, confirmed that 
cryptosporidium was there in one case. And then when there . . . 
one case doesn’t make a whole outbreak, but when they then 
found well, there’s some more, then they went right to the 
boil-water advisory. And within . . . the officials then went to a 
sort of a mandatory boil-water after confirmation a few days 
later. 
 
The whole process and how this works is something where you 
end up having to make sure you have the appropriate 
information. It’s not always very clear that it was the water, or 
was it food poisoning, or some of these other kinds of things. 
 
And so what we know is that they followed the appropriate 
procedures; they acted very quickly. Often they were working 
all day and all night to try to find out what this was, and they 
worked with it. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, of course the 
tragic occurrence in Walkerton, Ontario, should have given us 
all a heads-up that we have to be very vigilant. 
 
About a year ago the Saskatchewan Party asked the government 
about its procedure to test and maintain water quality in 
Saskatchewan. The Associate Minister of Health told us that 
Saskatchewan has a very good tracking and follow-up system. 
Municipalities submit their water to SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) for testing. If the 
results have a higher than acceptable levels of contamination, 
repeat testing is done then as soon as possible. 
 
SERM notifies the municipality and the local health officer, and 
I’m now quoting the former minister: 
 

. . . appropriate action is initiated immediately, such as a 
boiling water advisory to the communities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in this case, for some reason, it didn’t work. Either 
there was a breakdown in the system, or the system itself is not 
designed to act quickly enough with regard to problems of this 
nature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask again: why did the system fail? Why did it 
take so long to issue that first boil-water advisory? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the appropriate officials 
were working together and making sure that the steps that were 
taken appropriately. 
 
What happened in this particular case was that they knew that 
there was some illness there; they weren’t sure what the cause 
was. They confirmed cryptosporidium. Within later . . . within a 
week, they ended up then confirming another case and they 
started suspecting something with the water. Boil-water 
advisory was issued. Then a mandatory boil-water advisory or 
order issued, and all of the officials were . . . stepped in 
immediately to work on this particular case. 
 
What we’re now doing with the various Saskatchewan health 

officials, federal health officials, epidemiologists, is trying to 
identify how that happened. But also the city is working very 
carefully with the engineering firm to fix the problem. 
 
I advise all members of the public in the North Battleford area 
to continue to boil the water until they hear a clear from their 
local city. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I think members on both 
sides of the House know that obviously something has gone 
horribly wrong. Dozens — perhaps hundreds — of people are 
ill due to unsafe drinking water, and in fact three people may be 
dead. 
 
Today we’re learning the problem is with the parasite that may 
have been in the water system over a month before the first 
warning was issued. The Minister of Health has not yet told the 
House whether in fact water samples were taken for that period 
of about a month; whether or not the problem was identified or 
overlooked; and where exactly the problem was. Is the system 
flawed? Was there a breakdown in the system? 
 
Obviously something went wrong and I would ask the minister 
again: can he tell this House and the people of Saskatchewan 
what went wrong with the system that this problem was not 
identified sooner and the boil-water advisory issued sooner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer to a number of these 
questions can be answered in more detail by the actual officials 
involved. But what we do know is that diarrhea isn’t a 
reportable disease when it comes into the hospital. What we do 
know is that on average, over the last five years, there are about 
five cases of cryptosporidium that are reported in, I think, that 
particular area. So when there’s one case reported it doesn’t 
necessarily trigger all of these things that happened. 
 
It was when there was more than one case and there were still 
people that were feeling ill that they wanted to do some more 
checking. The officials did that and they took the appropriate 
steps when they had the suspicions confirmed. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we are told by the experts in 
this area that the cryptosporidium problem may be more 
prevalent, particularly at this time of the year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen where the water testing of the 
Battlefords area failed and certainly did not identify the 
problem quickly enough. That certainly does not make people 
in other communities in Saskatchewan feel very confident about 
the way the government does monitor our water quality system 
because protocol failed in the case of the Battlefords. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Premier or the minister what 
specific steps is the government taking to figure out what went 
wrong in the Battlefords and what are you doing? What is the 
government doing today to make sure that the other residents of 
other communities in Saskatchewan could be assured that their 
drinking water is safe? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the purpose of bringing in 
federal health experts, Saskatchewan health experts, to work 
with the local Battlefords Health District and do an 
epidemiological study is exactly to answer the question that the 



932 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2001 

 

member opposite has asked, which is, how did this happen; are 
there things that need to be done to make sure it doesn’t happen 
in other places? We are waiting for the results of that study and 
they are still trying to confirm a number of the suspicions 
around this. 
 
What we have done in the province is we have very strong 
water quality standards; we have methods of monitoring. And 
all of those kinds of information are added into and become part 
of how the public response takes place — local medical health 
officer works together with the city; it’s reported into 
Environment and Resource Management and to Saskatchewan 
Health; and then all the appropriate following steps take place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Proposed SaskEnergy Rate Increase 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question’s for the 
minister responsible for SaskEnergy. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, another week in NDP (New Democratic 
Party) Saskatchewan and another utility rate increase. Today’s 
Leader-Post headline confirms what many in the province have 
known for some time — SaskEnergy rates are going up again. 
 
However this time, Mr. Speaker, the president of SaskEnergy, 
Mr. Clark, has confirmed that the increase could be as much as 
50 per cent. That’s on top of the 27 per cent increase that 
Saskatchewan residents endured this winter that saw many bills, 
especially those that aren’t equalized, doubled, Mr. Speaker, 
during the winter months. 
 
And it’s also on top of the 6 per cent power increase that was 
approved this spring. 
 
To the minister: Mr. Speaker, what advice does the minister 
have for Saskatchewan families struggling with skyrocketing 
utility rate hikes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
was talking about what we know. Well we do know, Mr. 
Speaker, that SaskEnergy has provided the lowest energy costs 
in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker — the lowest energy rates in all 
of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also know that over the last 18 months, 
SaskEnergy has saved the people of Saskatchewan over $125 
million, Mr. Speaker, because they’ve kept the prices low, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also know that SaskEnergy has not applied 
through the winter months when people consume the most of 
their energy. 
 
But we do know, Mr. Speaker, that they’ve waited to now to 
make an application, and we need to wait to see what the rate 
review panel will say over this application, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
SaskEnergy is increasing its rates because of soaring natural gas 
prices around the world — the same soaring prices however 
that are generating $500 million in windfall revenue for this 
NDP government. 
 
But instead of using some of that massive windfall profit to help 
offset these rate increases, the government up till now has 
preferred to sit on their election slush fund. We also know, Mr. 
Speaker, that according to the annual reports, Crown 
Investments Corporation has about $185 million in their bank 
account. 
 
Now to his credit, the Minister of Finance has said he likes the 
idea of using some of these windfall revenues to offset some of 
SaskEnergy’s short-term losses and avoid another massive 
utility rate hike. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: is the government considering that 
suggestion from the Minister of Finance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, again I want to talk about 
what SaskEnergy has done. Mr. Speaker, we have been selling, 
we’ve been selling gas, Mr. Speaker, at $4.52 per unit, or per 
gigajoule, is the term; and we’ve been buying today I am told, 
at $7.50. 
 
It’s no secret, Mr. Speaker, that when you’re providing gas at 
this price, Mr. Speaker, that you can’t continue to do that. And 
I’m told that today the gas variance account sits at something in 
excess of $60 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So he’s saying, spend the money, Mr. Speaker. How can you do 
that, Mr. Speaker; there’s a deficit sitting there right now as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk as well about . . . they like to quote 
people from Alberta frequently. Peter Linder, who is an energy 
analyst, oil and gas, with Research Capital Corporation in 
Calgary, here’s what he says, Mr. Speaker. He says: 
 

I want to congratulate SaskEnergy first for their astute 
hedging program in using the storage facilities to offset 
these high gas prices. I would suggest the people of 
Saskatchewan are extremely lucky to be paying $4.52 a 
gigajoule when the price here in Alberta is a lot higher. It is 
basically twice as much as in Saskatchewan (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we’re asking 
very important questions — questions about a suggestion from 
one of his cabinet colleagues that could provide relief for 
Saskatchewan people. But we get no answers, Mr. Speaker. 
There is no candid answers over there. There is no innovation 
over there, no ideas over there, and very soon there will be no 
NDP over there either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 



May 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 933 

 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy is saying that without a 
massive 50 per cent increase they could lose as much as $120 
million this year. At the same time the NDP government’s 
sitting on $500 million in windfall oil and gas revenue because 
of those same rising rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the difference is we understand that’s the 
taxpayers’ money. The government seems to believe it’s theirs. 
 
However, the Minister of Finance has made a very interesting 
and positive suggestion. He talked about the possibility of using 
these windfall revenues or Crown profits to cover SaskEnergy’s 
short-term losses and avoid or limit a massive rate hike. 
 
Why hasn’t the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) acted on those suggestions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the member wants to talk 
about litigation before the process is even completed, Mr. 
Speaker. I think that’s irresponsible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We live in a largely deregulated environment which those 
members lobbied for, Mr. Speaker. Those members lobbied for 
an independent rate review panel. We’ve got the panel, Mr. 
Speaker. I say let the panel do its work. We’ll wait to see what 
the panel has to say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we are trying to save the work of 
the panel and save the cost of another panel review if, if the 
government is indeed . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. The member from 
Swift Current will continue. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if the government is already looking 
at a suggestion that would eliminate this process and provide 
relief to Saskatchewan families, why wouldn’t they just do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll repeat again. The Minister of Finance has said 
he likes the idea . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance has said he 
likes the idea of using some of the windfall revenue the 
government has, and the excessive Crown profits, to covering 
the short-term losses at SaskEnergy to enable the limiting, or 
maybe the elimination of this need to request a massive rate 
hike. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, here’s the question. If that’s the case and if 
that’s what the government’s thinking about, why are you 
putting SaskEnergy and the rate review panel through the 
expensive of rate increase application? Why are you putting 
Saskatchewan people through this process? Why doesn’t the 
minister just make the announcement? Why is the minister 
playing politics with Saskatchewan families? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister call off this charade and 

announce today that the government will use their slush fund to 
help SaskEnergy to avoid another rate hike? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well déjà vu all over again, Mr. 
Speaker. Do you remember in the 1980s when there was an 
independent rate review panel, Mr. Speaker? Do you know who 
killed it? Right over there — that’s who killed it, Mr. Speaker, 
right over there. And now he’s saying circumvent the process, 
get rid of the panel, Mr. Speaker — get rid of the panel. Don’t 
let them report to the cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will hear what the panel has to say. The 
government will make a decision after the panel reports, not 
before the panel reports. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment Guidelines for Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for CIC as well. 
Yesterday the government released to the media the investment 
guidelines for Crown corporations. The date on this document 
is August 25, 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two months later the Channel Lake report was 
released on October 15, 1998, and it made many 
recommendations designed to strengthen the procedures and 
guidelines that government Crown corporations and their 
subsidiaries should follow when conducting due diligence. 
 
Now it appears based on the government’s released document 
yesterday, that the recommendations of the Channel Lake report 
have been completely ignored. Mr. Speaker, I spent a great deal 
of time in the Channel Lake committee and I want to know why 
the due diligence recommendations have not been updated 
given the fact that the Channel Lake report reported very 
distinctly about these issues? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member is just 
completely inaccurate in what he says, Mr. Speaker. There were 
many recommendations . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. Order. I’m 
sure every member would love to have his turn or her turn at the 
mike, but it will only work if you let one member go at a time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well what the 
member says is just completely inaccurate, Mr. Speaker. There 
were recommendations that flowed out of the committee, Mr. 
Speaker, and those recommendations have been implemented, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, obviously CIC is keeping the 
minister out of the loop as well because he hasn’t even seen this 
document dated August 25, 1998. Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the 
committee of the Crown Corporations, Don Ching was asked if 



934 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2001 

 

SaskTel had provided quarterly reports to CIC on Clickabid as 
recommended in the Channel Lake report. The answer was no. 
In fact, Mr. Ching said CIC doesn’t require quarterly reports of 
any of SaskTel’s business ventures, even if this was a specific 
recommendation of the Channel Lake report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe if someone had been reviewing Clickabid’s 
financial statements quarterly, they would have seen it was 
bleeding red ink and it could have been stopped before it lost 
nearly $2 million of taxpayers’ money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the minister and CIC ignoring the Channel 
Lake committee recommendations? Why are Crown businesses 
like Clickabid allowed to go on unchecked by CIC? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, the member is 
completely inaccurate. He should quote correctly first of all, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the main recommendations that came out 
of that report was that subsidiaries of subsidiaries should be 
treated exactly the same as the subsidiary, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
largely what is happening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the recommendations from that committee and 
that report have been implemented, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, obviously the 
minister should be talking to some of his officials in Crown 
corporations. Because last week Mr. Ron Clark was asked if he 
had received any direction from the government to follow the 
recommendations of the Channel Lake report when reviewing 
any existing or potential business ventures of SaskPower or its 
subsidiaries. 
 
His answer was that while the SaskPower Board had certainly 
had the Channel Lake recommendations referred to them, he 
said, and I quote: 
 

Certainly I never got any directive to do anything. 
 
Mr. Speaker, did the government not learn anything from the 
Channel Lake experience? Have they not learned anything 
about that dreadful experience? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is the government going to listen to some of 
the recommendations instead of just letting them gather dust? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member raises a 
very important question: have we not learned anything from 
that? Of course we’ve learned from that, Mr. Speaker, of course 
we have. Recommendations flowed from the committee, Mr. 
Speaker, and those recommendations have been implemented, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Assessment Management Agency 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 22, The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2001 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 23, The 
Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2001 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 24, The 
Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 2001 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 25, The 
Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2001 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. 
 
Members of the Assembly, pursuant to section 286 of The 
Election Act, I have received and I am now tabling the report of 
the Chief Electoral Officer for the by-election held in 
Athabasca, October 26, 1998; for Cypress Hills, held June 28, 
1999; for Regina Dewdney, held June 28, 1999; for Saskatoon 
Eastview, held June 24, 1998; for Saskatoon Fairview, held 
June 28, 1999. 
 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 
 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly . . . order, please. 
Order. Pursuant to section 68.7 of The Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council Act, I hereby table correspondence, 
dated February 4, February 15 and April 25, 2001, from the 
Lieutenant Governor reporting the membership of the Board of 
Internal Economy. 



May 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 935 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
government, I’m very pleased to stand and table responses to 
questions number 148 and 149 today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to questions 148 and 149 are 
tabled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Yes. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(11:00) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wouldn’t ordinarily 
interrupt the proceedings of the House, but these guests are very 
important people in my life. I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you to members of the House, Glen and Laura Barreth, 
who are sitting in the east gallery. 
 
They’re Saskatchewan expatriates. They fled the province many 
years ago and now live in Alberta. I’m saying that a bit of a 
facetiously because they do enjoy coming back to 
Saskatchewan. They both have family in the southern part and 
the central part of the province. And I don’t see them frequently 
enough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like the members of the House to welcome them to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Estevan on her feet? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to welcome Glen 
and Laura Barreth here. Glen went to school with my husband, 
Vic Eagles in Macoun many years ago. And I know that he will 
be thrilled when he learns that you were here today. 
 
So I ask all members to also join me in welcoming you. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 

Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Chair: — I’d invite the minister to please introduce his 
officials with us in the Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. This 
morning I have with me the officials. Seated on my right, Mr. 
Ernie Spencer is the assistant deputy minister of Agriculture 
and Food. To my further right is Mr. Doug Mathis, who is the 
general manager of Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation. 
To my immediate left is Mr. Hal Cushon, who is the director of 
policy and program development branch; and directly behind 
me is Mr. Jack Zepp, who is the administrative services branch. 
And Mr. Russ Johnson, just beside Mr. Zepp, is the operational 
services manager, administrative services branch. 
 
Those are my officials, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good morning, 
Mr. Minister. I want to welcome your officials here this 
morning. 
 
This morning, in fact the last committee, Mr. Minister, the 
question had come up when will the forms be out for CSAP 
(Canada-Saskatchewan Adjustment Program) Two, and I 
believe at that time you said that within the next couple of 
weeks the forms should be out. 
 
Can you update us on that and actually whether the forms are 
really out there right now? And by that I mean the written 
forms, not just the ones you can take off the Internet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. The forms will 
be out within the next two weeks. What we needed is some 
additional information on the NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account) accounts that were . . . We have those coming in to us 
now, so we say within the next couple of weeks those forms 
will be out. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I guess then 
that puts the timeline for any cheques going out to farmers 
actually back. Can you give the farmers an idea today, how 
soon the earliest cheques would start to move out for this 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — My officials, Mr. Member, Mr. Chair, say 
that late May, early June is when farmers will start to receive 
their cheques. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, this 
week an interesting thing came up with the numbers from each 
of the provinces — Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba. And 
I was just wondering if you would comment on Alberta — 
10.29 per cultivated acre, compared to Saskatchewan. 
 
Could you maybe enlighten us on what actually, what it would 
work out to per acre in Saskatchewan. If I understand right, 
Manitoba is higher than Saskatchewan. Alberta, if my numbers 
are right, are actually double or higher than they’re going to be 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Can you maybe comment on that Mr. Minister? 
 



936 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2001 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. The member 
identifies correctly that the government of . . . that Alberta 
producers will get more than Saskatchewan producers will 
receive in terms of this payout. But what the member should 
also appreciate is that the Alberta government has added 
additional revenues over and above what the federal 
contribution has been. 
 
It looks like the Saskatchewan contribution, if we were to award 
. . . or the Saskatchewan allocation, if we were to correlate it on 
the same basis as Alberta’s, the Saskatchewan farmer would 
receive somewhere in the neighbourhood of 4.25 to $4.30 an 
acre. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you maybe 
then update us? Do you have an idea of what Manitoba’s will 
work out? We know what Alberta is because they topped their 
own program up with provincial money. But where’s . . . do we 
have an idea where Manitoba is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, it looks like 
Manitoba’s contribution is going to be about $7.36 an acre or 
7.35. What we have not calculated into Saskatchewan’s portion 
here is that we have other allocations of monies that we make 
available to farmers in the amounts of the property tax rebate, 
which is not included in our figure here. Manitoba doesn’t have 
the property tax rebate. 
 
We also have in Saskatchewan, as you know, the gas tax rebate 
that we provide of which isn’t provided in the . . . neither 
Manitoba or in Alberta. So this amount is strictly the cash 
return that farmers are receiving as it relates to cash receipts. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess though if 
what you’re doing is actually penalizing our farmers because 
you came out with the education tax rebate, the fuel rebate 
program you’re talking about. So to a degree, because we’ve 
had these programs in place, our farmers are going to receive 
now far less money than the Manitoba farmers and extremely 
smaller amount of money than the Alberta farmers. 
 
So what you’ve actually done is said, well the problem’s the 
same here. And I would say, Mr. Minister, the problem is even 
worse here than it is in the other provinces because of the 
amount of acres that we have, which are actually deducting 
these other programs that you had talked about so much before 
and deducting it back to 4.25 an acre. That’s an extreme 
difference, Mr. Minister, between 4.25 an acre and 7.35 an acre. 
On a 1,000, 2,000, 3,000 acre farm, that cheque will have a 
tremendous difference, Mr. Minister. 
 
Wouldn’t it have been even fairer — I mean we’re so 
comparable to Manitoba when it comes to agriculture — to find 
a way to get ours up to at least a 7.35, which is far less than we 
need and far inadequate of what the problems should be 
addressed out there with. Wouldn’t that have been more fair, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think I want to say, Mr. Chair, to the 
member, that throughout the course of the past couple of years 
what we’ve been doing in Saskatchewan of course is . . . 
Because we have such a large agricultural community here 
particularly in the grains and oilseeds side and you, sir, and us 

on this side of the House have been on many occasions talking 
about how it is that the funding formula today doesn’t recognize 
the huge imbalance that grain and oilseed producers today in 
Saskatchewan don’t have access to, and because the lesser share 
of the federal money of course flows to our province today 
based on the cash receipts issue. 
 
And so what we’ve tried to do in Saskatchewan over the last 
year or two is to mitigate some of that in our way. And so as a 
result of that you’ve seen the new programs in both the property 
tax rebate . . . which I know that you as well have been a strong 
proponent of as we travelled the province for a couple of 
months talking about the importance of the property tax rebate. 
We were able to achieve that, looking for ways of course to try 
and find some additional cash flow that we might be able to, at 
least, retain in the pockets of farmers across the province. So 
from that came the property tax rebate. 
 
Last year as well there was I think a good argument made on 
behalf of members of this Legislative Assembly and producers 
across the province that we wanted to see something done on 
the gas rebate side, and accordingly have been able to do that. 
 
So we’re looking for solutions that try and mitigate the 
problems that we’re experiencing today with the formula. Now 
this is a debate that will be ongoing. We raised this issue again 
with our federal government partners, just on this last round of 
CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program). And that’s part of the 
reason why we didn’t get into the program as quickly as . . . we 
were often criticized I think on some fronts, because we wanted 
to see a change to the formula. 
 
And when you look at the numbers as you’ve identified today, 
clearly on the face of it Saskatchewan farmers, on the formula 
that’s in place today, receive less. Now can we change that into 
the future? Our hope is that we can. And we’re going to have 
this discussion again over the next couple of months as we 
prepare for the next rounds of discussions — both in June and 
then again in the fall. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I think one 
area that we certainly are on the same footing and agree with 
when it comes to the federal government, I notice and I’m sure 
you did too, Mr. Minister, I think it was yesterday or the day 
before, the federal government came out with another 500, I 
believe, $550 million for the arts. And that’s fine. 
 
It wasn’t long ago that we heard the Prime Minister announce 
$500 . . . or $500 million to upgrade the waterfront in Toronto. 
All these dollars that they seem to be able to find and dig up for 
other areas in need doesn’t seem to cause them any problem at 
all. But when it comes to agriculture, Mr. Vanclief, and our 
Saskatchewan MP (Member of Parliament) here don’t seem to 
really get into the cabinet’s mind there that just how serious the 
problem is in agriculture, just how serious the problem is here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Because I find Mr. Goodale especially very silent on many of 
these issues. If he had any clout with his cabinet colleagues 
down there, surely that they could realize that agriculture is far 
more . . . in a far more serious problem than some of these other 
entities that they seem to have put this money into. And I’m not 
saying that that money isn’t justified, Mr. Speaker. What I’m 



May 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 937 

 

saying is that if these . . . Toronto waterfront for example needs 
$500 million, I would suggest agriculture across this country 
would need 1.5 billion at a minimum. And I think you would 
probably agree with me, Mr. Minister, on that fact. I don’t think 
they’re coming anywhere as near to fulfilling the needs of 
agriculture, especially in the Western provinces and especially 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, there was a little bit of confusing write-ups this 
week, and I’d like you to maybe clarify this for me. April 28, 
and they’re quoting you, Mr. Minister, and this may be right, it 
may not be right: 
 

Saskatchewan’s Agriculture minister and several provincial 
counterparts had given up their fight for 500 million in 
additional, emergency farm aid from Ottawa. 
 

Could you comment on that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. Just first to 
acknowledge his earlier comments as it relates to whether or not 
we have sufficient dollars in Saskatchewan today in terms of 
remuneration to our farmers. And he and I both will agree, 
having rural representatives on . . . the rural seats that we both 
represent. 
 
The reality is that there is, I think, a bit of a vacuum in Ottawa 
in understanding the kinds of pressure that are . . . particularly 
grain and oil seed producers are facing in Western Canada. 
 
(11:15) 
 
Now will some of that change when the federal task force 
makes its way across the country in the next several months, I 
hope? I’m hoping that that will be the case and we’ll be 
preparing submissions for the task force so in fact we will be 
able to hopefully influence their thinking in a different fashion. 
 
Clearly the most recent announcement, I think just in today’s 
paper, where we read that the Canadian Transportation Agency 
just increased the freight rates by another 3.5 per cent. At the 
same time, although we’re seeing some increases in the PROs 
. . . of the PRO (projection), the reality is is that when there is a 
slight increase in the prices of grain, it gets taken up as we’ll 
see today . . . as we read today in the increased freight rates. 
 
So our lobby with the federal government, I think, needs to 
continue, and it shouldn’t be misconstrued in any fashion that 
where this week we said we were going to . . . I think the 
headline reads that we abandon our efforts for emergency aid. 
It’s not so much that we abandon them because we’re not 
giving up and looking to ensure that into the future you 
continue to have, we think, some kind of an envelope that’ll 
address itself to emergency aid for farmers that we think should 
be, by and large, carried by the federal government. 
 
But collectively when we talk about what we’ve achieved to 
date with the federal government through the farm 
organizations and the producer groups across Canada, and in 
particular the five large agricultural producing provinces, when 
we look at our track record and see that already we’ve been able 
to achieve the 500 million and we continue to lobby for an 
additional 500 million — and we can’t seem to move anybody 

on that issue — we then said collectively that maybe we then 
need to put our resources into another area, our energies of 
which I think — not I think, I know — that my farm leaders and 
organizations have now said we should be. 
 
We know that there’s a new envelope that the federal 
government has established. It’s to do with the whole 
environmental side, the safe and quality food piece, the 
transition and adjustment because it looks like there’s going to 
be additional revenues that the federal government is prepared 
to put into that envelope, and are gradually moving away, in my 
view, from putting continued emergency aid money into that 
envelope where we accessed the 500 million from this year. 
 
So when we say collectively that we’re going to lessen our 
intensity on the envelope that talks about emergency aid, we 
haven’t given up on ensuring that the federal government 
understands that we may need some for the future. 
 
But for this period of time, over the next five or six months, 
we’re saying we’re going to concentrate on trying to get a larger 
chunk of that 500 or 600 million — whatever that number 
might be — on that environmental stewardship side that the 
federal government is talking about putting some additional 
revenues in. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I guess where the confusion came in this week, Mr. 
Minister, was we had read this comment in the paper that I’d 
talked about before, and then . . . that was dated April 28. And 
May 1, 2001 news release out of the Manitoba government: 
 

Agriculture and Food Minister Rosann Wowchuk today 
asked . . . the Standing Committee on Agriculture . . . the 
House of Commons (to) travel to Manitoba and allow 
producers and rural residents the opportunity to provide 
valuable input on the farm crisis . . . 
 

It goes on to say — and I’m sure you’ve probably seen this 
release, Mr. Minister, and your officials have seen it — that the 
motion called for, that they’d talked about in their House, 500 
million more in federal assistance. So they’re actually, they’re 
continuing the fight for that. 
 
Then I see that there was a release out of your department on 
May 2, I believe the date was, and really very close to what the 
Manitoba release was. 
 
So I think that’s where the confusion was. On one hand I think 
people thought maybe we’d dropped that whole issue and then 
they saw this. So that’s why I needed the clarification. 
 
A couple of different areas before I pass to some of my 
counterparts, Mr. Minister. I’m not sure how familiar you are 
with the cattle co-op feeder situation in Spy Hill. We’ve had a 
tremendous problem out there and there’s been a number of 
farm . . . livestock farmers out there that have been hurt very 
badly by the situation that happened out at Spy Hill-Rocanville 
area. 
 
I was just wondering, Mr. Minister, if your officials were up to 
date on this, if you could give us some kind of an update as to 
where we are with that right now. Because as you know how 



938 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2001 

 

that works, Mr. Minister, a number of farmers had equity built 
up in that program, had bought feeders or bought cattle through 
that program, and really in some cases I believe it’s pretty near 
putting farmers under out there right now. 
 
And I think it’s a problem we have to look at because the cattle 
feeder co-ops that are out there right now, I think are a 
tremendously good program. They’re a program that we have to 
look after and guard, that things like that happened at Spy Hill 
will never happen again. 
 
I guess my question, Mr. Minister, though is where are we with 
the problem that actually happened out at Spy Hill and what 
have we done to try and help the farmers out there that were 
caught in the middle of this thing through no fault of their own? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. I should first 
say to you that the officials from the Department of Agriculture 
and Food have been working very, very closely with this entire 
issue. 
 
As you may or may not know, this issue is continuing to be 
under the investigation of the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) because of the kinds of concerns and losses that have 
been experienced there. 
 
I agree with you that the cattle feeder co-op program has been 
very successful in the province. We continue to support it. 
 
I recently met with the producer organizations who are 
responsible for overseeing this whole piece. And what they said 
to me is that we need to be careful that we don’t paint a dim 
picture of what this program is about on the basis that you have 
one or two situations from time to time where you find yourself 
. . . where individuals are losing . . . where they have a loss and 
clearly this is one that you are identifying in the Spy Hill area. 
 
Just to report further, that the RCMP, as I’ve said, are involved 
in that investigation. Our officials have been closely tied to it. I 
think there are two individuals who have now . . . where the 
issue has been resolved. I think there are two others that are still 
outstanding and then the other matter as it relates to the RCMP 
investigation is ongoing. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I realize this is a 
very touchy situation out there and I guess our concerns are 
probably very similar because many of these people that were 
hurt out there are my constituents. And we even had a situation 
where a constituent phoned that she had had I believe five head 
of cattle confiscated because they were going to use that as 
security. It took a while and actually the cattle were returned 
later, Mr. Minister, but it certainly gives people a bad taste in 
their mouth when they see things like that happening. 
 
And I guess my biggest concern is that what it does to the cattle 
feeder purchase situation and livestock and bred cows, all those 
sorts of things. These programs are very crucial to what’s going 
on in livestock right now. I think we both agree that we want to 
expand. The hog industry’s expanding. We want to get into 
feeder cattle in a big way; we’d like bred cows right now, our 
numbers to expand. I think we all agree on that especially, Mr. 
Minister, on our side of the province where I think we can only 
benefit by increasing our livestock numbers. 

Mr. Minister, we’ll let that one sit for now because I realize that 
the RCMP are involved and we really can’t go much further 
with that. 
 
The other issue I’d like to bring up this morning, Mr. Minister, 
and I’ve talked to you before. I talked to your predecessor, Mr. 
Lingenfelter, about it is The Farm Land Security Act Bill. 
We’ve presented a private members’ Bill the last three years or 
so and actually were promised by your predecessor that it 
would be looked at and probably something would be done. Are 
we getting anywhere with a new Bill and that’s for The Farm 
Land Security Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, just a final 
comment on the earlier issue that you raised around the cattle 
feeder program. 
 
I very much appreciate your comments as it relates to . . . 
particularly on our side of the province where we need to see a 
significant transition — we think, and I think you would agree 
— from much of the grain farming industry today and try to 
grow the livestock industry to a larger way. 
 
It’s often somewhat discouraging to see not only our 
background in livestock prepared to the levels that they are 
today and then loaded up on semi-trailer tractors and hauled 
across the border for finishing. 
 
And then following the livestock of course is our grains. You 
know, you have the B-trains, with the barley and the oats on 
them are flowing right behind them. And we need to change 
that. 
 
And cattle feeder programs are extremely important to that 
entire process in growing the bred cow industry . . . or the area, 
as well as the intensive livestock are critical for us. And we 
want to make sure that when we have situations like the one we 
talked about earlier that we try to dispel them quickly so that 
they don’t interfere with the good work that producers are doing 
across the province. 
 
In respect to The Farm Land Security Act, we’ve had a 
considerable amount of dialogue across the province with a 
number of folks about how it is that we might be able to bring 
this to some kind of resolution, or where we have a better 
appreciation for changing the legislation that we have in place. 
 
And from time to time we hear that it does in fact inhibit the 
growth of the industry on some fronts across the province. And 
we may be able to make a case as well where that’s happening. 
 
I want to say to you that we have not made a decision as to 
whether or not we’ll be introducing this piece of legislation yet 
during the session. Because part of the reason is that our 
consultations continue to be in place. 
 
As you can well understand, this is a very, very sensitive issue 
with many folks. And the more dialogue and discussion that 
you have, the more you find that the issue remains almost in . . . 
where there’s not a clear definitive area that you can go to to 
satisfy people, that it remains somewhat at a deadlock. 
 
What we are doing however is looking very closely at what the 



May 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 939 

 

Manitoba legislation is and looking very closely at what the 
Alberta legislation is and are going to try and find within that 
purview something that works for all three of us. 
 
And there should be some, in my view, some consistency about 
what’s happening across the three Prairie provinces, because 
you have producers that are moving back and forth that are 
farming in both provinces. In some cases we may have people 
actually farming in all three. And so we’re looking at how we 
might be able to blend that in a more palatable fashion for 
Saskatchewan people, and will accommodate the growth in the 
industry as well. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well I appreciate that, Mr. Minister, 
because I believe — I’m not sure; I think this was probably for 
the year 2000 — that the numbers we got back from your 
department was that it was actually six of the applications 
received, six refusals, 158 approvals or exemptions. 
 
And I guess my thinking is that if we’re going to make all these 
exemptions, why don’t we just get to the point where we 
change the law and get with the new century. 
 
And I think you would agree with me, Mr. Minister, that one of 
the things that we’re lacking in this province is venture capital 
investment into such things like this. In my own area, we’ve 
had the luxury of having a person from Alberta, a farmer from 
Alberta come into our area and buy land and is expanding a 
cattle operation there where there was actually no cattle before. 
And it’s only a win-win for each area when we get these kind of 
people coming in. 
 
And should be, may be remiss if I didn’t touch on one thing you 
said there. You said that there is a lot of pros and cons to this 
and nobody knows that better than I do by pushing my private 
member’s Bill. I’ve got some very hot calls over the situation. 
 
The problem I have with some of the people that are so dead 
against this though is that we have so many farmers out there at 
the age right now where they’re so close to retiring or actually 
past the age where they wanted to retire and there’s no market. 
And again, I don’t want to keep harping on the east side of the 
province, but the problem seems to be worse there. There’s not 
a fair market for their land so they end up taking what the 
market right now will bear out there. 
 
And I think, if we could open it up at least the first step to, as 
you said, maybe make it comparable to Alberta, Manitoba, 
Saskatchewan. But people from across this country could come 
in here and invest their money in Saskatchewan. I think it’s 
only a win-win for us. 
 
I’m almost to the mindset that maybe we should even be 
looking already, the minute we do that, one step further. 
Because in our area we’ve had Swiss farmers come in, I believe 
we’ve had people from Germany come in. And again I would 
say, Mr. Minister, that this is a win-win for us. Number one, 
they bring fresh money into this province. But number two, 
they bring some fresh ideas and some new ways of doing things 
that I think are very timely right now and we can only benefit 
from this. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m probably at the end of the questions I had 

for you and I want to thank you and your officials this morning 
for answering those questions. 
 
But with The Farm Land Security Act, I would certainly urge or 
please ask you to try and, as expeditiously as you can, bring 
something in and let’s get some fresh money into this province. 
I think it can only help our situation. So thank you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I just want to maybe reiterate just a little 
further on the comments that the member from Saltcoats makes, 
Mr. Chair, because we’re not on a different page on this issue 
for sure. 
 
I should say though that if people are interested — and they are, 
because not only in your area, but I know some farmers that 
have now come into the area of the member from Canora whom 
I’ve had an opportunity to speak with directly, who have come 
here from other parts of the world — and if you move here and 
start up a farming operation here, then of course The Farm Land 
Securities Act doesn’t impact them in any way. This is about 
owning property in Saskatchewan and then having it farmed by 
someone else. 
 
(11:30) 
 
And I should say to you that this issue has come up in our 
discussions at the ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural 
Economy) committee and we’ve had some very, very good 
discussion around this. And I know that the subcommittee that’s 
responsible for this kind of legislation has been out there 
consulting with people. And it was interesting — they just 
reported very recently to me that, you know, that it’s really 
difficult to try to find the centrepiece on this, as you’ve nicely 
identified in your private member’s Bill. We’re pleased that 
most of those phone calls were going to you, sir, as opposed to 
over here. But we heard from some of those as well. 
 
And clearly, your comment about there being, I think, six 
rejections in 158 exemptions last year tells you that the 
Farmland Security Board is already doing some things in policy 
that maybe we should have in regulation. And clearly, that’s the 
route that we’re going to be going down and trying to blend that 
with our Manitoba-Alberta friends to see if we could find some 
solutions there. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I have 
some questions for the minister and his officials regarding the 
Meyronne community pasture catastrophe, I guess I can call it, 
which occurred last August where 69 head of cattle were found 
dead and it was determined they died because they lacked 
water. 
 
The information that’s public information that the cattle 
actually went 16 days without being checked for water, I would 
like to ask the minister how this could have possibly happened. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and to 
the member. This was a very serious issue, as the member has 
identified, as it relates to the Meyronne situation and any time 
that you have a loss of livestock and it occurs in the fashion in 
which, I think, it’s now been recognized it has occurred, we 
need to act on it, clearly. 



940 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2001 

 

And what’s sort of transpired from this particular incident of 
course is that we engaged in a community pasture study, not 
only on this particular issue but across the piece, so that we 
have a better appreciation and understanding for the future. And 
some of our policies and regulations . . . or some of our policy 
may need to change in order to ensure that we have maybe 
better accountability at the level at which the process occurs. 
 
I mean, today we have supervisors of community pastures, and 
then of course you have people who work within that 
environment who oversee the livestock that are in the pastures. 
 
And the question of course that came out of here was the 
accountability, what kind of reporting is in place today to 
ensure that there is good, solid pasture management and that 
when producers are putting their livestock into the community 
pastures, that they can be assured that they’re being well 
maintained and they’re being well managed and observed, 
which is a very important question I think that you raise and we 
have concurrence with. 
 
So what we undertook, as I said earlier, is a review of the entire 
community pasture program that we have in place. This report 
is almost ready to come to me. I should have this within the 
next very short while, of which then we’ll want to clearly make 
it public so that the cattle producers and the organizations can 
see what in fact we’ll be changing or trying to do to enrich that. 
 
And I think in the report, though I haven’t seen it yet, we’ll 
likely see some stronger recommendations as it addresses itself 
to accountability, which I think is one of the areas that one 
could easily ask the question here about whether or not there 
was that kind of due diligence. And we recognize that as well 
and that’s why we have the report coming to me. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I’m very pleased to see there’s a report coming out to 
identify some of the concerns and issues. We’re getting close to 
the time now where community pastures will be occupied with 
numbers of heads of cattle and we sure wouldn’t want to have 
that kind of an incident happen again this summer. So I’m 
pleased to see that it’s being worked on to ensure this does not 
happen again and I’d be very interested in seeing a copy of your 
document as soon as it’s available. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, to the minister again: could he please tell me 
what the final resolution was of this incident. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member. There 
were a couple of sort of immediate actions that we undertook 
outside of the report. One is that we recognized that there 
needed to be compensation to the producers, so compensation 
to the producers was made. We realized that there needed to be 
an investigation and so engaged the work of the RCMP and the 
RCMP have been involved in that process. 
 
We also realized that, from our perspective, there was some 
negligence here as we viewed it, and of course there was the 
change of duties of some of our employees and that 
investigation is still ongoing. And there may be additional, there 
may be still additional actions or reprimand that will occur that 
as it relates to some of the employees of that particular pasture. 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I want to carry 
on with that a little bit more; the disposition of the workers. It 
appears that there was gross negligence involved and in fact the 
RCMP had wondered about criminal charges and it’s my 
understanding that it almost seems like one of the workers has 
been rewarded rather than being chastised for this negligence in 
this particular instance. 
 
And I would like, I would like to ask the minister what the 
disposition of the two workers was or is? Where they are now? 
 
And it does seem like an awful long time, from August to now, 
to still have an investigation going on and I’d like the minister 
to let us know what the status of that investigation is. It’s not 
cut and dried obviously. But when we see that the cattle 
actually died of dehydration, I’m not certain how, what 
investigation . . . why it would take months and months and 
months. And if the minister could — it’s kind of a couple of 
questions in there — but the disposition of the workers and why 
the investigation is taking so long, reference the workers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To the 
member, just to say first that we concur with your analysis that 
this was a very serious incident. And that is the reason for why 
we engaged the RCMP in the process. There are some things of 
course that we believe that we could do ourselves immediately 
and some of that occurred with our employees. 
 
But once you turn a matter of this nature — and provided 
compensation I should say as well to those producers whose 
livestock had been lost — but I should also say that when you 
take a matter of this nature and you turn it over to the RCMP, 
which we did, we then are at sort of their peril and their 
expedience in the decision-making process. And I can say to 
you that the committee has been working very closely with this 
issue and I think with the RCMP as well. 
 
And I’m expecting that there’s going to be yet a further 
recommendation, not only by the committee, but I expect that 
there’ll be a further recommendation by the police force. 
 
And so as much as I would like to express what else might 
happen here, having no full knowledge of it but some sense of 
what may further occur, I think it would be inappropriate for me 
to do that today. But to say to you that, because the RCMP are 
engaged in this, this was a very serious issue and they are 
proceeding under the legislation for cruelty to animals which 
brings with it some very severe consequences to people who in 
fact may find themselves in a situation where they may be at 
fault here. 
 
I should say to you there may be other repercussions here that 
we’ll need to act upon. And we’ll assure you that we’ll do that 
in the same fashion that we have in the past to ensure that these 
kinds of incidents not only don’t happen in this particular 
pasture, but I think what we’d want to do is send the signal 
across the community pasture structure that this kind of process 
we don’t tolerate and that we will want to see a stronger process 
to ensure that incidents of this nature don’t happen into the 
future. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I totally agree. 
We cannot tolerate conduct such as this. Again I want to put my 



May 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 941 

 

question to you. The disposition of the two workers, where they 
are now and what they’re doing at this date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I just want to say, Mr. Deputy Chair, to the 
member, that the rider whom was working at that pasture was 
relieved of his duties. The pasture manager was placed in a 
different environment of which he then would have a different 
kind of a supervisory and supervised role. 
 
I am . . . as I said earlier in my comments, and I may be a bit 
guarded in the way in which I’m answering this question only 
on the basis that the work of the RCMP has yet not been 
completed. And I’m expecting that I will hear that in short order 
and you may . . . we’ll be happy to provide for you the outcome 
of the work of the RCMP and the associated decisions that will 
be made in accordance to the recommendations that the RCMP 
make. 
 
But I’m not able to go to that place yet today because the 
investigation is still completing. But I’d be happy to provide 
that to you immediately upon our receipt of it. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. As I 
mentioned before I’m looking forward to receiving any 
information that I can on this. 
 
Again I have a comment and a bit of a question, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. You’ve already indicated we want to send a very strong 
signal, and I totally agree. And yet we’ve taken the supervisor 
of the pasture and given him another job someplace else. 
 
That to me is not sending a very strong signal. And it’s my 
understanding — and I don’t have the data, but I’ve received 
numerous phone calls and letters on this particular issue — and 
I understand that the pasture manager was moved to another 
community pasture. And I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that 
this is not sending a strong signal. 
 
Can you confirm that in fact the supervisor is a manager or at 
least in another community pasture, which again to me is not 
sending a strong signal. It’s almost like rewarding the 
individual if in fact this is the case. Could you comment on that 
please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think, Mr. Deputy Chair, to the 
member, sometimes when you have situations where you 
believe that there has been some injustices or harm that’s come 
about — and clearly, there’s no question that there’s harm here 
when you see the number of livestock that in fact were lost — it 
then becomes necessary to engage a couple of processes, which 
we believe we have. 
 
We established the Pasture Review Committee, whose task it 
was to then examine what’s happened in this individual 
situation, and the RCMP. And we believed at the department 
that clearly one of the individuals needed to be relieved from 
his duties and, accordingly, one of the riders was relieved of his 
duties. 
 
The pasture manager was placed on a different pasture of which 
you’re familiar with, and now has a reporting to a different kind 
of a process or to a different individual. 
 

But it’s exactly this area of which we know that there has been 
some other work that’s been done by the authorities. And the 
authorities are continuing to examine that piece, and I expect 
that I will have — not expect, but will have — in short order 
some response that I might be able to make on this, which may 
shed some more appreciative light in terms of a final decision 
here. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I don’t want to 
belabour the point, but I just don’t see it as sending a strong 
signal. There’s obviously an indication from officials that the 
pasture manager did something wrong or else he wouldn’t have 
been moved. 
 
And if he did do nothing wrong, then why was he moved? And 
if he did do something wrong and was moved, why was he 
moved to another pasture? 
 
(11:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, the member, you 
know, having worked in a fairly large organized structure as 
you have, and as I have over my lifetime, sometimes when you 
need to make decisions that are of significant magnitude that 
may require sending a signal that there is a process that you 
need to follow. And clearly, this is what we’re doing here. 
 
We have an individual who we had some concern about and we 
relieved him of his duties. I would think it would be safe to say 
that we had concern, too, about the pasture manager. And when 
you’re proceeding down this path, you need to be sure that you 
do due diligence on this work and, accordingly, we think we 
have. 
 
We’ve established the review committee, engaged the RCMP, 
and took that particular individual who we’re referring to and 
placed him in a different venue, of whom he would be 
responsible to report to a different individual as well. 
 
And accordingly, it will be that information that will help us to 
determine what, in fact, will occur at the end of the day with 
this person. And it’s, I think, that kind of review that’s being 
undertaken today that we’re waiting for response on primarily 
because we think it’s a very delicate issue with a very senior 
employee. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess we 
could debate about the due diligence on it, but I guess my last 
question would be is any of your officials or yourself been in 
touch with the RCMP? I know we can’t press them for a precise 
time that their investigation would be finished, but if this drags 
on for months longer and into the years, it’s going to be left sort 
of as a dangling issue. Something like this, I believe, has to 
come to some sort of finality as soon as practicable. 
 
Could you let us know if there’s any indication from the RCMP 
when this will be finalized? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I can say two 
things here. One is that our official has been in regular 
communication with the RCMP and that we expect, in very 
short order, we will have a response from the pasture review 
committee, and then we’ll be making a recommendation of 



942 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2001 

 

which I undertake to provide to you when that decision is made. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d like to 
pursue this matter a bit more so that I have an understanding of 
how this situation came about. 
 
I understand, I mean the cattle died because they didn’t have 
access to water. But I guess to understand why that actually 
happened I would like to know, first of all, what is the carrying 
capacity of this particular pasture? What type of staff did you 
have to look after the animals? 
 
I understand that, if my information is correct or at least I’ve 
been told, that there was only a rider that was there on a 
day-to-day basis and that the manager actually resided at 
another pasture some distance away. I’d like to know how often 
that manager actually came over to the Meyronne pasture to 
check on and supervise the rider? What type of experience that 
rider had? 
 
And I think we’ll just leave it there. And if the minister could 
answer those questions and we’ll carry on from there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, what I 
think might be more appropriate is for me to provide for you 
sort of a written context of all of the issues that you’ve asked in 
terms of how long the rider has been an employee. I think it’s 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of a couple of years. How 
long has the manager been there? I think somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 18 years. 
 
So I think it would be of total service . . . I think it would be 
important for us to provide that for you. The various different 
responsibilities that each of them carry we should highlight for 
you so that you have that full appreciation. 
 
I think the pasture has about 900 cows that it was serving. So 
we can provide you with that kind of information which, I think 
then, would be more helpful rather than me trying to take you 
through that on a piece-by-piece basis. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, I have agreed to 
have the minister provide me with a written statement or written 
answers to those questions. 
 
I guess my next question would then deal with . . . I’ve been 
looking at the organizational chart of your department and I see 
that there is a Saskatchewan pastures program headed up by a 
director, and then within that there are regional managers. And 
this particular pasture would fall under the responsibilities, I 
assume of the south regional manager, I understand. Is that 
correct? That that’s the way the administration is set up? 
 
I guess my questions have to do with the responsibilities of the 
south regional manager. How often does . . . I would assume 
that this person would be directly responsible for the operations 
of the pastures in the southern area, and therefore would be the 
supervisor of the community pasture managers. 
 
My question would be how closely does the regional manager 
supervise the pasture managers? How often does the regional 
manager go out to the community pastures and actually drive 
out into the fields? And as I said, how hands-on is this regional 

manager in the operations of the community pastures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member. First to 
say that my officials tell me that there is a significant amount of 
contact that goes on between the regional manager and the 
managers of the pasture. 
 
And in your case, the southwest regional manager, I think, 
would have under his purview about 20 different pasture 
managers who would be responsible to him, and that there is 
likely not as much hands-on as what we might appreciate or 
might want to see. 
 
And I expect that when we see the report that the Pasture 
Review Committee has put together, they’ll be asking or 
responding to the issue about what kind of supervisory 
responsibilities are there and how much contact in fact is there 
between the regional managers and the managers themselves. 
 
My officials tell me that in the discussions that they’ve had with 
some of the members of the review committee that it appears as 
though they may be changing the structure a bit where some of 
those 20 pasture managers, they may be elevating two or three 
positions, or one or two positions, to a more senior level of the 
pasture manager who then could help the regional manager 
himself or herself oversee some of those other pastures. 
 
So I think what you’re going to see in this review is the greater 
responsibility that will be assigned to some of the more senior 
pasture managers or maybe some of the more able people to 
help with the supervisory responsibilities that are necessary 
around running the pastures and ensuring that there’s a more 
regular contact maybe with the producers who have their 
livestock in the pastures. But that I expect I’ll see in the report 
in the next short little while. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the minister. I have had 
some considerable experience in this area in my years of being 
a civil servant both in the provincial and federal governments. I 
had some direct hands-on experience in this area and I found 
that, from my experience, that it was necessary as a manager or 
a supervisor to actually go out, not only to the pasture 
headquarters but occasionally just to drive through the pasture. I 
think the pasture managers appreciated it, and I think it also was 
a safeguard against situations such as the one we are discussing 
here today. 
 
And I guess my question . . . And I think in your review, I think 
it would be imperative to know if in fact your regional manager 
did visit the pasture, and if so, when was the last time? If I’m 
led to believe that this particular pasture, as I’d indicated earlier, 
was if the day-to-day supervision and well-being of the 
livestock in that pasture was the sole responsibility of a rider 
who didn’t have a whole lot of experience, and if that in fact 
was the case, I think it was incumbent upon the department staff 
to perhaps more closely supervise that area. 
 
So it’ll be interesting to . . . I look forward to your report and 
the review of the situation, and I think that once you receive this 
report that you should look very, very carefully and implement 
changes so that we can safeguard against this incidence 
happening again. 
 



May 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 943 

 

I would just like to ask a couple more questions, more general 
questions about the community pasture program. About your 
fee structure — is your fee structure determined . . . Do the 
pastures operate on a cost recovery basis? Is that how your 
pasture fees are set up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The community pastures, as you probably 
know, are managed through what we call a revolving fund. And 
of course, the fees, of course, are reflective usually to what the 
animal raising units are throughout the given year and the price 
of livestock is. So that’s how in fact, the pastures are operating 
today. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Then, Mr. Minister, I take it from that that the 
costs of the operation of the pasture are recovered through the 
fee structure. I guess that would lead me to another question 
then. I understand that the compensation paid to the producers 
who lost livestock . . . I don’t recall the figures exactly, but I 
believe they were in excess of $100,000, is that correct? And if 
so, will that be . . . will that compensation be part of the cost of 
operating the community pastures and, thereby, then passed on 
to the producers who are utilizing your pastures this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Just to the, Mr. Deputy Chair, to the 
member, that the compensation was made out of the revolving 
fund which is the way in which we’ve managed that. But the 
revolving fund will be reimbursed by the Department of 
Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So then I take it, Mr. Minister, there’ll be no net 
cost to the revolving fund, and, thereby, then the producers 
utilizing the services of the community pastures will not be 
incurring additional fees to pay for that compensation. And I’m 
happy to hear that. 
 
If I could just for a moment turn to another topic. I noted in 
your response to the member from Saltcoats, to one of his 
questions having to do with additional federal funding for farm 
programs and so on, and I’m looking at a newspaper article in 
which you’re quoting as saying that: 
 

Programs offering technology and environmental tax credit 
for land conversion could also open up Ottawa’s purse 
strings . . . 

 
Mr. Deputy Chair, could the minister expand on that, what type 
of programs that he envisions that’ll maybe bring more federal 
dollars to the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
I want to say this, that in the last several months, one of the 
things that I’ve realized in our discussions at the federal table 
with our federal friends is that there appears to be a significant 
change in mind in terms of how we’re going to fund agriculture 
for the future. And I define this or describe this as sort of three 
envelopes. 
 
In the past we’ve had one envelope that’s really been about 
emergency aid or one-time funding, of which the federal 
government and the provinces across Canada continue to put 
resources into agriculture because it’s an emergency for 
producers. In that envelope today we got an additional $500 
million, which is the one-time aid. 

Then I describe sort of a second venue or second envelope that 
is safety nets, which is the crop insurance and the NISA and 
now the Canada Farm Income Program, which is sort of the 
centre envelope. 
 
And then of course the other envelope, which is the new one 
that the federal government has been talking about, is the one 
that addresses itself to the transition adjustment, environmental 
stewardship, and safe food. 
 
And what the federal government has said, I think in two very 
important fronts, in their Throne Speech . . . there was a 
paragraph in their Throne Speech that said we’re going to move 
away from making funds available for producers today that is 
crisis management — which I view as the emergency fund 
envelope — and that we want to start providing more money on 
a long-term basis; a little more to safety nets maybe but we’re 
already putting $2.6 billion in there so you should be happy 
with the crop insurance and the CFIP and the NISA programs. 
So that’s where we’ve committed our money, but we’re also 
now keen and interested in looking at what we might be able to 
do on the third envelope. 
 
(12:00) 
 
And so in my comments to the newspaper article you’re 
referring to, it’s that area that I’m speaking about. How much 
resources is the federal government prepared to put into that 
envelope? Have they in fact abandoned the emergency aid 
envelope completely? Because if we have a year similar to what 
we had last year in Saskatchewan again this year, does it mean 
that the federal government is saying there’s no more money in 
the emergency aid envelope, and that all of our resources now 
are going to have to travel through the new envelope which 
they’re talking about, which is about environmental 
stewardship. 
 
Now we know that there has been a fair bit of discussion about 
taking land out of production, growing more of our forage 
crops, talking about carbon sequestration, how farmers might in 
fact start to get credit for some of the carbon sequestration by 
taking land out. 
 
There’s people in our province today for some time who’ve 
been talking about land set aside and using the environmental 
envelope as being the way that we might be able to flow money 
to farmers. 
 
And the large issue here of course is one around trade. Because 
the minute that we start to provide a direct compensation to 
farmers, which might look like subsidy, then of course we’re in 
countervail. 
 
And what the federal government, I think, is attempting to do is 
to try to find some new avenues of which we might be able to 
flow money into the pockets of producers, using possibly 
environment as that tool, but at the same time I think asking 
producers to look at different ways in which they might try and 
use their land. 
 
Because clearly in Saskatchewan today, we have a very large 
land base. We have a huge oilseed and grain industry which 
continues to be on a slide. And when you look at what the 



944 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2001 

 

world markets are predicting for the future we need to find a 
different way of compensation. 
 
And so it’s from that context that I talk about trying to find 
some rationale or reason as to how we’re going to fund it into 
the future and what pool of money might be available to us, and 
then to have that money travel to producers through that new 
venue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee 
report progress on the Department of Agriculture and Food. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
(Subvote HI01) 
 
The Chair: — I’d invite the minister to introduce the officials 
with her in the Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. To my right is 
Ron Styles, the deputy minister in the department. To my left is 
Barry Martin, assistant deputy minister in charge of operations. 
Immediately behind me is Carl Neggers, assistant deputy 
minister in charge of policy and planning, and beside him is 
Don Wincherauk, assistant deputy minister in charge of 
corporate services. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon 
to the minister and her officials again today. This is getting to 
be a habit, Friday afternoons, and we’ll see how many more 
Fridays we can accomplish with Highways and Transportation. 
 
One of the areas that I am getting a number of inquiries on, 
from members of my own caucus and from people involved in 
the construction industry, is the issue of the spring tendering 
schedule. And I understand that the government through written 
questions and responses to those written questions, I understand 
that there’s been some delay because of government — at the 
federal level — government promises of money that have not 
yet arrived. So there’s been some delay. 
 
But also I’ve noticed in the written response to the earlier 
questions I submitted, the minister did indicate that some 
projects are already being undertaken, projects that require or 
are concerned only with provincial funding. 
 
Would the minister be able to detail some of those primary 
projects for us today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I can send you a list, if that would be 
helpful. 
 
But we have tendered on Highway 4 the supply and erection of 
structural steel over the Battlefords bridge. As well we are 
doing some resurfacing into Echo Valley Provincial Park. As 
well, as I said, the construction of the Battlefords bridge, North 
Battleford. As well we are grading Highway No. 1. As well we 
are doing some spot overlay on Highway 4 between Kyle to 
Rosetown. We are grading and widening sections on the Shoal 
Lake to Red Earth access, which is Highway 55. 
 

Highway 4, we’re doing some grading at the North 
Saskatchewan River crossing. As well we’re doing some 
grading and paving on Highway 11 around the Grasswood Road 
going into Saskatoon. We’re doing some resurfacing on 
Highway No. 22, which is Cupar, west. And we are doing some 
grading again on Highway No. 1, a 3-kilometre section. And 
then there are various other projects. 
 
What I can tell the member is that we are waiting federal 
government approval and it has not yet happened, in terms of 
prairie roads initiative. And we are contemplating the 
possibility of issuing a tentative schedule in order to get things 
underway in terms of that agreement that has been signed 
between the federal and provincial ministers but has not yet 
received federal cabinet approval. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through the Chair to 
the minister, last winter you introduced what was claimed to be 
the largest winter tender schedule ever. I’m wondering how 
much of that schedule has been impeded by the lack of 
agreement, or the lack of monies, forthcoming from the federal 
government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — None of it. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, given the issue of roads and so 
forth, do you feel that you have gained enough advantage from 
the early tender schedule through the winter to actually get the 
work accomplished this summer that you had originally 
intended? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, we do. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, we’ve had a number of 
individuals approach us about their concerns with not knowing 
where they stand on the works that might be available to them 
this year. 
 
Can you give me a rough ratio — I don’t need something real 
specific but a rough ratio — of the number of jobs the 
department will undertake under provincial funding alone as 
opposed to the jobs that would involve federal funding as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. It’s approximately 50/50 split 
between the feds and the province on the $30 million program 
for prairie grain roads. On top of that, we have an additional 
$110 million worth of construction. So a total of $140 million 
construction. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, is the total . . . Of the 
100-and-some million you mentioned, is that the provincial 
portion alone or is that part of the federal program as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I indicated that. Of the 140 million, 
about $15 million is federal money. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister, you alluded to 
some repairs on Highway 22 and the member to my left is quite 
curious about that. I think he has some questions he’d like to 
ask. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I heard the 
minister, in response to an earlier question from my colleague; 



May 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 945 

 

indicate that there would be some resurfacing on Highway 22 
west of Cupar. 
 
I wonder if the minister could provide me with more details as 
to what actually will be done on that stretch of highway and 
how many kilometres would be covered by the resurfacing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes. It’s Highway No. 22. It’s west of 
Cupar. It’s approximately 7.2 kilometres. It’s a resurface project 
and the approximate cost to the project is $862,000. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So I take it then, from the minister’s answer, that 
the resurfacing will not cover the entire distance from the town 
of Cupar to Junction No. 6. It will be somewhere within that 
area, part of it will be done. 
 
That particular section of highway has been, I guess, of some 
concern to the town of Cupar in the rural municipality. And 
there’s been correspondence and meetings with your 
department in the past over that particular section of highway. 
And it has to do with the whole issue of the number of 
kilometres that primary weights can be hauled off of a primary 
highway onto a secondary highway. 
 
And the issue is that under the current regulations, I believe it is 
15 kilometres that primary weights can be hauled on a 
secondary highway. And that would bring . . . that distance 
would be — I’m going to use the old metric or the imperial 
measurement because I’m more familiar with it and that’s how 
our land is surveyed — it would bring that distance that truckers 
could haul primary weights off of No. 6 Highway on No. 22 to 
a distance within 3 miles of Cupar. 
 
And what the RM (rural municipality) . . . the town have asked 
for some time is that that exemption or that distance would be 
expanded to the town of Cupar therefore making commerce 
much more realistic and more feasible. And I understand in 
conversations with the former minister of Highways that there 
was a . . . the department had a meeting last fall to discuss and 
review this whole issue. 
 
And I wonder if the minister could provide me with an update 
as to whether she’s looking at changes in that particular 
regulation and what is the thinking of the department on that 
matter? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As I said to the member, the Highway 
critic, last week, it’s an ongoing issue about primary weights on 
structural pavements and also thin membrane surfaces. And it’s 
my plan to have an external review done to look at the whole 
issue of weights on our roads that are not up to primary . . . 
they’re not primary surfaces. And we anticipate that we’ll be 
launching that review shortly. 
 
We need to link, obviously, economic development with our 
physical infrastructure. And the comment has been certainly 
made to me that while we’re upgrading our roads, we’re not 
upgrading all of our roads to primary weight strength. And that 
is a . . . we’re upgrading some of the TMSs (thin membrane 
surface) to structural pavement. But it still creates some 
difficulties in terms of having particular weights go over those 
surfaces. 
 

So we have to figure out how we balance economic 
development with our fiscal capacity to fix the roads in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(12:15) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I certainly agree with the 
minister when she says that you have to look at economic 
development. And that in fact is the case in this particular 
situation where United Grain Growers has invested some 3 or 
$4 million in the new grain handling facility and the purpose of 
that facility is to take grain off the roads and put it onto the 
railway, to the railways. 
 
And so if this issue of primary weights could be resolved and 
some common sense could be brought to this situation, it would 
facilitate taking grain off of the highways and putting it onto the 
railroads which would then, thereby, help extend the lifetime of 
our highways. 
 
So I would urge . . . I mean I’m getting the same answer as I did 
a year ago: that we’re going to look at it. And I was told about a 
year ago that I should wait until, and that area, that community 
should wait until this August or October meeting — I just forget 
when that meeting took place — and now the minister is telling 
the community that they have to wait for an external review. 
 
I would urge the minister to look at some of these situations. 
And I realize there’s probably other situations throughout the 
province where this same sort of situation exists. And if there’s 
some common sense decisions that need to be made, make 
those in the interim and then when you have an overall plan, 
then you can re-look at them. 
 
But in the meantime you’re hindering commerce, you’re 
frustrating truckers and farmers, and people are just constantly 
saying to me it just doesn’t make any sense. I can haul primary 
weights to within three miles of the town of Cupar and then I 
have to go secondary weights. And it’s the same highway, 
Madam Minister — it’s exactly the same highway. 
 
So therefore, as I said, I would urge the minister to look at these 
isolated situations and perhaps make some interim decisions. 
 
I would like to turn my attention now to the No. 22 Highway 
east of Cupar, which is a different structure of a highway. It’s 
certainly not capable of carrying primary weights. 
 
But there is a section between the towns of Cupar and Dysart 
that is . . . last year was one of those sections of highways that 
the department, I guess, really didn’t know what they were 
going to do with. In fact the former minister said they really 
didn’t know what they were going to be doing with it. And it’s 
still in that situation where we have short chunks of gravel and 
then some dust-free surfaces that are breaking up. 
 
The department attempts to maintain these areas, but grading 
them once a week is certainly not adequate. My office 
constantly receives complaints about the condition of this 
highway. 
 
We had a number of matters passed on to your department last 
summer that evolved because of the condition of that highway. 



946 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2001 

 

And the people in the area really can’t understand why this 
short section of highway — I think it’s about seven miles — is 
left in that condition when last year there was a part of the 
highway from Dysart, in fact the whole section pretty well from 
Dysart to Lipton was resurfaced and redone. 
 
And the people are quite happy with that and would be very 
pleased if the department would just finish the job. And they’re 
saying look, you started the job, why don’t you just finish it? 
 
And, Madam Minister, I have quite a number of petitions here 
that I’ve been waiting to table dealing with that precise 
situation. 
 
And I wonder, could the minister tell me if you have any plans 
for that particular section of highway in this year’s program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is we do 
have more money in this year’s budget and we’re hopeful that 
we’ll be able to keep it in better shape. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Deputy Chair, so I take it from the minister’s 
answer that there’s no plan to complete the resurfacing of that 
highway. 
 
So if that in fact is the case, I would like the minister to explain 
to the citizens of that area of the province why they just 
wouldn’t finish the job. I mean, it’s a section of highway . . . 
you have a decent section on one end of it and a decent section 
on another end of it, and the people that live in the centre have 
to put up with this poor section of highway. 
 
I mean, why don’t you just finish the job, Madam Minister? Do 
you not like the people of Dysart? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — My understanding from the officials is 
that the east end is where there is more truck traffic. We wanted 
to get that section of the road done and we did. On the other 
side there is truck traffic as well. It’s just a matter of how much 
money that we have in this year’s budget. 
 
As you know there’s been a lot of lobbying in your area to deal 
with the Cupar situation where there’s . . . you know going into 
the inland terminal, and we only have so much money and 
there’s a tremendous amount of pressure. 
 
And what we’re trying to do is deal with the pressures in terms 
of where the truck traffic is, and we’ve got a three-year rolling 
budget. And there is so many requests, member, which I know 
you will understand, and there’s only so much money. And this 
is the largest amount of money that we’ve ever had in the 
province to spend on fixing our road surfaces in the province. 
And we made the decision to fix the road surfaces where we 
have some of the greatest problems with the truck traffic that’s 
increased dramatically since the elimination of the Crow benefit 
and the restructuring of the grain handling and transportation 
industry. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I would have one final 
comment for today to the Minister, and that is I spoke to the 
contractor who worked on that section of highway late last fall 
and he indicated to me, if I understood him correctly, that he 
felt that if he could . . . would have some assurance that that 

remaining section of highway was to be done this year, that he, 
you know, he could see cost savings by some forward planning 
and just going into an area and completing a section. 
 
So now what we have is the contractor has left the area. If you 
would have . . . if there’d been some assurances that this area 
would have been finished and the tendering would have been 
done over the winter, the contractor could have left his 
equipment in place; he wouldn’t have had those additional costs 
of moving. I’m sure he could have done the work for 
substantially less than now, sometime in the future doing the 
work and bringing a new contractor on site and you incur all 
those moving costs. 
 
I think we need to have some rationalization. Instead of doing a 
little chunk here and a little chunk there, take a section of 
highway, complete it, and then move on. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What the constituents of your riding 
should know is that last year 63 kilometres of roads were 
resurfaced, strengthened, and paved at a cost of close to $3.6 
million. And that was significant, member. 
 
This year you will have further construction occur in your 
constituency at a cost of close to $1.4 million. We take the 
money we have with the urgency that’s in the province, and 
there’s been a 900 per cent increase in the amount of truck 
traffic on our roads in this province, and we have the largest 
numbers of kilometres of any province in this country relative 
to our geographic space. And we are doing what we can with 
the money that we have. 
 
And I know that you have constituents that are putting pressure 
on you and calling my office as well. This is all over the 
province — all over the province this is going on. 
 
And we need to have an integrated road and rail system because 
of the branch lines and the impacts of some of the changes of 
UGG (United Grain Growers Limited) consolidation, the Wheat 
Pool consolidation, and so on and so forth. This has put 
tremendous pressure on our roads. And we do the best we can 
with the money we have. 
 
The other point I’d like to make is that everyone has an opinion 
on this, about how we could save money here and save money 
there and so on and so forth. But one of the things that I’ve 
come to observe is that it costs a lot of money per kilometre to 
either strengthen the road, resurface the road, or pave the road. 
It costs a lot of money. 
 
This is not an inexpensive endeavour. It’s a costly endeavour in 
terms of capital construction. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Sorry, Mr. Chair, I feel I have to make one more 
comment. We all realize that it costs money to fix highways and 
we certainly aren’t going to argue with the minister on that 
point. It’s the efficient and effective use of the money and the 
manner in which highways are repaired and upgraded. 
 
I liken the current government’s plan of fixing highways to 
what used to happen in rural municipalities a number of years 
ago, at least in my own municipality, where each councillor was 
allocated a certain number of dollars to spend for road 



May 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 947 

 

improvements in his division. 
 
And so what we saw under that plan was a section of road in a 
period of 10 years rebuilt in part and some minor improvements 
made. And basically what it amounted to is the ratepayers of the 
municipality still didn’t have a decent road because the job 
wasn’t done properly the first time. Short sections of road were 
improved and it didn’t lead anywhere. 
 
This is exactly what’s happening in the Department of 
Highways today. Instead of taking a section and completing it, 
like in this situation where it’s a matter of 7 miles and it’s not a 
high-cost improvement, and we have the contractor move out 
and then we’ll pay another contractor some time down the road 
to come in. In the meantime people who cross that section of 
highway are sustaining damage to their vehicles, accidents have 
happened, and those sorts of things. 
 
I would urge the department to look at the way they do business 
and perhaps . . . I’m sure we could do things a lot better. 
 
I mean the rural municipalities realized the shortcomings of 
their system of operation quite a number of years ago and 
adopted a unified budget for the whole RM, and as a result by 
and large, we have a pretty good system of rural roads. And I 
think our Department of Highways could learn a lot from our 
rural councillors. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, the department advises me that 
the reason that the pavement was done the way it was done is 
because we have some north-south grids going into Dysart and 
Cupar, and that is where the truck traffic is. They come on to 
the Highway No. 22 and then they go into Dysart and they go 
into Cupar because that’s where the truck volume is. 
 
There isn’t as much truck traffic, as I understand it, between 
Dysart and Cupar as there is on the other parts of the road. And 
so what they’re trying to do is repair and improve the roads 
where the truck traffic is presently going. 
 
(12:30) 
 
So that is the public policy argument. When you only have so 
much money, you look at your volumes of truck traffic and you 
try and repair the roads or strengthen the roads where the trucks 
are going. And my understanding, in terms of truck traffic, there 
isn’t as much volume between Dysart and Cupar as there is in 
other parts of the province. We’re trying to do this 
incrementally. It’s not about giving each RM X numbers of 
dollars because politically that’s what you’re trying to do. 
 
This is about trying to match the money that we have in our 
budgets — last year, the year before, this year — with the kind 
of truck volume that we’re presently facing coming off of our 
grid roads onto our secondary roads. Does the member 
understand that? Oh, you don’t understand that. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I understand. In fact, Mr. Chair, the minister is 
only partly informed. The situation is not quite the way the 
minister described it. True, the grid road coming . . . the 640 
grid road coming down to Highway 22 does carry a lot of truck 
traffic. And that section of highway west, it’s quite acceptable. 
 

The 639 coming down to Dysart comes down to Highway 22. 
Dysart no longer has grain-handling facilities. Now if those 
trucks coming off of 639 want to go east over to terminal 22 at 
Balcarres or wherever to hook up with the Highway 35, your 
plan, your work last year, you left about a kilometre of 
unfinished highway. Why didn’t you then finish it right to 
where the 639 meets Highway 22? That’s what the residents of 
the area are asking. They can’t understand why would you just 
leave that section there? I mean not alone the section between 
Cupar and Dysart. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There is a carry-over and it’s going to 
be finished this year. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
with the persistence of my colleague from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, you know, I think that you finally gave 
him the answer he was wanting. But in your description of the 
process and the fact that you alluded earlier to a rolling 
three-year budget, there are efficiencies that come out of that 
type of rolling budget scenario. 
 
It would be precisely these kinds of examples I think that would 
benefit from that rolling three-year budget. You could say we’re 
going to do so many kilometres this year, so many kilometres 
the next year, we’ll finish it. Not only will you have the project 
finished, you will have removed one of those many dozens of 
irritants that you talked about earlier. When the job is done, the 
people will no longer be calling your office or the office of the 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly). 
 
And I think that’s one of the main advantages of the three-year 
rolling budget scenario. I hope, if I understood a document I 
saw written by the deputy minister, I hope that that kind of 
specific job scheduling will be worked into the department’s 
future planning. Do you have that in mind, as a matter of fact, 
given the three-year rolling budgeting? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Can you tell me what document you 
saw from the deputy minister? I’m not sure; we’re not sure 
which document you’re talking about. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, and to the minister, it’s a 
document that I believe the deputy minister sent out to a 
number of staff people in the department, referring to changes 
in philosophy and emphasis within the department, and how the 
money would be spent on an ongoing basis. 
 
I think the deputy minister in that memo also talked about 
having greater emphasis on larger portions of road. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell you is that we do plan 
on tabling a three-year capital plan that will indicate what our 
plans are. Because of the delay from the federal government, I 
suspect that that will not be tabled, year two and three, until 
June. 
 
It’s going to illustrate our plans for transportation improvement 
in the province, which is going to help us. 
 
I know the member is new to the Assembly, but one of the 
problems that all governments have, and our government has, is 
that you don’t necessarily know what your revenues are going 



948 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2001 

 

to be like in the out years. So we don’t know what they’re 
necessarily going to be like in year 2002-03, 2003-2004. 
 
Now because we had excess oil and gas revenues in the last 
fiscal year, the Government of Saskatchewan decided that we 
were going to spend an additional $150 million on capital 
construction in Highways for the fiscal years 2001-02, 2002-03, 
and 2003-04. 
 
Some of that money, of the 150 million, is contained in this 
year’s budget. The rest of the money is in the fiscal stabilization 
plan, which some of your members have called upon us to 
spend. That’s where we’re keeping the money for the following 
two years. And this is what’s going to allow us to roll out our 
multi-year plan. 
 
And we are the only department in government that has a 
multi-year capital construction plan. And that’s because of the 
decision by the government to take those excess revenues from 
oil and gas and put it into a Highways capital construction 
budget. And the money we’re not spending this year is 
presently in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, which some of your 
members have indicated we should spend now. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
you know, I understand that. But you have, in your own budget 
this year, committed to spending so many dollars per year for 
the next three years and I think that that’s the real advantage to 
a rolling budget. Now you can’t tell me, on one hand, that 
you’re committed to spending so many dollars per year but, on 
the other hand, saying you’re not sure what revenues are going 
to be year ’02 or ’03. 
 
So you know, what is it? Are you going to have $300 
million-plus a year for the next three years or are you not? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — No. What I’m talking about is the big 
picture. I’m not just talking about my department. I’m talking 
about government. 
 
Government does not necessarily know what sorts of revenues 
will happen in the out years. We don’t know that. You forecast 
it. 
 
But in the case of the Department of Highways and 
Transportation, this government has made a commitment to 
take the excess revenues that we obtained in the last fiscal year 
and spend $150 million of those revenues on Highways and 
Transportation in the province of . . . or province of 
Saskatchewan over the next three years, including this present 
fiscal year. 
 
Where we keep our money to allow us to have a rolling budget 
is in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund which some of your members 
— and I’m not saying you have — but some of your members 
have called for the government to spend today. And that’s 
what’s allowing us, that’s what’s allowing us to have this 
three-year-rolling plan. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I think the Road Builders Association in this 
province and other people interested in the issue have called for 
this type of rolling budgeting and I think, frankly, there’s a lot 
of merit in that argument. I would like to see that type of 

budgeting have been done much earlier. And I think that having 
you admit, or indicate, that you’re going to be doing that in the 
future is a step forward. 
 
I think that there are real efficiencies to be gained by taking that 
approach to departments, especially like Highways, where you 
can, in fact, save money in the construction costs by being able 
to say to the contractors who tender, these are the projects we’re 
planning to do over the next three years, we’re going to tender it 
in this kind of a schedule, and if you think you can underbid or 
reduce your bid because you know what’s happening, the 
department and the people of this province ultimately are the 
benefactors of that type of a way of handling the budgeting for 
the department. 
 
So I’m not criticizing what you’re doing, Madam Minister. I am 
suggesting that there are efficiencies there that will benefit 
everybody but will also remove some of the irritants that you 
talked about. 
 
The people of this province that I have talked to on an 
individual basis, time and time again, have said, we know the 
department is limited, we know the resources are not as 
adequate as maybe we would like to accomplish everything, but 
give us a plan, tell us what you’re going to do this year, next 
year, and the year after. A lot of people in this province are 
prepared to wait if they know what the schedule will be. 
 
Having made that . . . would you like to respond to that, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think we know that, and that’s 
why we responded the way we responded. And in the budget 
documents submitted by the Minister of Finance, we have 
indicated that in this fiscal year, we will be spending $311.7 
million. In the next fiscal year, 2002-3, 314.9 million; and 
2003-4, $321.9 million. So we have made a commitment, the 
money is there, and it will happen. 
 
Now in terms of the three-year rolling plan, as I indicated, it is 
our intention to release, as soon as we get approval of this 
federal money, our year ’02-03 schedule which will be released 
in, we believe, June of this year. And what it will do is allow 
the road-building industry to plan their long-term manpower or 
human resource needs as well as their equipment utilization, 
effectively. 
 
The thing that is difficult is that we’ll lay out our plan, but I’m 
sure that there’ll be people who will be not happy that their 
particular section of road is not in our three-year plan. And they 
will try and ask us why isn’t our road in the plan. And what I 
have to say to them, and to all MLAs that represent citizens 
who will want their road in the plan, is that we are trying to 
respond to truck volume, where truck volume is going, and 
where we have the greatest urgency in terms of roads that are 
under tremendous pressure. 
 
And we know that there will be roads that we won’t be able to 
get to next year or the year after or the year after. And that’s 
why in some cases where we’re trying to preserve as much 
thin-membrane surface road in the province, we may want to, 
dependent upon the rural municipalities, we may want to enter 
into alternate truck agreements . . . truck route agreements, in 



May 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 949 

 

order that we can keep as many dust-free surfaces in the 
province as possible so that citizens can go over dust-free 
surfaces. 
 
So I guess the point I’m trying to make is we will release our 
plan, there will be people who will not like the plan because 
their particular section of road is not in the plan. Their road is 
under tremendous pressure. They want a dust-free surface. And 
in order to help us maintain those dust-free surfaces, citizens 
may want to think about entering into alternate truck 
arrangements to keep their roads as dust free as possible. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and to the 
Chairman. I think it’s human nature to resent or disapprove of 
plans that don’t meet your standards of convenience or don’t 
benefit you immediately. So I understand that failing of human 
nature quite well. 
 
You have alluded on several occasions now to the inputting of 
funds specifically where truck traffic was of most concern — 
the major criteria. However, I need to know, are there other 
criteria that you are using to determine where you allocate 
funds? 
 
(12:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, it’s a very complicated set of 
circumstances. But what I can tell you is we look at the 
condition of the road — is it rutting, is it falling apart, does it 
need to be widened because of the truck traffic that’s going 
down that road — and then we look at the truck volume. So it’s 
a matter of two things: what is the condition of the road in terms 
of all of the engineering problems that might be associated with 
that road; and then we look at truck volumes going over that 
road. 
 
But we can get you that information, in terms of the actual 
criteria that we use. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chairman. I 
assume the asset allocation process is part of the factoring when 
you make those decisions. Is that assumption correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Can you give us a definition of what 
you describe as asset allocation? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I understand, Madam Minister, that the 
Department of Highways bought into a program, developed in 
Australia, that looks at the infrastructure and the state of the 
infrastructure, and that regular information is put into the 
program and information is returned from that program that 
would tell you how best to salvage or update or improve that 
infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The member’s correct. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister. Earlier you 
alluded to an external study that you were going to commission 
on the issue of weights. Would you be good enough to detail for 
us the terms of reference for that study, when you expect it to 
begin, and when you expect it to be completed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It has not yet been determined. What I 

can tell the member is that there are so many varied opinions on 
this subject, as the member probably knows, that we had at the 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
convention a resolution saying that nothing over 80,000 
kilograms should be going over our TMSs. 
 
We have various opinions about whether primary weights can 
go down some of our structural pavements. There are so many 
different opinions on this subject that I want to get some people 
externally to give us some advice on this. 
 
We have not yet set the terms and conditions, the mandate, or 
anything, but we’re in the process of doing that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chairman. I 
believe a study like that is not just important, I think it’s long 
overdue. If I remember correctly, I was told that when the thin 
membrane surfaces were put into place in this province, there 
was a weight limitation using the imperial measurement of 
about 72,000 pounds. And now I understand that we’re at 
weight limits that can approach 120,000 pounds. 
 
Could the minister detail for me the ever-increasing weights? 
Can you give me a little history on how that happened and over 
what time frame it happened? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — One of the officials has been in the 
department a long time and he remembers about 80 per cent of 
the history. But what we will do is we will get that, we will get 
that for you in writing. 
 
But there has been a variety of changes to regulations, to 
policies, and so on. And it became very clear to me shortly after 
I was appointed as minister that we have so many different 
weights and different agreements with trucking companies and 
so on and so forth, that it’s time that we had an external review 
of this whole issue because of the pressures that are coming 
from communities, the trucking industry, and just the pressures 
in terms of trying to keep our roads as, you know, in good 
condition as possible. And with the increased truck volumes, I 
think it’s time to take an external look at this issue. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, in 
my understanding of the trucking business, weights have moved 
up on a fairly consistent and regular basis as pressure was 
brought to bear on the department, not by individual farmers or 
individual trucking operators, as much as corporate interests in 
this province. 
 
And I guess when you tell me that weight is one of the most 
serious debilitating impacts on the road system here and yet 
we’ve had ever-increasing weight limitations. Restrictions have 
been removed considerably on a consistent basis as the 
pressures were brought to bear. 
 
Doing a study now on the impact of weights is a little late . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Okay well if it’s not on the impact, 
what other purpose is there to study the weights? You know if 
we’re going to study weights now it’s a little like closing the 
barn door after the horse is gone. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It’s not just about impacts. It’s about 
public policy consistency and that’s what’s . . . from my point 



950 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2001 

 

of view as a cabinet minister, one of the things that you try and 
do is have consistent public policy. 
 
You will know from the Vanguard people what struck me when 
we were having that discussion about weights on their thin 
membrane surface, was that there were some trucks that had a 
partnership agreement with the province that were still on that 
road, where other trucks weren’t on that road. To me that’s an 
inconsistency of public policy. We need to have consistent 
public policy on our various surfaces if it’s possible. 
 
And that’s why I want to take a look at all of the various 
weights that we have on different roads to see if it’s possible to 
begin to move toward some consistent public policy when it 
comes to weights on our various roads in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, once again I find myself in the 
rare position of agreeing with the minister. Because I think that 
that’s been something that’s been lacking. And I couldn’t agree 
more that I think it is fundamentally unfair that some 
companies, because they’re larger and maybe have more room 
for persuasion, would get special privileges even though it’s a 
partnership program and it is costing them something, whereas 
other independent and smaller operators weren’t eligible for 
that. 
 
So I think that that’s probably in my mind, at least on the 
surface of it, is a move in the right direction. And I would 
appreciate being made aware of the results of that study as soon 
as it’s available to the minister herself. 
 
Having reached this time of day, and I know many of my 
colleagues are anxious to leave for the weekend, I think that I 
will thank the minister. It’s premature I know, but I think I’ll 
thank the minister and her officials for her attendance here 
today. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:56. 
 
 


