















































Hansard: April 23, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 659 
 April 23, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of residents in and around 
Bruno who would like to become a part of the Humboldt 
telephone exchange. And the petition reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to allow 
Bruno to be part of the Humboldt telephone exchange. 

 
And the signators on this petition are from Humboldt, Fulda, 
Viscount, Bruno, and Pilger. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have a 
petition from constituents in Rosetown-Biggar concerning the 
two government’s Crown corporations. SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy both recently announced significant rate increases 
for residential and business customers. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are primarily from Biggar, 
although I see Landis on here as well. And I’m pleased to 
present this petition on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with proposed weight 
restrictions to Highway 43. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the economic harm its plan to close Highway 43 
to heavy traffic will do to south-central Saskatchewan and 
instead devote necessary funds to upgrade Highway 43 in 
order to preserve jobs and economic development in the 
area. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals all from the community of 
Vanguard. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
again on behalf of petitioners concerned about the hospital in 
Swift Current. And the prayer of this petition reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 

 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And Mr. Speaker, this petition today has been signed by people 
from Swift Current, from Cabri, from Stewart Valley, from 
North Battleford, from Wymark, Kyle, and Gull Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present petitions today on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan. 
These petitioners are concerned about the EMS project in the 
province. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services recommended in the EMS report, and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners that signed this are from the 
communities of Bengough, Ogema, and Kayville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present 
a petition. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take necessary steps to ensure the Hafford 
Hospital remains open. 
 

And it’s signed by the good citizens of Richard, Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition here from the 
citizens concerned about the high rates of SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Regina, Bladworth, Davidson, 
Francis, Langham, Vanguard, Kenaston, and Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of concerned constituents. The petition deals 
with consolidation of ambulance services. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



660 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community based ambulance 
services. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And signatures to this petition come from Saskatoon, Wynyard, 
Elfros, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition from citizens 
concerned with the high energy rates. And the petition . . . or 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
As in duty bound your petitions will ever pray. 
 

And the signatures on this petition come from the good people 
of Mont Nebo, Spiritwood, Medstead, and Chitek Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise in regards to the health 
care in the province, and particularly Pioneer Lodge in 
Assiniboia. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that, at the very least, 
current levels of services and care are maintained at 
Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Assiniboia, 
Mossbank, and Killdeer. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again on behalf of concerned citizens with reference to the 
cuts at Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that, at the very least, 
current levels of services and care are maintained at 
Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signators on this come from Assiniboia, 
Mossbank, Moose Jaw, Kincaid, Big Beaver, Limerick, 
Viceroy, and Rockglen. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province on the following matters: 
 

The centralization of ambulance services; 
 
Swift Current’s request for a new hospital; 
 
Level of services and care at Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia; 
 
The necessary funding to upgrade Highway 43; 
 
Substantial energy rebate to consumers; 
 
Ensuring the Hafford Hospital remains open; and 
 
Allowing Bruno to be part of the Humboldt telephone 
exchange. 

 
Also the petitions for private Bills are hereby read and received: 
 

The petition of the International Bible College of Moose 
Jaw in the province of Saskatchewan praying for an Act to 
amend its Act of Incorporation; 
 
The petition for Our Lady of the Prairies Foundation 
praying for an Act to continue Our Lady of the Prairies 
Foundation; 
 
The petition of the Providence Hospital in Moose Jaw 
praying for an Act to dissolve Providence Hospital; 
 
A petition of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities praying for an Act to amend its Act of 
Incorporation; and 
 
The petition of St. Anthony’s Home, Moose Jaw, praying 
for an Act to dissolve St. Anthony’s home; and 
 
The petition of St. Thomas More College of Saskatoon 
praying for an Act to continue the St. Thomas More 
College. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that on 
day 27 I will ask the government the following question: 
 

How much is budgeted for travel outside of Canada by 
officials of SaskTel and its subsidiaries to investigate 
investments made or under consideration during the year 
2001; a similar question for investments outside of 
Saskatchewan but in Canada; and parallel questions for the 
years 2000 and 1999. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 27 ask the government the following question: 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 661 

 

To the minister of SOCO: what are all the companies in 
which SOCO has invested interest, including the name of 
each company, the total amount invested in each company, 
the investment vehicle used for each investment, and the 
terms and conditions of each investment. 
 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 27 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of SOCO: what were 24 companies in 
which SOCO invested in 2000; how much was invested in 
each company; what was the investment vehicle used for 
each investment; and what were the terms and conditions of 
each investment. 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a written question. I 
give notice I shall on day no. 27 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: did 
Sask Valley Potato Corporation purchase any 
potato-growing equipment in the 2000-2001 fiscal year, 
and if so, what did they purchase; what was the cost of each 
piece of equipment? 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 27 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: did a 
number of executives of SaskPower travel to Minneapolis 
on or about April 18, 2001; if so, who went, for what 
purpose, and at what cost; what specific mode of 
transportation did they use and at what cost? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure to day to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of this place, 
22 grade 8 students, 18 grade 5 students, from Walker School in 
the riding of Regina Elphinstone here in Regina. They’re 
accompanied by their teachers, Cheryl Ball and John Stark. And 
I look forward to meeting with you later. Please enjoy your time 
here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of this Hon. Assembly, a 
delegation of reeves and councillors from the area of Highway 
43. These people are concerned with the proposed weight 
restrictions to Highway 43. And included are the reeve of Glen 
Bain; Mr. Leo Haack and three of his councillors, Mr. Henry 
Hildebrandt, Mr. Kal Sadden, and Mr. Reg Wagner; and the 
reeve of the RM (rural municipality) of Lac Pelletier, Mr. 
Cornie Martens and three of his councillors, Mr. Lloyd 
Peterson, Mr. Walter Kruszelnicki, and Mr. Ron Miller. 
 
I understand that these gentlemen have already met with one 
cabinet minister today, and they have another meeting coming 
up. 
 
And we wish them the very best and hope that they have a 
productive time in the legislature. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 
with my colleague, the member for Thunder Creek, in 
welcoming all of the people that have travelled to Regina to 
meet with, I think, two cabinet ministers. They had an 
opportunity to meet with me this morning. 
 
I know you’re going to find question period interesting. And 
I’m assured on this side of the House that we’re going to 
behave ourselves so that you can hear the questions and the 
answers. 
 
So thank you very much for coming to Legislative Assembly 
this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Health Bursary Program 
 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Good health care is a 
priority for this government. And we’ve taken steps that prove 
our commitment to providing Saskatchewan’s people with the 
best health care possible. 
 
I’m pleased to acknowledge in the Assembly that the 
government has, today, announced a creation of the 
Saskatchewan Health bursary program. This program will help 
students with their tuition costs in exchange for service in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Students studying health care professions will be awarded 
$7,000 per year. For every year that a student receives a 
bursary, that student will serve one year in a rural community. 
 
Important members of the health care team such as those being 
trained in physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech and 
language pathology, audiology, public health inspections, 
respiratory therapy, and early child psychology will benefit 
from this new bursary program. And I am pleased to say that no 
less than 23 bursaries will be awarded to Saskatchewan 
students. 
 
Not only does the Saskatchewan Health bursary program help 
students with the cost associate with going to university but it 
helps to address the shortage of health care professionals in 
rural areas. 
 
This program is another way in which we can help health 
districts across the province recruit and retain health care 
providers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program is good for our students and it is 
good for the people of Saskatchewan. I wish to congratulate all 
involved in the creation of the Saskatchewan Health bursary 
program. Thanks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 



662 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

Mennonite Youth Farm in Rosthern 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the 
opportunity this weekend to be present at the opening of the 
renovations that have taken place at the Mennonite Youth Farm 
in Rosthern, and this is a senior care home. 
 
It is probably, Mr. Speaker, the most beautiful senior care 
centre in Saskatchewan, having been bought by the Mennonites 
of Saskatchewan in 1943 as an old experimental farm. And so 
all the buildings and the trees and the landscaping is there and 
it’s a very beautiful centre. 
 
The renovations are a combination of effort between that 
particular body and as well as Gabriel Springs and also some 
provincial money put into that. 
 
And it’s a very impressive facility and very much appreciated 
by the people of that particular area, carrying out the continued 
tradition that Mennonites began back in 1880 in the Ukraine 
with taking good care of their seniors. And it’s good to see and 
it was a great building. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince of Wales Cultural and Recreation Centre 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
inform the House that on Saturday, I had the pleasure of 
advising nearly 200 volunteer fundraisers in Assiniboia that the 
Government of Saskatchewan is adding just under $1.1 million 
to their efforts to fund a multi-purpose cultural and recreational 
facility. 
 
The Assiniboia Civic Improvement Association took on the task 
of fundraising for the $4.2 million project less than 7 years ago. 
With only $3,000 in their bank account to begin with, the 
association has raised over $3 million which, along with the $1 
million-plus grant from the Associated Entities Fund, permits 
construction to begin this summer. 
 
This centre will house a theatre, a cultural performing arts 
centre, a curling arena, as well as the Assiniboia Palliser 
Regional Library, multi-purpose area, and community meeting 
and board rooms. 
 
As Civic Improvement Association Bill Batty said at Saturday’s 
luncheon, the government is proving that it is serious about its 
commitment to rural revitalization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nearly 200 residents of Assiniboia and area stated 
repeatedly on Saturday they feel revitalized by the 
government’s commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Unity Lazers Midget Girls Hockey Club Win Female 
Provincial B Championship 

 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations are in 
order to the Unity Lazers Midget Girls Hockey Club for 
winning the female provincial B championship. In the 
provincials, they eliminated the teams from Turtleford and 

Lashburn, and in the finals came up against the team from 
Eston to win the championship. 
 
They also won the east-central female Alberta Hockey League 
championship, defeating Irma in the final game. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate coach Larry Heitt and 
manager Rick Hill. 
 
These girls come from the communities of Wilkie, Unity, 
Luseland, and Little Pine. And I wish to extend our best wishes 
and congratulations to the Unity Lazers Midget Girls Hockey 
Club. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canada Book Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to inform the Assembly and the public that each of us 
today should do the following: we should go to the Internet, log 
on to www.canadabookday.com, and then vote for our favourite 
Saskatchewan author — W.O. Mitchell, Sinclair Ross, John 
Hicks, Maggie Siggins, Gail Bowen, Ken Mitchell, Diane 
Warren, Connie Gault, Lorna Crozier, Gary Hyland, and that 
just started my list, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Or, if you must, vote for your Canadian author. This national 
poll to find Canadians’ favourite authors is being conducted as 
part of Canada Book Day, which in turn is being celebrated as 
part of World Book Day, a day that Canada joins more than 80 
countries to celebrate books and what they represent. 
 
And what they represent, Mr. Speaker, is the active life of the 
mind, without which there would be no self-expression, no 
interchange of ideas between individuals and between cultures, 
and no intellectual freedom and, frankly, no joy. The ability to 
read is a fountainhead of civilization. Those who give us the 
ideas, the stories, and the information to read are gatekeepers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this day is to encourage people to 
read to their kids and for themselves. And it is a day to remind 
ourselves that there are Canadian authors, publishers, and 
booksellers who are more than worthy of our support and we 
wish them a great deal of luck. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Smeaton and District Care Home Co-operative 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 
bring recognition to the village of Smeaton and the rural area 
surrounding the village. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on December 1 of the year 2000 the Smeaton and 
District Care Home Co-operative opened its doors for the first 
time. This community-owned and operated facility also took in 
its first residents on December 1, and in only three months the 
care home was being fully utilized. 
 
The Smeaton and District Care Home has been made especially 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 663 

 

attractive and has been connected physically to the Smeaton 
Health Centre. Thus, Mr. Speaker, residents in the care home 
have access to nurses, pharmacists, doctors, chiropractors, 
therapists, and many more valuable services. 
 
The board of directors are very proud of being a part of this 
amalgamation, Mr. Speaker. But one aspect of the home makes 
everyone especially proud, and that fact is this $800,000 home 
was built with no provincial government help. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, the village of Smeaton and the surrounding 
community have built this care home entirely of their own 
initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to join 
me in congratulating the Smeaton and District Care Home 
Co-operative and their board of Tom Jensen, Roni Jean 
Grunerud, Margo Marshall, Doreen Willness, Mike Rudnicki, 
Leonard Backlund, Dwayne Ealey, Lorne Butterfield, and 
Morris Davyduke. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Melfort Co-op Sets Sales Record 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This time from the thriving city of 
Melfort. 
 
For the second straight year, Mr. Speaker, the Melfort Co-op 
has set a new record for total sales. Obviously something good 
is happening out and about in our province because 
Saskatchewan people are expressing confidence in 
Saskatchewan-owned institutions by supporting them with their 
dollars, and in this case, with their memberships also. 
 
Sales figure for the Melfort Co-op in 2000 totalled $22.73 
million. That’s up 13 per cent or 2.7 million over last year. As 
the general manager, Gordon Dymtruk, pointed out, many 
sectors of the Co-op showed impressive gains with the fuel 
purchases leading the way. 
 
And there is more good news, Mr. Speaker. Several successful 
products were undertaken to expand and upgrade the services 
offered to members in the Melfort area. 
 
And at an annual meeting a major capital project for the near 
future was announced — the development of an integrated 
lumber and agro centre. The 16 acres for this development has 
already been purchased. These plans for the future are signs of 
the confidence in the future. 
 
One thing for sure, Mr. Speaker. With this much shopping 
going on in downtown Melfort, it’s fair to say that the good 
citizens of that community do not buy into the rhetoric of doom 
and gloom. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Volunteers from Humboldt 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 

National Volunteer Week. And I’d like to recognize two 
volunteers from my constituency, from the city of Humboldt, 
Ed and Isabelle Brockmeyer. 
 
Although the Brockmeyers farm about 10 miles out of the city, 
they always seem to be in the city, helping out one organization 
or the other. And it is something they have done for years now. 
 
Last year, Ed was recognized for his efforts by his hometown 
and was named Citizen of the Year 2000 by Humboldt and 
District Chamber of Commerce. 
 
Ed has been active in the Wildlife Federation, a founding 
member of the Community Cross Country Ski Club, a Scout 
leader, a board member of the Waldsea Lake Regional Park, 
District Volksport, Friends of the Water Tower, and the 
Humboldt and District Historical Society. He has also been 
heavily involved with Sommerfest. 
 
Ed wishes he could have shared his volunteer award with his 
wife as she works alongside him in most of their volunteer 
activities and contributes a great deal through her great culinary 
skills. Isabelle has been seen and found preparing great special 
fish recipes for the Wildlife Federation banquets and baking for 
functions and helping to entertain tour groups at the 
Willkommen Centre. 
 
Their volunteerism really took off when Humboldt adopted the 
German theme. Both Ed and Isabelle are of German descent and 
this became the focus of their volunteerism. Both are very 
involved in the German Heritage Society, singing and dancing. 
 
When asked why they have become so involved in the 
community, the Brockmeyers said that it’s payback time as 
Humboldt has been very good to them. In Isabelle’s words: you 
got to do for other people; you don’t gain anything by doing for 
yourself. And, Mr. Speaker, that is what volunteerism is all 
about. 
 
Thank you, Ed and Isabelle, for giving so generously of your 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Closure of Lanigan Hospital 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week the people of Lanigan learned that the Lanigan Hospital 
would close from June 15 through to September 15. The health 
district says that the closure is due to a staffing crisis but the 
health professionals in Lanigan are concerned. They say at no 
time did the health district ask them how they could handle the 
summer staffing concerns. 
 
I have a letter from Dr. Saxena of Lanigan who says, and I 
quote: 
 

We have quite a few acute emergencies from heart attacks, 
congestive heart failure, and multiple injuries, especially at 
this time of year with farming accidents. Having this 
hospital closed is jeopardizing the life of those patients. 



664 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

I, along with the community, would appreciate that you 
impress to the Minister of Health to stop the proposed 
closure of the Lanigan Hospital for the summer months. 
 

Mr. Speaker, with the Minister of Health listen to the people of 
Lanigan and stop the closure of their hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize for my voice 
today and I will speak a little more quietly than usual. What we 
know in Saskatchewan is that we are going to continue to build 
a very good health system, working with all of the people 
involved. 
 
We know in the Lanigan area that they have had some difficulty 
recruiting enough staff to provide coverage, and so the board in 
that area has been working with the local people to figure out 
how they can provide coverage for the summer as well as give 
some people who have worked very hard over the last year or 
two years needed summer vacations. 
 
The solution that they have proposed involves having those 
people take their summer vacations this summer and have the 
coverage being covered by another hospital within their region. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke about 
how they’re working with the people, but on April 11 many 
community leaders and stakeholders in the Lanigan Hospital 
met with the health district to discuss various issues of health 
delivery in the community. These people say that at no time 
was the prospect of their hospital being closed even mentioned. 
They were shocked to hear just one week later that their 
hospital would be closed for three months. 
 
The doctor and nurses at the hospital say that they were 
prepared to co-operate with the health district and work out a 
staffing schedule amongst themselves so that the 24-hour health 
care could be provided during those three months. 
 
They were also very concerned because there’s a new doctor 
preparing to come to Lanigan in July, but if he has no hospital 
to work out of, they believe he will decide not to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does the Minister of Health expect to attract 
doctors, specialists, and nurses to the province when they close 
the facilities right out from under them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, we will 
continue to work with the local people. We know that the local 
health districts have worked on this issue. It’s very clear that if 
we get involved in micromanaging these whole systems, we 
will not come up with solutions that work in local areas. 
 
The health district has been working with the staff. And 
presumably if there are suggestions and ideas about how to 
work with this particular problem this summer, then those 
people will be able to do that. We prefer to allow those very 
capable people to make some of these decisions in their local 

area and we will continue to work with them. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Obviously the minister doesn’t want to take 
responsibility for what’s happening. And they did not talk to the 
people, they did not talk to the stakeholders or the nurses or the 
doctors. 
 
Last year the then minister of Health said that there would be no 
major changes made to health care delivery in the health 
districts until the Fyke report was finished. Well the Fyke report 
is finished and there are health districts still facing major 
operation decisions. 
 
This district has decided to close the Lanigan Hospital for three 
months and move long-term care patients out of their 
community, leave their existing doctor without a hospital, and 
potentially lose the services of a new doctor. The people of 
Lanigan aren’t interested in more study of the Fyke study. Their 
crisis is happening now and they want some answers about the 
summer closure of their hospital immediately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will the minister stop hiding from dealing 
with the immediate problems facing our health system and 
make some decisions to help this province deal with issues of 
staffing shortages? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think if the Premier was 
looking for a minister who would hide, he would have picked 
somebody a little smaller. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we know is that this particular situation 
involves a shortage of staff. We are working very carefully with 
SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses), SRNA (Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses’ Association) and other professional 
organizations, as well as the School of Nursing to increase the 
numbers of people who are trained so that we can have the full 
amount of staff. 
 
What we also know is that we will continue to work with the 
people as we develop a plan for the province, because all of 
these things are important as we make sure that all of our 
people have the services that they need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan’s Centennial Celebrations 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning the minister released a report on 
celebrating Saskatchewan’s 100th anniversary. We look 
forward to celebrating this important milestone and all the 
achievements of Saskatchewan people in our first 100 years. 
But, Mr. Speaker, what is the first recommendation of this 
report — set up a new Crown corporation. 
 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 665 

 

The NDP (New Democratic Party) has decided that we need a 
new Crown corporation to celebrate Saskatchewan’s birthday. 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why do we need a new Crown 
corporation to celebrate Saskatchewan’s centennial? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
very pleased that the member opposite was able to attend the 
media announcement this morning. And it was wonderful to be 
able to officially and formally thank all the members of the 
anniversary committee who worked so hard over the last three 
years to develop the recommendations. 
 
And she is indeed right, that the first recommendation that that 
committee made was that we should establish a Treasury Board 
Crown in order to be able to facilitate the planning and 
development of the very great ideas that are coming forward 
from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m sorry that the member had to leave early. She would have 
heard me answer this very question to the media. And the 
answer, Mr. Speaker, is that this will facilitate budgetary 
planning from year to year so that this Treasury Board Crown 
will be able to work in progress for the next four years with the 
plans for the centennial. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, in 1995 Saskatchewan hosted the 
best Grey Cup in history without setting up a Crown 
corporation. This year Saskatchewan will host the Memorial 
Cup and the Olympic curling trials. Great credit to our 
province. But they did this without setting up a Crown 
corporation. 
 
Our province routinely puts on world-class events and 
celebrations of Saskatchewan achievement without setting up a 
Crown corporation. Mr. Speaker, why does the NDP think it 
needs to set up a whole new bureaucracy to celebrate 
Saskatchewan’s centennial? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Perhaps the member opposite, while full of Alberta envy, is 
very conveniently ignoring the fact that Alberta will also be 
celebrating its centennial year in 2005 and they have set up a 
Crown corporation to manage it. 
 
And perhaps the member opposite is a little shoddy in terms of 
her history and has conveniently forgotten that the Grant 
Devine government also had a Crown corporation for Celebrate 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I realize that the member opposite perhaps would not 
remember that the great historian in this province, Dr. John 
Archer, who was involved in the jubilee celebration also had 
recommended and was part of a Crown corporation for that 
celebration. 
 
This is simply a tradition that we are carrying on. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, no one is more interested than 
the Saskatchewan Party in celebrating our centennial. After all, 
we plan to be the government in year 2005. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — We want to make sure that it gets done right. 
 
But we are also very interested in open and accountable 
government. This morning the minister said one of the main 
reasons for setting up a centennial Crown is so they don’t have 
to bother running their expenses through the General Revenue 
Fund. Isn’t that typical of the NDP — more bureaucracy, bigger 
government, less accountability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much money is the NDP going to spend on 
another unnecessary bureaucracy and how many taxpayers’ 
dollars will be spent paying the board of directors of this new 
corporation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I’m absolutely dumbfounded 
because, you know, this morning was a wonderful 
announcement of a great celebration that all people of 
Saskatchewan, regardless of their political ideology, will be 
participating in. 
 
I wouldn’t have thought that the Saskatchewan Party would 
choose to play cheap politics with the celebration. But quite 
frankly, if she doesn’t want a Crown corporation, would she 
want an all-party committee? I kind of doubt it. 
 
And I’m a little worried that if they should happen to form 
government, which I do not think will happen at all, Mr. 
Speaker, what would they do with the centennial Crown 
corporation? They’d probably sell it off. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investment 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for SaskTel. Mr. 
Speaker, on Friday we learned that SaskTel lost about $2 
million trying to get into the business of collecting and selling 
people’s health records to drug companies. I got the distinct 
feeling that the minister was learning about it on Friday for the 
first time as well. 
 
SaskTel went to great lengths to keep the purpose of this 
company hidden, Mr. Speaker. While IQ&A was mentioned in 
the annual report to the government, exactly what IQ&A did 
was never, ever even summarized in those reports. There was 
no news release when this company was started back in 1998, 
and it seems like SaskTel didn’t really want anyone to know 
that they were buying and selling people’s health information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister. What was SaskTel up to? Why 
would they go to such great lengths to hide the activities of this 
company? 



666 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is my understanding that there wasn’t sale of health 
information. But I do want to point out, as well, the member, as 
I said last Friday, the member chooses to point out the fact that 
this Crown lost money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go through a list, if you will . . . if I 
could, I should say, of the companies that made money. 
Leicester Cable made over a hundred million dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. Saturn/Austar made 37, over 37 million. Regional 
Cable over 8 million, Mr. Speaker. Alouette made over 6 
million, Mr. Speaker. ISM Westbridge, over 23, just about 24 
million. And yet that member chooses to pull out one Crown 
corporation that loses money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the government and 
the minister specifically, seems more than happy to start taking 
responsibility for some of the Crowns he just mentioned. When 
will he take responsibility for this Crown, and others that risked 
and lost taxpayers’ money, Mr. Speaker? That’s what we’re 
asking him to do in the legislature over the last number of days. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, IQ&A put out an annual report each 
year, but they never mention the purpose of their business. They 
never once mentioned they were in the business of buying and 
selling people’s health care information. It seems like a pretty 
important detail to overlook. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a lot of other people must have had big problems 
with this idea because in two years, they didn’t make a single 
sale, this company. All their partners bailed out; they lost $2 
million. Obviously people were very uneasy about the idea of 
SaskTel buying and selling people’s health care information. 
 
To the minister, Mr. Speaker: is buying and selling people’s 
health information an appropriate business activity for a Crown 
corporation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the simple fact is that IQ&A 
asked Saskatchewan Health for access to their information. 
They responded, no way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, don’t you think SaskTel might have 
then in fact phoned the Department of Health ahead of time 
before investing a million to $2 million in wasting the 
taxpayers’ time and money. How about picking up the phone 
and asking the question, Mr. Speaker. This is unbelievable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sad part is SaskTel spent $2 million getting 
into the health information business. And they obviously had no 
assurances from anyone, including their own Department of 
Health, they had no assurances that anyone wanted to do 
business with them. 
 
At the end of the day, no one ever did use the service. SaskTel 

never made a single sale — not one. They never generated a 
thin, lonely dime of revenue. And Saskatchewan taxpayers are 
left on the hook for $2 million. So there’s a whole series of 
questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Where was the business plan? Where were the signed contracts? 
Where was the due diligence? Mr. Speaker, SaskTel blew $2 
million and never made a dime on the venture. Who is 
responsible for the gross mismanagement of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers’ money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I would ask the question, Mr. Speaker, 
where were the questions from the opposition one year ago, in 
1999, Mr. Speaker, when there were annual reports that talked 
about this very situation over a year ago. He talks as if he’s 
revealing some big secret to the public of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said in this legislature many times, the 
Crown Investments Corporation and our Crowns will make 
investments that will lose money, Mr. Speaker; but they will 
make many more investments, Mr. Speaker, that will earn much 
revenue and dividends for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister asks why we didn’t ask 
about this question last year when it was mentioned in the 
annual report. There was no mention of the fact that this 
government had set up a subsidiary of a Crown corporation to 
sell people’s health care information. Not one. 
 
And more to the point, where was the minister when these 
reports were being made to him that this company was losing 
money and not making a single sale. Where was the minister, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, SaskTel set up IQ&A in 1998 with 
four partners. But by ’99, the partners realized there was no 
demand for the service and they decided to wind it down. Yet 
on July 19, ’99, SaskTel spent another $830,000 to buy out the 
four partners. Why on earth would SaskTel pour another 
$800,000 into this thing, when it was clear that it was already 
going down the tubes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, of course hindsight for the 
opposition is 20/20. Mr. Speaker, it is clear — it is clear — 
we’re admitting, Mr. Speaker, that there will be investments 
where the Crown Investments Corporation, in our Crown 
corporations, will lose money, Mr. Speaker. But in every case 
there is due diligence, there is audits completed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crown Corporations Board goes through the 
investments, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 9 times out of 10, 
Mr. Speaker, the Crowns make money and return profits and 
dividends to the people of Saskatchewan. They diversify a risk 
when it comes to investment in insurance, Mr. Speaker. 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 667 

 

These investments will not always be profitable but the majority 
of the times, history has shown that they are profitable, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the due diligence on 
this project was apparently so exhaustive that at the start of the 
outfit in the first place, they didn’t bother to phone the Minister 
of Health to find out if she was even prepared to sell them 
information in the first place. That’s just absolutely ridiculous, 
Mr. Speaker, in the face of a $2 million loss of taxpayers’ 
dollars. 
 
I’ll ask the minister the direct question again, Mr. Speaker. Why 
did SaskTel — and the minister did not answer this question — 
why did SaskTel spend $800,000 to buy up the remaining 40 
per cent of the company? 
 
He mentions hindsight. Well by then it was clear to SaskTel and 
the government that this thing was going nowhere. So at that 
point, why did the minister invest another $800,000 of 
taxpayers’ dollars when this business was already going down 
the tubes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, why didn’t we sell the 
Cameco shares when those members suggested we should? And 
why did we not sell our share in the Bi-Provincial upgrader at 
Husky when those members said we should, Mr. Speaker? It 
was because we had good advice from our financial analysts 
who knew better than we did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in every case, Mr. Speaker, there’s due diligence and 
there’s audits performed. And, Mr. Speaker, in the majority of 
cases by far, Mr. Speaker, they will make money and will not 
lose money. Sometimes there will be money lost, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what happens when you invest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But for the people of Saskatchewan, it is always our intent and 
history will show that they will far more often return profits to 
the people of Saskatchewan than lose money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not getting answers to some 
very important questions about taxpayers’ money and about the 
waste of taxpayers’ dollars so we’re going to keep asking them, 
Mr. Speaker. You can have assurance of that. 
 
I’ll give the minister another chance to answer the question. 
When it was clear that this company was going nowhere — in 
fact in this legislature not less than a year ago the then Minister 
of Health confirmed that the province wouldn’t be selling health 
care information — when it was clear that this business idea 
was going absolutely nowhere, why did the government, why 
did SaskTel, purchase an additional 40 per cent for $800,000 
worth of taxpayers’ money? Why did the government do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, well first of all, we’re not 
going to get into as a CIC (Crown Investment Corporation) 
Board, — and I’ve answered this question a number of times — 
into the micromanaging of the investments in the corporations, 
Mr. Speaker. We will absolutely not do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is up to our officials — who have historically shown clearly, 
who have a reputation of solid investment and solid advice — 
that we will allow them to provide us the information, Mr. 
Speaker, the advice and the recommendations. Mr. Speaker, and 
their recommendations and the history has shown that they will 
make money way more times than they will lose money for the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Two million dollars is not micromanagement in 
the constituencies we represent on this side of the House. And 
as a news flash for the members opposite, it’s not a small issue 
for your constituents either. It’s $2 million we’re talking about 
here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s another question for the minister — where did the 
money go? IQ&A’s annual report shows that only about 
$350,000 was spent on capital assets like computers. About 
$1.8 million simply shows up on the annual report as operating 
expenses. There’s a lot of operating expenses for a company 
that never generated any money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister please explain what were these 
operating expenses? What or who received the $1.8 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite talks about a loss of something under $2 million and 
we shouldn’t trivialize it because it’s important, Mr. Speaker. 
But that member’s party, Mr. Speaker, racked up a debt that’s 
costing us $2 million a day, Mr. Speaker — a day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what did they do when they were in 
opposition . . . when they were in government, Mr. Speaker? 
They racked up debt in our Crown corporations of over $2 
billion, Mr. Speaker. They stripped away the retained earnings, 
Mr. Speaker. The credit rating of this province hit an all-time 
low, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What did we do, Mr. Speaker? We’ve reduced the debt, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ve seen nine consecutive credit rating 
upgrades, Mr. Speaker — upgrades. And I think that shows that 
the people that advise us in our Crown corporations provide us 
good, sound financial advice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the bottom line for 
this project is that the NDP blew 2 million of the taxpayers’ 
money on a company that never made a single sale, never 
earned a single dollar of revenue. 
 
Taxpayers have a right to know. Where did this money go? 
There is absolutely no disclosure in IQ&A’s annual report on 
this — and I’ll tell the minister because it’s clear he hasn’t read 



668 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

the annual report — that you can’t find this detail in that report. 
It just says operating expenses. What were these operating 
expenses? Was it salaries? Was it consulting contracts? Where 
did this money go? Who received the $2 million SaskTel blew 
on this company? Answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again, 
I’m not going to get into the details of micromanaging our 
Crown corporations or the investments that they make, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’ve made no secret about this, Mr. Speaker. Our Crown 
corporations will continue to invest in investments that they 
think are good for the people of Saskatchewan and they will 
lose money sometimes, Mr. Speaker. Sometimes they will not 
be profitable, but the history has shown, Mr. Speaker, that they 
will return investments and dividends to the people of 
Saskatchewan many, many more times than they will lose, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The evidence is as I have just listed. Over $200 million in 
investments that they made for the people of Saskatchewan 
versus 20 million that they’ve lost, Mr. Speaker — ten to one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 204 — The Justice System Review Act 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to move the 
first reading of Bill No. 204, The Justice System Review Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great deal 
of pleasure on behalf of the government to table the answers to 
written questions 77 through 91. 
 
The Speaker: — Written questions for 77 through to 91 
inclusive are hereby tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise in the Assembly today to move second reading of The Oil 
and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
It’s a very important piece of legislation for the province and 
the oil and gas industry, Mr. Speaker. This legislation provides 
the framework for a comprehensive program that will ensure 
Saskatchewan’s oil and gas wells, facilities and related sites are 
properly abandoned and reclaimed once they are no longer 

needed. 
 
Within industry, the program is generally known as the oil and 
gas orphan program. A number of amendments of housekeeping 
. . . of a housekeeping nature are also included in this Bill to 
update The Oil and Gas Conservation Act and strengthen the 
authority to make minister’s orders and regulations. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, represents another example of our 
government’s commitment to responsible protection of the 
environment. Mr. Speaker, there are approximately 41,000 oil, 
gas, and service related wells, along with numerous flow lines 
and facilities like oil, batteries, and gas processing plants in this 
province. 
 
Nearly 10,000 wells are already inactive. At some point in the 
future, when no further economic need or use can be identified 
for the wells and facilities, they must be properly abandoned 
and the sites reclaimed. The costs to carry out this work will be 
significant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the oil and gas industry is prepared to guarantee 
the proper abandonment and reclamation of wells, facilities, and 
related sites if the province introduces a comprehensive 
abandonment and reclamation liability management program 
and strictly enforces the provisions of that program. 
 
The program that we are introducing through this legislation 
will ensure that the responsibility for proper well and facility 
decommissioning and cleanup rests with industry and not 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s oil and gas orphan program will 
contain two important parts. The first consists of a more 
comprehensive licencing system for wells and facilities, along 
with a system of financial guarantees to ensure that all licensees 
will be able to meet their abandonment and reclamation 
responsibilities. 
 
This part of the program will focus on steps necessary to 
prevent wells and facilities from becoming orphans. An orphan 
in this context is a well or facility where the owner is defunct or 
missing. 
 
The second part of the program will consist of a fund financed 
entirely by industry, which can be used to abandon and reclaim 
orphan wells and facilities. 
 
I am pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that the provisions of our oil 
and gas orphan program are based on the recommendations of 
an industry government committee that has been reviewing this 
subject for more than a year. 
 
Industry had suggested that we model our program after 
Alberta’s orphan program. We acknowledge that our program 
reflects many of the principles and provisions contained in 
Alberta’s orphan program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to specifically acknowledge and thank the 
three industry associations that worked with our department and 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management in the 
development of this environmentally responsible program. They 
include the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, the 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 669 

 

Small Explorers and Producers Association of Canada and the 
Saskatchewan Swab Producers Association. 
 
The associations will continue to work with us over the next 
few months to develop the regulations necessary to have a fully 
functioning program. 
 
This is a very forward-looking and responsible piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. While the oil and gas industries expect 
it to be a very important part of the provincial economy for 
many decades to come, now is the time to adopt measures that 
will ensure the final stage in the resource development cycle is 
properly managed. 
 
I commend the industry for its interest and support in this 
environmental stewardship initiative. 
 
With those brief remarks and comments, Mr. Speaker, I move 
second reading of The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment 
Act, 2001. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to enter into the debate on Bill No. 10, The Oil and 
Gas Conservation Amendment Act. 
 
A number of issues have come to light, when I heard the 
minister speak on this amendment Act . . . Act; as well, as our 
critic has touched on a number of issues that we have some 
concern with and want to follow-up a little bit further. 
 
One of the first things that the minister talked about is how no 
one can drill without ministerial licence or having to go to the 
minister for a licence. And it was just a short few minutes ago 
he was saying how, as a minister, he didn’t want to 
micromanage. And I’m just wondering how that works when 
now everybody has to go ask the minister to drill before they 
can. 
 
But certainly, the oil and gas industry in Saskatchewan is an 
area that we really need to flourish and to really carry this 
province into the future, as we all know that agriculture is 
having its troubles but the oil and gas industry with the rate 
increases that we’ve experienced through the gas area is a very, 
very important industry to the province. 
 
And there are a number of things that we need to do to increase 
the capacity of our fields and hopefully this Bill goes towards 
some of them. 
 
The reclaiming costs of orphan wells and how that’s going to be 
transferred onto companies so that we don’t have 
environmentally reckless people out there and so there’s some 
responsibility on the companies, we think is a good thing. But 
there’s a number of companies that we want to deal with, and 
touch with, talk to regarding that very issue. 
 
It was also interesting that the minister had talked about how 
they’re going to model it after the Alberta experience, and 
we’ve often said some of the things that are done right in 
Alberta and commented on them, they keep calling us, saying to 
us that all you have is Alberta envy and everything else. Well 

it’s always interesting, when they bring legislation in from 
Alberta, I wish they would have thought of this about 30 years 
ago and followed the Alberta experience back then and we 
would never be in the situation that we’re in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So, Mr. Speaker, we would like to take this 
Bill and certainly do a lot more consultation with the people in 
the industry. As I said, we realize that these people are very key 
to the growth and the expansion of our province, the economic 
well-being of this province, and it would . . . so we’ll adjourn 
the debate now and consult with the groups that would be 
interested. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Freehold Oil and Gas Production 
Tax Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much again, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in the Assembly again to move 
second reading of The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax 
Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
The specific amendments, Mr. Speaker, will be firstly, provide 
clear authority for the province to levy a tax on crude oil that is 
recovered from certain oil field facilities and that was never 
measured at the time of production for purposes of applying a 
Crown royalty or freehold production tax; secondly, to protect 
royalty revenues that have been collected to date on recovered 
crude oil; and third, prevent crude oil recovery facilities from 
being used as a means to produce provincial royalty . . . to 
reduce, I should say, provincial royalties and/or taxes. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear that we are not changing 
our basic policy of levying a royalty or tax on oil recovered 
from oil field facilities such as water disposal plants and 
waste-processing facilities. The province has levied a royalty on 
recovered crude oil since 1983, Mr. Speaker. I also want to 
make it clear we are talking about raw crude oil and not used 
motor oil. 
 
Recently questions were raised regarding the province’s 
authority to levy a royalty on oil recovered from certain oil field 
facilities including waste-processing facilities. The legal advice 
we received, Mr. Speaker, suggested that our authority to levy a 
royalty on this oil was not as strong as it could be and may not 
stand up to a legal challenge. We were also advised that a tax, 
rather than a royalty, should be applied to this oil. For this 
reason we are taking the prudent step of ensuring that clear 
authority exists to charge a tax on this oil. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the vast majority of oil produced in the province is 
measured at the wellhead or at a battery where the fluids 
recovered from a well are separated into water, gas, sediments, 
and saleable crude oil. Unfortunately some of the oil is retained 
in waste materials, such as saltwater or produced sand, and is 
not measured as production while part of the waste product. If 
the oil is not measured as production, no royalty or tax is 
assessed. 



670 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

We are pleased, Mr. Speaker, to see that operators of various oil 
field facilities are recovering oil from waste streams. Clearly we 
do not wish to discourage this practice. At the same time, there 
is concern that certain crude oil recovery facilities could be used 
as a means to reduce or avoid paying royalties and taxes on 
other oil production if this recovered crude oil was not subject 
to some form of levy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation provides the authority and 
framework for a tax on recovered crude oil. The specific details 
of the calculation of the tax, the level of the tax, etc., will be 
provided for in the regulations. We will be consulting 
extensively with crude oil producers and operators of 
waste-processing facilities in the development of those 
regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can assure the members of this Assembly that we 
are not looking to increase revenues from this source. As we 
work with the industry on the development of the regulations, 
we will have an opportunity to design a system that recognizes 
the unique nature of crude oil recovered from oil field waste 
streams. We want a fair and administratively simple tax system 
which encourages crude oil recovery yet protects against 
possible abuses. 
 
Again with those brief remarks, Mr. Speaker, I move second 
reading of The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax 
Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to make a 
few comments on Bill No. 11, The Freehold Oil and Gas 
Production Tax Amendment Act. And a couple of . . . Again 
after listening to the minister and having a brief look at the Bill 
and not a lot of time to go through it, clause by clause, but 
certainly any time that we hear the government or the members 
opposite talking about adding another tax, it really makes us 
nervous. And it makes us, you know, want to do as much 
research as we possibly can. 
 
As I mentioned before that the oil and gas industry is extremely 
important. And I realize that, you know, if there’s some crude 
oil being taken that the proper royalties aren’t being paid to it, 
paid on it, there maybe needs to be some steps. But I’d be 
concerned that if you’re starting to raise tax on this, whether the 
companies would find it profitable then or not. And so that’s 
some of the issues that kind of come to light when we talk about 
this Bill. 
 
As I mentioned, the last thing that we want to have is 
companies from around — well, mainly Alberta — but around 
the country that are coming into Saskatchewan and saying well 
there’s the government of the day, the NDP government raising 
another tax, are we going to invest in that province? And so 
many times they decide not to. And I think that’s one of the 
reasons why, as I mentioned before, that we find our province is 
lagging behind in a number of areas. 
 
So the minister is talking about a tax rather than a royalty, that 
type of thing. But again until we consult with the groups that we 
think this is going to affect, we would like to make sure that 
they’re comfortable with it and that the crude oil will still be 
taken from waste streams and not just simply, because of the 
cost is too high, ignored. 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time though I’d like that the Assembly 
do now proceed to item 3 under second reading of a private 
members’ public order, Bill 212, The Balanced Budget Act, 
2001. 
 
The division bells rang from 14:36 until 14:46. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 22 
 
Hermanson Heppner Julé 
Krawetz Boyd Stewart 
Eagles Wall Bakken 
McMorris D’Autremont Bjornerud 
Weekes Kwiatkowski Brkich 
Harpauer Wakefield Wiberg 
Hart Allchurch Peters 
Huyghebaert   
 

Nays — 31 
 
Calvert Kasperski Hagel 
Lautermilch Atkinson Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Goulet Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Wartman Thomson Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Hamilton Junor 
Addley Jones Higgins 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. The vote will continue. 
 
Harper Trew Osika 
Lorjé Yates McCall 
Hillson   
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Freehold Oil and Gas Production 
Tax Amendment Act, 2001 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I could, I would 
like to add one or two comments that I’d like to put forward 
with regards to the amendment on this Act. 
 
Some of the things that I’ve noticed referred to in this Act affect 
my particular area to a great extent. One of them, of course, is 
the talking about the freehold gas and oil holdings. There’s a 
great number of freehold leases in my constituency and I’m 
afraid that when the tax is put on these, as opposed to a royalty, 
there’s a great concern because people will be looking at that as 
a particular signal. 
 
Another thing that is a particular problem in our area, Mr. 
Speaker, is the fact that there is a lot of by-products that come 
up with the oil and the gas. There is a great deal of water, salt 
water is generated, a great deal of sand is generated, and 
because of this the expense level in my particular area is very 
high. 
 
A lot of effort is put into recovering anything they can from this 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 671 

 

particular . . . these particular by-products, and the fact is that 
this costs the oil companies a great deal. There is an expense for 
separating the oil, making . . . separating the sand from the oil, 
making sure that the sand is moved and deposited in such a way 
that it is acceptable to the Saskatchewan government 
regulations. 
 
Also the water that is generated has to be disposed and it has to 
be disposed in a proper way. Very expensive for the companies 
and there’s no revenue for these kinds of things. 
 
Anything that can be generated for the company would 
certainly help offset that and in fact, allow these companies to 
expand and to try to develop even further in our province. By 
putting a tax on this — a further tax — is certainly not the right 
signal to try to develop further into this province. 
 
Now when we’re talking about developing the regulations much 
like they were in Alberta, as was referred to earlier, I think we 
could learn a lot about the kinds of, the conditions that are given 
to these companies in Alberta to try to make them move ahead 
and develop further and not, and not tax them. 
 
A lot of consideration must go into these kinds of Bills. 
Certainly I would like to spend more time with the companies 
in my area. And for that reason, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We just have 
a few questions to ask of the minister and her officials. And I’d 
like to welcome her official, I guess. I was out of the room for 
the introduction, so welcome. 
 
In terms of each of the symbols of the government, Madam 
Minister, the government has decided to proclaim these official 
symbols of Saskatchewan. Can you tell us the decision process 
in selecting the white-tailed deer, the needle-and-thread grass, 
and curling as the provincial sport. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you. I’d like to thank the member 
opposite for her question. And before I answer, I would like to 
take this opportunity to introduce someone who is no stranger 
to this House. I would like to introduce our chief protocol 
officer, Dr. Michael Jackson, who will be assisting me in 
answering the questions today. 
 
With respect to the decision process, I would like to inform the 
House that this whole thing basically got started by an on-line 
magazine, I believe it’s called Virtual Saskatchewan, who were 
doing a poll of people — an on-line poll — about what should 
be the official animal. And when they started the poll, I’m not 
sure which commercial radio station — and I believe it was a 
commercial radio station — grabbed on to this and started 

doing a poll with their listeners and pretty soon it extended to 
the non-commercial radio station, and people all over 
Saskatchewan just got very excited about the question of having 
a provincial animal. 
 
With respect to the provincial sport, we had the Saskatchewan 
Curling Association come to us and ask that it be designated as 
the official sport. 
 
And the grass emblem basically came about because we had a 
coalition of groups who are involved in conservation wanting to 
do something to have us designate an official grass. And they 
were the ones who basically chose the grass because of the 
value that it has to ranchers in Saskatchewan. 
 
So that’s really how the thing started. It’s a process that seems 
to have risen, if you will, almost organically. It seems that the 
people of Saskatchewan are looking for more emblems and 
honours, and I think that we are fortunate in this Legislative 
Assembly to be able to respond to that grassroots groundswell. 
 
And while I’m at it, I do want to thank the members opposite 
for their assistance in helping to fast-track this Bill so that it can 
be proclaimed. And I think that the willingness of the 
opposition to assist in this process is part of that whole 
groundswell of recognizing that it is important that we add to 
our honours and emblems in this province. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, you mentioned that the 
Curling Association of Saskatchewan came forward 
recommending curling. 
 
I’m just wondering, did you give opportunity for other 
organizations involved in sports to forward, of course, what 
they would think, which obviously would be the hockey 
association would think hockey should be, and baseball — 
baseball. Was this opportunity given? Or did you just go 
forward with curling because they had asked you to? 
 
(15:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well I did mention that the Saskatchewan 
Curling Association requested curling to be the official sport. 
After that, then there was an omnibus survey and there was a lot 
of polling that was done with respect to choosing of the official 
sport. 
 
And I recognize that it’s always very difficult. For instance, 
there’s a very popular morning broadcaster in this province who 
was holding out for basketball as the official sport and she 
didn’t get that. 
 
We decided to go with curling because it’s a sport that people 
of all ages and both genders can participate in. It requires 
teamwork but at the same time requires a lot of skill. And we 
have so many provincial curling champions that we wanted to 
recognize indirectly by naming curling as the official sport. 
 
So that’s the reason ultimately that we decided to go with 
curling as the official sport. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, you said we decided. What 
exactly do you mean by that? Did you have a committee? Did 



672 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

you have a group from your ministry or who was the who in we 
decided? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — To the member opposite, I did refer to the 
omnibus survey that was done and also a number of radio 
stations conducted their own polling, and curling seemed to 
draw up to the button on this one. 
 
So it seems that while various people have different sports that 
they want to put forward, the one that seemed to be the clear 
winner was curling. 
 
And so the department brought forward the recommendation 
based on the omnibus survey, based on the radio stations’ polls, 
then I took it to cabinet and we’re now bringing it here to the 
legislature. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, I think the people of 
Saskatchewan will be interested in what other choices there 
were. And I mean I think we are on this side. Just like did you 
choose from three sports, or how did you . . . you know, what 
were some of the other choices that you eliminated? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well Sheila Coles of CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) will be disappointed to know that 
one of the options that was considered . . . that was not 
considered in the omnibus poll, was not basketball. 
 
There were four options for an official sport: curling, football, 
hockey, and soccer. Curling ranked the highest at 47 . . . Soccer 
is amazingly popular and growing in popularity . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, in Saskatchewan, in Saskatchewan. 
 
So because of the popularity of those four sports they were the 
ones that were included in the omnibus poll. And here’s the 
ranking that happened on them. Curling ranked the highest at 
47.3 per cent, followed by hockey at 31 per cent. I’m sorry I 
don’t have the rankings for football and soccer. But I will point 
out to the members that over 50 per cent of the rural residents 
who responded to the poll favoured curling. So that’s why 
we’ve gone with curling. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Now that these symbols have been selected, 
what happens now? Does the government let the province, 
everyone in the province know, or have you already . . . do you 
feel that you’ve already let this information out? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — We’re not actually planning an official 
communications strategy on this. We will be letting the Curling 
Association trumpet curling as the official sport. I think it’s 
going to sort of happen organically. Part of what’s happening is 
the debate in the House. There’s been a tremendous interest in 
these honours and emblems. And of course once we officially 
pass the Bill, then more people are going to become aware of 
the official grass, the official sport, and so forth — the official 
animal. And it’ll gain speed on its own. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Are there any 
other forthcoming official symbols that you are planning to 
initiate or bring forth? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Certainly not for the time being. But I 
would say that in my travels I have seen what a great publicity 

tool and a sense of awareness and chauvinism, in the positive 
sense, symbols can be. When you designate certain symbols it 
allows people to feel a sense of pride for their home province, 
or their home state as the case may be. 
 
In my travels I once saw in the state of Minnesota an official 
passport. And I noted in there they had an official fish, an 
official drink, an official pie, and they even had an official 
muffin, if you can imagine. So if the people of Saskatchewan 
want to have a muffin, I suppose we could entertain that notion. 
But right now for this legislative session we’re interested in 
adding to our emblems an official sport, an official grass, and 
an official animal. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you. In terms of the Saskatchewan 
Order of Merit, what is the process to select who gets this award 
each year — or is it awarded yearly, and what is the process? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — In response to the member, I would say 
that it is awarded annually, and it’s done in response to public 
nominations. We have an entity called the Saskatchewan 
Honours Advisory Committee, chaired by Ted Turner, and 
they’re the ones who make the recommendations for the 
awards. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And who makes 
the final decision then? Is there an independent board or the 
Premier or . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — The process basically, to the member 
opposite, is that the Saskatchewan Honours Advisory Council 
makes the recommendations to the Premier. The Premier then 
concurs, and then makes recommendations to the Lieutenant 
Governor. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Has there ever 
been an instance where the recommendation has been rejected 
by the Premier, or is it an automatic? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I’m advised that the Premier has never 
turned down a recommendation of the advisory council. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, the Act refers to current or 
long-term citizens of Saskatchewan in terms of eligibility for 
receiving this honour. What is meant by long term? Is there a 
time frame attached to that and could you tell us what it is? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — In response to the member, I would advise 
that there is no specific time frame. The advisory council has 
discretion to determine that. And an example of someone who 
has been awarded the honour would be Pamela Wallin, a few 
years ago. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Changes are 
now being made under this Act to the Saskatchewan Order of 
Merit, and there’s a process called honorary inductions. How is 
that different from what we have now? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would advise the member that while the 
advisory council makes the recommendation to the Premier and 
then on to the Lieutenant Governor in the normal way, the 
difference is that these people will not be required to be 
necessarily Canadian citizens nor necessarily be present or 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 673 

 

long-term residents of the province. But other than that, the 
process will go in the same normal way. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, just a 
few follow-up questions. I don’t have a lot for you this 
afternoon on this Bill. 
 
Certainly we recognize that with the important events that will 
be taking place here on Thursday that there is some need for 
hastiness, and we’re certainly willing from this side to want to 
co-operate fully. 
 
I think for the record we’d like to have a few things clarified. 
One, we know that, you know, you certainly used some 
prudence in this process. You indicated to the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy that no committee was struck. You used 
basically polling by CBC Radio and what have you. How has 
that . . . were you able to, though, through some portion of time, 
attribute cost to your department to get from your start-up to 
this point in time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — In response to the member opposite, I 
would first of all like to thank the opposition for their 
co-operation in allowing this Bill to proceed. You’ve been very 
helpful and I do appreciate this. 
 
With respect to the question of costs, there really were no 
incremental costs with the emblems. It was the time of the 
officials, but they were hired anyway so there weren’t any extra 
costs. 
 
There will be in the future — and I mean in the very immediate 
future — some incremental costs because we intend to publish a 
new symbols brochure. The old one is very badly out of date. It 
doesn’t even have, for instance, our mineral, potash, in it. 
 
So we will be putting out a new brochure. There will be that 
kind of incremental cost. But that’s really to keep us up to date. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. The member from Weyburn-Big Muddy discussed 
with you at length the choosing of curling as our provincial 
sport. And as a curler, I thought it was a very good idea, but as 
a hockey player, I of course am somewhat disappointed. I know 
you had to pick one. And as someone who has no interest at all 
at this time in soccer, I’m glad it didn’t get to be chosen. 
 
But, Madam Minister, there is some curiosity from my part in 
the choosing of the provincial grass. I know from many of our 
members on this side of the House, the choosing of 
needle-and-thread grass was probably quite relevant. 
 
Those of us who are a little farther north, of course, never heard 
of this grass being as we don’t have that a little farther north. 
And certainly ranchers in this province are going to feel some 
pride that a grass that they are dependent upon for their 
livelihood is being recognized as the provincial grass. 
 
Madam Minister, though, there is a large area of the province, a 
lot of our provincial population whose cultural association with 
the natural world derive a great deal of significance from a very 

different type of grass. 
 
I’m wondering, Madam Minister, if you might be able to 
elucidate for us how many grasses that you looked at in 
choosing this symbol. How may . . . or what process was used 
to eliminate many of the other grasses? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would like to thank the member opposite 
very much for that question. 
 
The grass emblem is basically coming forward by virtue of the 
Saskatchewan Prairie Conservation Action Plan committee. 
And that committee has several members. I’ll just read them for 
the record because I think they’ve done an excellent job and I 
would like to commend them at this time. 
 
The Canadian Wildlife Service; the Canadian Plains Research 
Centre; University of Regina; Ducks Unlimited; Parks Canada; 
the grazing and pasture technology program; Nature 
Conservancy of Canada; Nature Saskatchewan; PFRA (Prairie 
Farm Rehabilitation Administration); Agriculture and 
Agri-Food Canada; Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food; 
Saskatchewan Energy and Mines; Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management; Saskatchewan Research Council; 
the Saskatchewan Stockgrowers Association; the Saskatchewan 
Wetland Conservation Corporation; the University of 
Saskatchewan; and the World Wildlife Fund. 
 
Now that committee, which is a very hard-working and 
dedicated committee, also considered the western porcupine 
grass and the June grass before making its selection. 
 
And if you will permit me, I will make a few comments about 
the grass that they ultimately did decide, the stipo comata, or 
needle-and-thread grass. Though some of us — I hate to say it 
— probably know it by a name that we used more commonly, 
which is spear grass. 
 
It’s a native of the Northern Great Plains region of North 
America, and it is a component of the vegetation on nearly all 
of the 14 million acres of native grasslands of Saskatchewan. 
It’s a major component of mixed grass prairie in the drier parts 
of the province. The stipo comata is nutritious forage and it’s a 
high yielding species, as those of us who’ve gone walking on 
the prairies and had to pick the spears out of our socks can 
attest. 
 
It’s very conspicuous in the field with its prominent flag leaf 
and long-curling awns. It can be used, which I think this is why 
it got the nod actually, it can be used in reclamation activities 
when disturbed sites need to be returned to a long-lived hardy 
species. The stipo genus of grasses, which this is part of that 
family, is considered to be the oldest grass genus on the planet. 
 
And as well, people are busy working, biologists are busy 
working cultivars of the needle-and-thread grass to make it even 
more adaptable to wildlife and reclamation plantings. So we 
think it’s an excellent choice of a grass and we do commend the 
people for their choice on that. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you 
repeat the other two grasses that were eliminated, please? 
 



674 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Certainly. Western porcupine grass was 
eliminated and June grass was eliminated. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess those of 
us from the North . . . Could you elucidate just a little bit these 
two grasses, so that I could get a little clearer understanding of 
. . . I understand now the grass that you’ve chosen. It’s quite a 
historical context for Saskatchewan and for certainly North 
America. But these other two grasses must have some 
significant context also, if you could just explain those a little 
bit to me. 
 
I guess what I want to try to get to is, why in Saskatchewan 
with the historical relationship between our First Nations people 
and their culture, that sweet grass was not looked at? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I’m going to give you a two-pronged 
answer. First of all, the Stock Growers’ Association were very 
active in this committee, and they find that the 
needle-and-thread grass is just an excellent grass in terms of 
reclamation and forage and so forth. And so that’s why they 
were really pushing for this grass; it’s very useful in the 
ranching business. 
 
Secondly with respect to sweet grass — and I’m sorry I’m even 
debating if sweet grass is a grass — but with respect to sweet 
grass, it is an important Aboriginal symbol. It’s used in 
important observances, and I would doubt that First Nations 
people would want such an important symbol to be declared a 
provincial grass. 
 
It’s important in many of their observances, and so we don’t 
want to tread on their toes by appropriating it. There have been 
far too many appropriations of symbols by the dominant culture 
throughout the centuries and we would not want to give offence 
to First Nations people in that sense. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. I appreciate your comments and I welcome the 
thought process that you’ve . . . I guess, you know, when you 
listed off the associations and the groups that were involved, 
one of them I noticed that was conspicuously absent was 
anyone representing First Nations people. So I guess I would 
have some concern that a decision like this would be made 
without their input. 
 
You could be right, that they may find that because of the 
religious context of sweet grass, that it would be inappropriate 
to have it as a provincial grass. But without that input from 
them, we, being the dominant again, would be making a 
decision on their behalf. And I think we need to be a little more 
cognizant of that in the future, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, though, I want to switch at this time to the 
official animal of the province, the white-tailed deer. And 
certainly as a wildlife enthusiast, someone who has these 
animals wandering across his lawn on any given morning in the 
summertime, the beauty of this animal and its ability to provide 
sustenance for many centuries in this province to the people that 
have lived here, I understand a great deal of the attachment for 
this animal. And certainly the member for Rosthern now is 
going to be able to have some use for that head that he picked 
up in his grill the other day. 

But, Madam Minister, again I have some curiosity. This is an 
animal that is basically restricted to the bottom 40 per cent of 
the province and there are certainly other animals that range 
over a much larger percentage of the province. So I’m 
wondering, what other animals were considered and what 
process was used to eliminate those ones? 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Requesting leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to the House a group of grade 7 and 8 
students from Willow Bunch. And they’re here visiting today 
for a short period of time and their teachers, Jeanette Mondor 
and Marc Cheriyan. I would like everybody to join me and 
welcome them. 
 
But first I’d like to say to the group, it seems kind of quiet in 
here right now. You should have been here about an hour and a 
half ago when question period was on and it was a lot more 
lively then. So would you please join me in welcoming the 
group from Willow Bunch. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2001 

(continued) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would like to thank the member opposite 
for the question. 
 
And before we move off the grass, I do want to just say 
officially, for the record, that department officials did consult 
with the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) 
with respect to the naming of an official grass and they 
approved of the recommendation for the needle-and-thread 
grass. 
 
Now with respect to the animal, I believe I’d already indicated 
that the initiative came from an online magazine and then the 
various radio stations took up the cause. It really caught fire in 
the province. It seems that there’s a great deal of desire to have 
an official animal in this province. 
 
There was some polling, and I’m going to admit right upfront 
that the white-tailed deer didn’t come out on top on the polls. 
 
But what came out on top on the polls was something that most 
of us would consider a pestilential roadkill, actually. The 
gopher came out on top. And when we analyzed the results, it 
seemed that it was more out-of-province people who were 
voting for the gopher than not. And we have, you know, we 
know that there are major concerns with the gopher. Farmers 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

 

are very concerned about the problems that gophers can create. 
 
So the close second was the white-tailed deer. It was followed 
at some distance by other animals. The fox, for instance, got 9 
per cent; the antelope got 5 per cent. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Coyote. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I don’t think coyotes even came in on the 
radar screen. 
 
But I would point out that our coat of arms has the white-tailed 
deer, or a version thereof on it, so it was decided that the 
white-tailed deer should be our official animal. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, I guess, you know, from someone who has been given 
the opportunity by my leader to critique the area of northern 
affairs, I was hoping that maybe the two ministers from the 
North would have had some influence. 
 
You indicate that the animal on our coat of arms could have 
some resemblance to a deer. It could also have some 
resemblance to a moose, which is a far more wide-ranging 
animal in this province, and certainly has been a long-time 
staple of the First Nations people of this province, especially 
those in the North. 
 
And again there is that one animal that at one time was almost 
extinct in this province, the buffalo, which is making a strong 
comeback in private enterprise. It was also a long-time staple of 
the First Nations people of this province, and probably would 
have been something that could have been looked at by the 
province. 
 
Again I have some concern I guess of using polling from people 
from outside the province. Those people I’m sure, who would 
find great favour from the member from North Battleford when 
he talked about the Richardson’s ground squirrel, or gopher, as 
it is more commonly referred to. 
 
Madam Minister, I guess we still need to establish, I guess, a 
provincial rodent. And so the gopher then, its opportunities 
remain alive and well, although maybe not along the roadsides. 
 
Madam Minister, I was also reading in this Bill, Bill No. 8, this 
section that you’re amending regarding people who can qualify 
now for honorary membership to the order of Saskatchewan. 
And you talked about this earlier, that if nominations can now 
be open to people who are not Canadian citizens, people who 
may or may not have even lived in Saskatchewan but who could 
be nominated because of the . . . what could be appropriately 
termed, as having made contributions to social, cultural, and 
economic well-being. 
 
I guess I would like to hear explanation as to why we would 
honour someone who is not a resident of Saskatchewan and 
may or may not have even lived here. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would like to thank the member opposite 
for his question. As I recall it’s a two-part question. 

So I want to just for the record indicate that the white-tailed 
deer has tremendous economic value to this province. It’s 
estimated at almost $172 million in terms of . . . by virtue of 
studies done in other jurisdictions. But we certainly, just from 
white-tailed deer hunting alone, generate almost $30 million of 
economic benefit to this province. So we think that this is a 
good animal to have as our provincial animal. 
 
With respect to the question about the honorary membership, I 
think that’s quite a fair question to ask. Right now the province 
has no way to honour distinguished international figures. And 
so we feel that this is the one way to do it. 
 
As we approach the 100th anniversary of this province, we will 
be wanting to look to honour various people and people are 
actually doing an honour to us by accepting the award. 
 
I would point out to the member opposite that the Order of 
Canada, for instance, has honorary membership and also the 
Order of Quebec has honorary membership. I’m sorry I can’t 
recall off the top of my head right now, members with honorary 
membership in the Order of Canada though about one person a 
year is so designated. 
 
But certainly with the Order of Quebec, various prime ministers 
of France have been given that honorary membership. And the 
great humanitarian, Jean Vanier, was also awarded the Order of 
Quebec. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
Minister: in this clause, and you explained it also clearly to the 
member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, that the Premier will 
receive a recommendation and very seldom or has never 
rejected a recommendation on who should receive these Order 
of Merits. 
 
Now I’m wondering, Madam Minister, for this process of when 
someone who is not a Canadian citizen, who may or may not 
have ever been here before, should receive an honorary 
recognition, is that in all likelihood going to bypass the present 
type of processes that are in place, coming straight out of the 
cabinet, or how do you envision this happening? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — To the member opposite, I would say that 
it will be exactly the same process as for all other recipients of 
the order. And that’s what the legislation says. I will just quote. 
Section 27.1 will be amended. A new sub (6): 

 
Notwithstanding subsection (1), a person who is not a 
Canadian citizen or who is not a current or former 
long-term resident of Saskatchewan may be invested with 
the order as an honorary member of the order on the 
recommendation of the council to the President of the 
Executive Council. 

 
So it will be exactly the same process as for other awardees. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, we’re going to wrap this up now. Thank you for your 
indulgence this afternoon, and I want to thank your official for 
taking the time to be here. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 



676 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Before I do that, I would be very remiss and certainly 
wouldn’t be a terribly good Provincial Secretary if I didn’t, first 
of all, thank the members opposite for their questions. I really 
appreciated the opportunity to answer them, and I think that 
they were very keen, very compelling, and very cogent 
questions. So I would like to thank the members opposite. 
 
And I would also like to thank my official, Dr. Michael 
Jackson, for his assistance, as I shepherded my first Bill through 
the legislature. 
 
So having done that, heartfelt, I will say, because I think . . . I 
do, again, want to thank the opposition for their assistance in 
this and for helping me with my first Bill in the legislature. 
 
I would move that Bill No. 8, The Provincial Emblems and 
Honours Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a third time and 
passed under its . . . No, I’m not going to do that. I’m just going 
to move . . . I’m going to report it then. Okay. Thank you. You 
see? I need an awful lot of assistance on this. 
 
What I’m going to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, instead of what I 
planned to do because I’m jumping the gun, I’m going to move 
that we report the Bill without amendments, absolutely without 
amendments. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 8, The 
Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2001 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(15:45) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Chair: — Before we get underway, I’d invite the Minister 
of Environment and Resource Management to please introduce 
his officials in the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my 
immediate left is Stuart Kramer. He’s a deputy minister. And to 
my immediate right is Dave Phillips, the assistant deputy 
minister of operations; and to my back right is Bob Ruggles, 
assistant deputy minister of programs; and immediately to my 
back right . . . or back left, sorry, Lynn Tulloch, executive 

director of corporate services. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and 
Mr. Minister. And welcome to your officials as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, just a couple of brief items before we move on to 
a number of items that may take a little more time here. In the 
past you were, as well as being the Minister of Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management, also the associate 
minister for Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs. Is that 
still your status, Mr. Minister, and can you indicate to us what 
duties are involved in your associate minister capacity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. Just to clarify that I’m no 
longer the associate minister. That position, of course, has been 
taken over by a very capable minister. I’m just at this stage of 
the game primarily the Minister of SERM (Saskatchewan 
Economic and Resource Management). Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And with 
respect to the Forest Fire Contingency Fund, last year for the 
first time the government budgeted a separate line item of $50 
million for the Forest Fire Contingency Fund. I note that $3.85 
million were charged against that fund last year, Mr. Minister. 
 
Can you give us a bit of an indication of what was included in 
some of those expenditures, and what types of costs were 
covered by the 3.85 million of the $50 million Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you for the question again. And 
first of all, just for the information, there are two firefighting 
budgets for SERM. One is a $28 million operational firefighting 
budget and another is a 50 million contingency escape fire 
budget. 
 
And what the $50 million last year was primarily to deal with 
the fires that we deemed escape fires, that are 100 hectares or 
above, and that of course are the fires that do cost quite a bit of 
money. 
 
Last year was a fairly good year. We expended 3.8 million on 
large fires, thereby decreasing that 50 million contingency fund 
by 3.8. 
 
And approximately 50 per cent of all cost of firefighting goes to 
the rent of aircraft; 10 per cent go to firefighting wages — and 
these are approximate numbers — 9.6 go to supplies and 
provisions; 2.2 go to rental of heavy equipment; other goods 
and services, 5.1; overtime, 10.7; fuel, 10.7; and other costs, 
1.1. So those are the approximate costs of the overall 
firefighting budgets combined. 
 
But clearly there are two budgets: one budget for 28 million; 
another backup budget for 50 million in which any fires over 
100 hectares, we take the costs of fighting those fires from the 
50 million Contingency Fund. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, was 
the $50 million Forest Fire Contingency Fund ever legally 
established? Was that fund set up where the money’s actually 
physically set aside? Can you describe how this fund was 
structured and the way in which the $3.85 million that was used 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

 

and charged against it was expended? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The answer is, certainly, yes it was. 
The only difference between our regular budget and the Forest 
Fire Contingency Fund is that there was no separate Act that 
was necessary but two separate votes: one vote, 26, which 
established our regular operating budgets for the entire SERM 
operation; and vote 72, which was the Forest Fire Contingency 
Fund. Legislation is the same, it’s just that there’s two separate 
votes identifying the two sources of revenues for firefighting 
and operations. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, the 
fund of $50 million as I understand it — and we have a letter 
from the Minister of Finance to this effect — that fund was 
never legally established. And that the unused monies, in his 
words, lapsed from it. 
 
So I guess my question is: how did you charge $3.85 million 
against a fund that was not legally established? And how do you 
intend to deal with the $40 million that you’re proposing be set 
aside this year in a Forest Fire Contingency Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just to 
clarify, it doesn’t need a separate Act to be legal. It is not 
established as a special fund. 
 
It was established as a legal appropriation through the 
Appropriation Bill like the SERM budget. So it is a vote in the 
Consolidated Fund — the same as SERM’s budget. 
 
And I might add that it’s been through some great work of our 
Finance minister that some of the expenditures in SERM have 
increased and we are able to do more forest firefighting 
preparedness work that will lessen the cost overall for fighting 
forest fires in future years. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, if then, in fact, 
the way that you describe it last year was appropriate, why is 
the minister suggesting, and I quote: 
 

A legally established fund will be created, using legislation 
to be introduced during the current session. 

 
Why is he suggesting that this budget cycle you will, in fact, be 
requiring separate special legislation in order to maintain the 
$40 million Forest Fire Contingency Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you for the question. Just to 
advise you that last year the $50 million was set aside. It was a 
fund that was intended to back us up in case we had the larger 
forest fire season that we had in 1995, as an example, or 1998. 
There was some very tough years in firefighting. 
 
But the difference between last year’s budget and this year’s 
budget is last year’s budget lapsed. At the end of March 31, all 
the dollars that were left in the $50 million Contingency Fund 
lapsed. 
 
This year, we have $40 million. We want to make sure that the 
funding stays within SERM’s forest firefighting operation and 
that it doesn’t lapse into next year. 
 

So that is a critical difference and that’s why legislation this 
year is different, because first year $50,000 . . . the money that 
was set aside for that lapsed. The $40 million that we’re setting 
aside this year, the legislation is going to be introduced to make 
sure that it doesn’t lapse at March 31, 2002. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. A 
couple of questions then, very quickly. 
 
Are you suggesting then that $46 million lapsed and was 
returned to the General Revenue Fund? Can you indicate as to 
where that money went? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Yes, the answer to that question would 
be yes, it would be returned to the General Revenue Fund. And 
to point out as well that one of the reasons why we have the 
Contingency Fund — and it was through the wise advice and 
support of the Finance minister — is that we are able to look at 
the yearly challenges of forest firefighting costs. And these 
costs go up and down, as you can appreciate. And some years 
are really good and other years are very low. 
 
And what this Contingency Fund does is it allows us to have 
some continuity in our forest firefighting budget so we’re able 
to continue to operate in a sensible way financially, but also 
give assurances to the folks out there that there is a good, solid 
fund in place to fight forest fires in northern Saskatchewan and 
throughout the province as well. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I 
note that this year the Contingency Fund, as we’ve discussed, 
Mr. Minister, has been reduced to $40 million. 
 
First of all, I would be interested to know why it is $10 million 
less this year than what was anticipated would be needed last 
year? 
 
And the other thing is I noticed that the categories have 
changed. Last year the $50 million was charged against 
something called supplier and other payments. This year the 
reduced amount, the $40 million, is going to be charged against 
something called transfers for public services. 
 
Can you explain why we are charging it differently? And can 
you also explain where supplier and other payments were in last 
year’s budget, if that was where the $50 million was allocated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. I think the change, you 
know, reflects that the $40 million will be transferred to a 
special fund once it is created. In the first . . . (inaudible) . . . 
when you have supplier and other payments, that was directed 
to mean that we would . . . and we’re anticipating costs that 
would be high, and that’s how the fund was characterized, as a 
supplier and other payments fund in anticipation of forest 
firefighting costs. 
 
This year once the special fund is created, it’s going to be 
transfers for public services. So really it is a defined cost in the 
first year, as you mentioned, to supplier and other payments, to 
a new name under the transfers to public service, once the fund 
is created. 



678 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

So really it’s not much of a difference in terms of the intent. It’s 
just an interpretation of the uses because there’s going to be a 
lot of activity on the preparedness side, so we’re able to do 
more work in anticipation of forest firefighting as opposed to 
the actual forest starting . . . we want to spend more money to 
prevent the fires from carrying on. And that’s why you also see 
a difference of 50 million down to 40 million in this particular 
fund once it’s created, to more activity at the front end of our 
forest firefighting budget of plus 9 million. 
 
So really we’re spending more money in preparedness and 
trying to stop the fires from getting big or starting at all; and the 
interpretation that you make in reference to, it really is meant 
more to, you know, reflect some of the change that the $40 
million will represent once it’s transferred to a special fund, 
once that special fund is created. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — I guess a couple of things, Mr. Minister. 
Do you expect then that this legislation will in fact be 
introduced this session? And could you better define then 
transfers for public services and what kinds of expenditures 
might be involved in that category? And can you — I realize of 
course it’s tough to predict the fire season — but can you give 
me some indication as to what the expectation of expenditures 
from that fund might be this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again just for your information, the use 
of funds for 2001 will be the same as for the year 2000. It’s 
going to be for escape fires — any fires above 100 hectares or 
more. And the costs for this fund of $40 million would be clear, 
would be used for anything from rent of aircraft to firefighting 
wages to rent of heavy equipment to other goods and services. 
 
So the first part of your question, to be perfectly clear, is that 
the intent of the fund this year is going to be the same as last 
year. And the costs that were covered of last year’s 
Contingency Fund will be the same as this year’s. 
 
In reference to the prediction of the forest firefighting costs and 
the dipping in of this fund, I am glad to see that you can 
appreciate it’s difficult to assess how the firefighting season is 
going to be. 
 
But what I would say is that legislation we hope to have in this 
year. And what I will say also is that we’re about 75 per cent of 
the snow cover right now in northern forests. It’s very difficult 
to predict how the firefighting season will be. 
 
We do know that if we put more money into preparedness, that 
will help us reduce some of the costs of fighting huge escape 
fires. 
 
So we’re looking at being more proactive before the fire begins. 
And of course, hiring more folks is always something that’s 
going to help us out in the long run. 
 
But clearly I think with the cooler weather during April . . . and 
like farmers we hope that there’s good moisture levels 
throughout the year so we can kind of hope that it limits the 
forest firefighting problems that we have in northern 
Saskatchewan. So we’re continuing on being prepared. We’re 
certainly hoping we get some more rain. And again, as I 
mention, we hope to have the Act introduced this session and 

the use of funds for 2001 would be the same as 2000. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Deputy 
Chair, and, Mr. Minister, the 2000-2001 budget projected a use 
of $150 million from the Crown Investments Corporation. This 
money was never expended, and in fact no money whatsoever 
was used from the Crown dividend pool. 
 
Why didn’t you use $50 million of the Crown Investments 
Corporation dividend to create the Forest Fire Contingency 
Fund throughout fully, legally legislated fashion in the first 
place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you for the question. You know, 
with all due respect, I appreciate some questions we have 
coming our way but that’s a question for the Minister of 
Finance. And when he’s here I’m sure that he will answer the 
question. Thanks. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, how much money out of the Forest Fire Contingency 
Fund and out of the fire management and forest protection part 
of the Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management 
budget was used for firefighting out of province and out of 
country? And how much of that money was recovered by the 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Both for in country and out of country, the total cost was 2.7 
million. And as you can appreciate many of our firefighters 
travelled to Alberta, to BC (British Columbia), Manitoba, the 
Territories, the States. And the full amount of 2.7 million was 
received back by the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that is a deal that all the inter-jurisdictions made amongst 
themselves, that obviously some jurisdictions have some 
difficult times during the firefighting season and other 
jurisdictions come along and help them out. And there’s been 
numerous examples of how the Saskatchewan forest firefighters 
have been asked for — and they’re one of the better-trained 
squads — and they go out all throughout the States and other 
provinces to fight fires. And they’re really highly touted as 
being very professional firefighters. 
 
So very quickly, they’re a very good firefighting crew. We have 
agreements with other jurisdictions because from time to time 
we also need their support, where if we send in our men or 
equipment, then the cost for sending them in will be paid by the 
other jurisdictions. So last year 2.7 million was the cost and we 
received 2.7 million back in payments. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I 
noted that on budget day the minister of SERM was one of the 
ministers over on the other side with the bigger smile on his 
face, and after I seen the public service hirings in the budget . . . 
We all know now of course that the civil service is going to be 
increased by 570 new personnel, but the lion’s share of those 
are in fact going to Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management. One hundred and three and a half new positions 
will be created this year alone in the department. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you give us an indication, a breakdown of 
what those positions are, what those jobs, those new jobs will 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 679 

 

be, and a bit of an indication as to how they will be distributed 
throughout the department, whether in enforcement, 
administration, or what particular areas that they will be hired 
into? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. I certainly was very 
pleased with the budget from SERM’s point of view. We’re 
pleased with the budget throughout the other departments. As 
you know, the budget was a tremendously good, powerful, 
positive budget. 
 
The 104.5 FTEs (full-time equivalents) that you notice in the 
budget documents. Just for an explanation is that 71 of these 
FTEs were employees of the seasonal staff, of course, as you 
know which has typically being used for forest firefighting 
costs. So the 77 that were on there, or are base staff members 
. . . I’m sorry, the 71. 
 
So some of the other additions to the SERM budget. Of course 
17 FTEs would be new positions, and these new positions are 
the initial attack and preparedness efforts that I spoke about 
earlier; that we’re going to spend more money attacking the 
fires before they start or before they get big. So I think the most 
important thing is . . . the logic that we use is that if we’re to 
prepare better for a fire that begins or is at a small size, to 
respond to it quicker, then it would stop it from becoming a big 
fire and costing the province of Saskatchewan a heck of a lot 
more. 
 
So as a result of that we added 17 new positions in our initial 
attack and preparedness efforts. And I think that’s money that’s 
very well spent on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The other additions. Of course we have ten and a half FTEs in 
the safe . . . drinking water problems, and challenges that the 
province faces. As you know, there’s been challenges with the 
quality of water right throughout Saskatchewan. And again, the 
Minister of Finance saw a lot of wise use of money, and said 
having a response team to be able to help some of the 
communities to ensure we have some safe drinking water 
guidelines and standards being implemented and followed, and 
as a support system to many of the RMs and the municipalities 
and folks out there, that this would be a wise use of money. 
 
And as well, as you know, we have an industry in forestry that’s 
going to be expanding and getting bigger, and we added seven 
more additional FTEs here to ensure that the forestry companies 
are complying with our new regulations in forestry. 
 
So you throw in the mix the fact that we have had a core group 
of people that are now a part of our regular budget, that were 
under special warrant before. That includes the 71. You throw 
in the 17 FTEs for fire management, for preparedness, initial 
attack, and the whole exercise of responding quicker to a fire. 
And you throw in the FTEs for safe drinking water. And you 
throw in the FTEs for making sure that folks out there that are 
harvesting the forest are doing it in a wise, sustainable fashion. 
It all adds up to a good, solid environmental program. I think it 
will benefit the people of Saskatchewan for the money that it 
has taken. Thank you. 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I 
would like to follow this up with a little more discussion, but 
for the moment I would like to relinquish the floor to my good 
friend, the hon. member from Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And I also 
want to welcome your officials here today, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to go to a bit different area than the member for Carrot 
River was with you, Mr. Minister. And I think you know where 
we’re coming from on this one. At the present time SERM is in 
the process of taking the RM of Churchbridge to court and has 
been delayed again I believe till June, adjourned till June. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve seen out in my area in the Saltcoats 
constituency, and for that matter in a number of constituencies 
on that side of the province, since going back probably before 
1995 where we had many areas flooded out there, we’ve had 
many roads washed out, and we’ve had very large number of 
acres out in that area that have been under water, or somewhere 
throughout the summer with the heavy rains that we’ve had, 
cropland washed out after the inputs have been in out there. 
 
And I guess the point I’m trying to get across, Mr. Minister, is 
that farmers right now are struggling as it is and when they put 
inputs into a crop, which may be as high as a 100 to 140, $150 
an acre, and to see that crop washed away in the middle of the 
summer by heavy rains which can happen every year out there 
it seems in the last while, it’s becoming the norm more than the 
exception. 
 
And then to have a problem come along where the local 
council, local elected officials try and find ways to clear beaver 
dams, clear drainage ditches, do things that may help alleviate 
the problem, and it can’t completely alleviate the problem, Mr. 
Minister, but it certainly could help the situation out there. 
 
When local elected people such as reeves and councillors who 
are answerable to the local people out there try to do something 
to help them and then we have — and correct me if I’m wrong, 
Mr. Minister — but I believe Sask Water was the first one to 
take these people to task out there. Even went as far as to try 
and bring a hoe out there and backfill some of these things on a 
Saturday when I felt they probably thought no one would be 
around. A hundred farmers gathered, or a hundred plus farmers 
gathered in the town of Bredenbury and stopped that from 
happening. 
 
And it seems somewhere along there, Mr. Minister, that SERM 
got involved again in this and decided that if Sask Water wasn’t 
going to press charges against this RM, that SERM would. 
 
And I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, when the situation has been 
so wet on that side that . . . why would SERM . . . what is their 
purpose of going to the extreme of taking this RM to court? 
What is their reasoning for doing this, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — One of the things that’s very difficult in 
this particular challenge is that we represent the province as a 
whole. And there is no delight that I take as a minister of having 
to charge any people of Saskatchewan at all, in any way, shape, 
or form. 
 



680 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

A bit of the history on this particular file. In the fall of 1998, the 
RM conducted channel clearing of more than 100 kilometres of 
watercourses on the Blackbird Creek system. They’d done so 
under the approval of SERM and the work was closely 
monitored and completed with minimal problems. 
 
And some of the work continued. SERM investigated. The 
Justice department had a look at this and said that there is basis 
for charging. 
 
Now I know you can appreciate this: that this is before the 
courts and I can’t make any further comments on this particular 
case. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I don’t know. I have a big problem when I see a 
department of government, a wing of government, coming 
along and overruling a local body, a local elected body out there 
that, who are better qualified to represent the people out there. 
 
Now you say you’re here to represent the whole province and 
that’s fine; I agree with that. But on the other hand, what on 
earth does what’s happening on the east side of the province 
have to do with somebody in Kindersley, Rosetown, Swift 
Current? Absolutely nothing. So that one won’t fly, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I honestly believe there has to be more to this than we’re seeing. 
A court case aside, Mr. Minister, I realize and I was expecting 
that answer to come and questions certainly will come as soon 
as that court case is over. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, what is it that SERM is trying to protect out 
there? It’s certainly not the local farmer. I think some of the 
reports I’ve heard out of the court case that even some of the 
explanations were to do with fish. Well I’ve lived out there all 
my life, and in some of these runways if you could find a 
minnow or a bloodsucker, you’d be lucky. And you certainly 
wouldn’t be out there with your fishing line fishing for 
anything, so that’s not a good excuse. 
 
Mr. Minister, not to do with the court case, but what is SERM 
trying to protect out there? What really . . . to prevent the 
removal of beaver dams and we have them in a number of RMs 
out there; they’ve been a tremendous problem for us. They’ve 
even hurt RMs as far as our roads are concerned, back up into 
fields. Who really is SERM trying to protect, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
And again I want to re-emphasize is that we take no joy in 
charging any people of Saskatchewan. It is not something that 
we enjoy doing at all. And to point out that the laws that we 
make from SERM’s perspective are provincial laws and in 
many times some of the laws apply; it may seem unfair, but 
they apply right across the board. 
 
And we have general laws that are made for all of 
Saskatchewan and what I want to point out is that in the 
background of this, the RM and SERM work together to clear 
over 100 kilometres of water courses. That’s a significant 
amount of distance. And the work was closely monitored and 
there’s minimal problems after the work was completed. 
 

However, the work continued on, and there are laws on proper 
processes for drainage. The investigation was done on these 
activities. And Justice has determined that there is a basis for 
charging. And again I go back to my earlier comment, we take 
no joy in this particular exercises. And again as I mentioned, I 
can’t make any particular comments about this case as it is 
before the courts. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
then one question. And I touched on it a bit before and I don’t 
believe, unless I missed it, that you maybe touched on it. Why 
did the jurisdiction . . . (inaudible) . . . has been removed from 
Sask Water? It seemed to me, all my constituents out there were 
dealing with Sask Water and all of a sudden Sask Water seems 
to be out of the picture and SERM is involved. 
 
Can you explain how that happened? Why jurisdiction went 
from Sask Water and ended up with SERM? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I just want to point out that both SERM 
and Sask Water are working together on this one. There are 
laws and regulations in reference to drainage, and what we want 
to ensure as a government, that is we have drainage activity 
happening in a confined area. That we want to work with all the 
effects of drainage, and that’s one of the reasons why SERM 
and Sask Water have worked together very, very closely on this 
one. 
 
And of course, what we want to ensure as well is that any 
drainage activity happening throughout all of Saskatchewan, 
that we have some influence and that we have some role to play 
to make sure that the effects are monitored very closely and that 
the effects are minimal. 
 
(16:30) 
 
So as a result, Sask Water and SERM are working together and 
it’s under the SERM Act that charges were able to laid upon 
Justice’s advice. Now as I mentioned earlier and I’ll state it 
again, it is not in any of our desire to see people of 
Saskatchewan charged. It is not. 
 
We do a lot of work to try and work with as many stakeholders 
as we can to see how we’re able to bring processes and bring 
the parties together to see whether it is a resolution or a 
mediation that can happen. It is not our desire to go down the 
path of prosecution all the time. 
 
What I also want to say is that we can appreciate some of the 
agricultural value that many of the farmers contribute to the 
province. We understand that completely. 
 
But the fact of the matter is that there was activity happening. 
Justice had a look at this. There was some concern and charges 
were laid. 
 
And again, as I mentioned before, I don’t want to make any 
further comments on this particular case. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, can 
you explain to me then . . . You say Sask Water and SERM are 
both involved in this court case or the bringing about of this 
court case. Who will be picking up the legal costs of this, Sask 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 681 

 

Water or SERM or both or who? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — It would be my assessment that the 
Justice folks would be paying most of these prosecution costs. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, are 
you telling me that — SERM initiated these I believe and 
probably Sask Water I guess, from what I understand today, 
was involved — that there’s no legal costs to SERM or to Sask 
Water through this procedure; it’s all through our Crown . . . the 
Crowns that’s going to pick up the tab for this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you again for the question. 
Just to clarify, the legal services are being provided by Sask 
Justice and SERM. Sask Justice provides us with all the legal 
services, and Sask Water of course have their own legal 
counsel. And since I’m not the minister of Sask Water, I can’t 
speak on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then maybe I 
could ask you a question in a little bit different direction. Has 
SERM budgeted any dollars in this budget for the cost of this 
court case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The answer is no. There is no budgeted 
cost for legal counsel for SERM. All costs, as I mentioned 
before, are covered by Justice. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, just 
a different area . . . well actually in the same constituency but a 
different thing. The Assiniboine Valley study is now over, and 
that was kind of a holdup, I believe, to the Langenburg C&D 
(conservation and development) and the Marchwell drainage 
system. 
 
Where are we on that now? Those projects now — are they still 
on hold or is there anything happening with them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you for the question. Just to 
report again that the study has been done, completed, and right 
now is being looked at by Sask Water, by SERM, by the federal 
government. And all the recommendations on the Upper 
Assiniboine River Basin study will be looked at very 
thoroughly by those partners. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just one more 
question on that line, Mr. Minister. Will we get some kind of a 
recommendation or some answers from that study very shortly? 
What’s the timeline on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again thank you for the question. Just 
to point out that the report was done several months ago. And if 
you’d like a copy of the report, we can certainly forward that to 
you. 
 
What we want to do is we want to give the partners an 
opportunity to look through the report and then see what some 
of the issues are. And to also point out that SERM is one of the 
people that are looking at . . . one of the folks that are looking at 
this document and to point out that the lead here is Sask Water. 
So again we can ask for Sask Water, but to point out that if you 
want a copy of the study, we can get you a copy. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Actually I 
have a copy and have read that. In fact I have had it for a while, 
and that’s why I was wondering what the holdup is now. 
 
As we know, this procedure has been going on for a long time 
out there. This is an organized drainage system set up out there, 
through that C&D, and because of this the Assiniboia Valley 
study, has put this project on hold for a number of years, and it 
looks to me like it’s far from over yet. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just want to go back. One question I just missed 
when we were talking about the problem with the Churchbridge 
RM out there. I believe right now that someone has hired legal 
counsel to try and quash a subpoena to have past ministers 
Lorne Scott and Bernie Wiens testify at that court case. 
 
Now I understand you can’t talk about anything to do with the 
court case, although I would like to know, I guess the question 
would be is, who hired legal counsel? Is it Sask Justice, or did 
SERM have anything to do with trying to squash that . . . quash 
that subpoena for these two people to testify? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you for the question. Just to 
point out that I can’t make any comments on the case that’s 
before the courts, other than to tell you that Justice handles all 
our legal talks. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay. Mr. Deputy Chair, thank you. Mr. 
Minister. I want to thank you and your officials for the answers. 
And I will pass it back it back over to the member for Carrot 
River. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. 
Minister, I’d just like to spend a little bit of time on the whole 
issue of the recreation sites. As you will recall, your department 
embarked on a scheme to demolish and decommission 46 
recreation sites around the province. There was certainly a huge 
degree of opposition to this, a lot of it coming from northeast 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I guess my question, Mr. Minister, is where is the department at 
with the decommissioning of those recreation sites? How many 
have been decommissioned, and at what stage would the entire 
process of the demolishing of those sites be at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Just to point out that it is always incumbent upon any 
government department to continue looking at ways and means 
in which we’re able to operate our, our different operations. 
 
And in this case when we look at the rec site closures, and 
generally what we’ve done for the park system, and so on and 
so forth, through the Centenary Capital Fund and through a 
number of other funds, we are very, very pleased to say that 
there’s been an increase in funding to a number of other 
provincial park systems, the regional parks systems, and so on 
and so forth. And that we continue to take part in the 10-year, 
$25 million infrastructure program for provincial parks. 
 
So there’s no question that there’s a lot of subsidies that the 
province gives to the provincial park system, and what the 
people demand back is that we continue being very diligent 
against some of the costs and some of the ongoing costs of our 



682 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2001 

 

provincial park system. 
 
So in reference to your question about the rec sites, is that 
they’ll be green space forever. These rec sites are not going to 
be shut down or closed. They’re going to be decommissioned; 
there’s going to be less service to these sites, but they’ll be, 
continue to be operating as green zones or green areas. 
 
And of the 30 areas slated for, you know, the reduction of 
services and facilities, and so on and so forth, action has been 
completed at 19 of the sites so far. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Of the other sites that are out there that we’re looking at 
completing the work on, we are dealing with a number of 
different groups. And we are going to try and see if we could 
either contract or make lease arrangements with the other folks 
that are being impacted with some of these rec site closures. 
And the rec sites themselves are good sites — I’m not saying 
that they’re not — and that the utilization will continue. 
 
What I am saying though is that we have to always be aware 
that there are some operational costs and ongoing costs in 
operating all the parks throughout the province, whether it’s rec 
sites or whether it’s regional parks or whether it’s provincial 
parks. And we’re just trying to make sure we’re able to 
maintain a good core of park services for the entire population 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now rec site closures are really tough. And I’ll have to say to 
you as well is that six of these sites were closed in my 
constituency. And of course that has an impact on absolutely 
everyone. And some of the sites that were being closed in my 
constituency had limited use. So I can appreciate where we’re 
heading now when we talk about some of the choices that we 
have to make. 
 
So what we’re doing now as in all the other cases, we’re 
advising the communities in the impacted area, these are our 
plans. Did you want to join us to try and figure out a plan which 
we can keep these sites open for green spaces? Do you have any 
plans? 
 
And we’re doing that for six sites in my constituency and we 
hope to continue that work throughout the province as well. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, the 
assurance that you’ve just given me on the remaining sites that 
local communities, municipal government, service clubs, those 
kinds of things will be approached and a discussion will take 
place as to what their role might be in the future in those sites is 
exactly the same assurance that you gave me last year just prior 
to the 19 being decommissioned and demolished, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I would certainly hope that this time, that you do hold true to 
your word and that those people are in fact consulted with. 
 
A couple of very specific questions. In the case of the Hudson 
Bay area, Mr. Minister, I understand that there is a partnership 
agreement with the town of Hudson Bay, the RM of Hudson 
Bay, and Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management. And that partnership agreement very, very clearly 

calls for the partners to consult with each other prior to doing 
anything that may affect one or the other. 
 
And I think one of the things that those communities were the 
most insulted by, when the rec sites were decommissioned, was 
that that partnership agreement was not abided by in any form 
or fashion. 
 
I think the other thing, Mr. Minister, that frustrated a lot of 
people was the fact that there appeared to be no logical criteria 
for the decommissioning and the destruction of these sites. As a 
matter of fact, I’d like to quote from a Post-Review article. And 
I quote: 
 

In a telephone interview with the director of parks and 
special places branch, it was noted that the closures were 
made as part of the 2000-2001 budget process when a 
$150,000 was cut from SERM’s budget. Even though he 
couldn’t say how these particular 46 sites were chosen, it 
apparently had something to do with the low ratio of 
visitors and the perception that the sites have therefore 
deteriorated. 

 
So I guess, Mr. Minister, I would very much appreciate you 
indicating what type of criteria were in place prior to the 
decision to decommission those sites and what type of criteria 
you will be using in the future. And if you can assure the people 
of the communities in the Hudson Bay area that in the future 
you will also honour your partnership agreement with them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well there’s no question, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, that, that . . . I have a copy of the agreement that the 
member was making reference to and I will share the agreement 
with him. And throughout the agreement there was really 
nothing in reference to the rec site area that he made reference 
to. And I will forward a copy to him. 
 
The agreement that he makes note of is primarily a forestry 
agreement, and I think if you look at the activity in forestry in 
the Hudson Bay area, it’s the largest free-standing structure in 
all of Saskatchewan — a tremendous opportunity for the 
Hudson Bay area and the employees that work in Hudson Bay. 
It’s just a tremendous forestry opportunity. 
 
So the agreement that he makes reference to is an agreement I 
think the province of Saskatchewan filled with . . . filled right to 
the absolute limit. 
 
So when he makes reference to the agreement, there’s no 
question in my mind that the agreement was a forestry 
agreement and that the government paid in full the agreement 
that they have with the people of the Hudson Bay area. 
 
On reference to the rec site closures, there’s no question that the 
reporter that spoke to the official from SERM — in the 
reference that you made — the reporter certainly can put their 
stories in their own words. And I can defend with honour the 
staff member that you made reference to; that in all occasions of 
my dealing with him he has been forthright and honest and he 
has been very, very brave as well. 
 
I made the reference of shutting down six sites in my 
constituency. So he didn’t hide that fact from me, so I doubt 



April 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 683 

 

very much if he’d hide any other facts from me as well. 
 
So I think the reporter obviously has his interpretation of how 
the interview went, and I know that the rec sites that we’re 
looking at, closures is always a difficult thing to do. And as of 
today — I gave you my word last year that we would continue 
working with the communities — that offer is still on the table. 
We are still working forward with the RM as you mentioned, 
with the village, and we’re talking with them on options in the 
future. 
 
So if you look at the three points raised by yourself, I can assure 
you that, number one, is that we are working very hard with the 
RM, with the Indian bands, and with the village to try and see 
what we can do, or with the town of Hudson Bay to try and see 
what we can do to maintain these rec sites in a co-operative 
fashion. 
 
And secondly, the reference of the partnership agreement, it’s 
been paid in full. 
 
And the third aspect as well, in reference to the staff member’s 
comments, I can assure you that his comments are primarily 
those that made sense at the time of the assessment of the sites 
and that he has always been an employee that has served well in 
his capacity as director of the parks and special places branch. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
would like you to indicate at this point the specific status of the 
rec sites at Greenbush, Dagg Creek, Armit, and Pasqua River. 
 
I would also at this point, Mr. Minister, thank you in advance 
for the answer and thank your officials for attending today. And 
subsequent to your providing of the answer, I will be 
relinquishing the floor to my colleague from 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just to 
answer the member’s question. First of all, as we are having 
these discussions, as we’re standing here with both the town of 
Hudson Bay and the RMs and several Indian bands and in the 
spirit of co-operation and fairness — and I know the member 
appreciates that — I just want to add that these discussions, 
negotiations, and meetings are happening as we speak. And in 
order for us to not compromise our partners on this, I would 
much rather not make any assessment of the sites right now 
because these are all being discussed, as I mentioned, as we 
speak. 
 
So what I will do is, as soon as some of these discussions have 
proceeded to a point where an announcement can be made, then 
we will most certainly hope that the members are around for 
those announcements and we’ll fill them in prior to the 
announcement so there’s a full understanding as to what the 
town and the RM and some of the Indian bands in that area 
have negotiated with the province of Saskatchewan in reference 
to the four sites that he spoke about. 
 
The Chair: — It being near 5 p.m., this committee stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 

 


