















































Hansard: June 13, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1773 
 June 13, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present again today regarding the EMS (emergency medical 
services) report: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Rose 
Valley, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the condition and the 
capacity of the Avonlea dam. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconstruct and expand the Avonlea dam to meet current 
water supply demands, allow for sufficient water supply to 
accommodate proposed economic developments, and 
reduce flooding that has caused significant hardship in 
previous years. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Rouleau, Avonlea, Ogema, Briercrest, Hearne, Bengough, 
and Spring Valley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again on behalf of citizens of 
both the city of Swift Current and communities across the 
southwest regarding the state of the hospital in Swift Current. 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitions today, Mr. Speaker, from the southwest are signed 
by residents of Swift Current, from Vanguard, Waldeck, 
Tompkins, Wymark, Shaunavon, and Hodgeville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
who are concerned about the proposals contained in the Fyke 
report. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitions humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take the necessary steps to 
ensure that services are maintained at least at their current 
level at Weyburn General Hospital, Bengough Health 
Centre, Radville Marian Health Centre, and Pangman 
Health Center in order that accessible health care services 
are available to residents of the Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency and beyond. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Bengough. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition regarding 35 Highway. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway No. 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of life, and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in the area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Fort 
Qu’Appelle, Edgeley, and Qu’Appelle areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition today to present on behalf of the southeast 
Saskatchewan ambulance services. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities of 
Storthoaks, Maryfield, Redvers, Fertile, Antler; Reston, 
Manitoba; Bellegarde, and Alida. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition from citizens calling for immediate 
implementation of a province-wide 911 emergency service. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to fulfill its 
promise to the people of rural Saskatchewan by 
immediately implementing the 911 emergency telephone 
system province-wide. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



1774 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2001 

 

Signed by the citizens from Blaine Lake and Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
opposed to the possible reduction of health services in 
Kamsack. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that health care services in 
Kamsack Hospital be maintained at its current level of 
service at minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency 
and doctoral services available. 
 

The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Kamsack, Veregin, Runnymede, and Cote. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with 
citizens opposed to possible reduction of services at Davidson 
and Craik health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum, with 24-hour acute care and emergency and 
doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to the 
users from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present on behalf of concerned citizens. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Wynyard and Foam Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
again rise in the Assembly to bring forth concerns about our 
health system in Saskatchewan. And the concerns are raised by 
the citizens of Shellbrook-Spiritwood. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce the current levels of available 
acute care, emergency, and doctor services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Rabbit Lake, Spiritwood, and also from Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by folks from the province concerned about the high 
energy costs. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenue to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Neilburg, 
Marsden, and Waseca. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition from concerned citizens with reference to the 
ambulance service in rural Saskatchewan. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work and improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signators on this are from Regina and 
Rockglen. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I 
present petitions concerning the issue of the restoration of old 
government house in Battleford. The prayer of relief reads as 
follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to designate the 
restoration of Territorial House in Battleford as a centenary 
project and provide the necessary funds to complete the 
project prior to the 2005 Saskatchewan centennial. 
 

Your petitioners come from the town of Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 



June 13, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1775 

 

Petitions of citizens asking the government to make 
necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency; 
 

And 11 other petitions that are tabled and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 61 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for SERM: how many land 
sharing agreements does your department have in place 
with Ducks Unlimited; and what are the details of these 
agreements; and how much land does this affect? 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that on 
day 61 I shall ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Workers’ Compensation 
Board: in the year 2001, how many workers were granted 
independence allowances to date; and (2), what was the 
cost? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through I want 
to introduce a very special group of visitors from St. George’s 
Hill, northern Saskatchewan. They travelled many, many miles 
to be here, and they’re in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It gives me great pleasure as their MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) to introduce them. And with the number 
. . . with the 12 students . . . that are from grades five to nine, 
we have the teachers that have done a lot of work with them, 
Mr. Evan Gillis, and Mr. Peter MacKay. And the chaperones 
are Ms. Donna Janvier, and Ms. Sadie Bekkattla. 
 
And they’ve travelled all the way from St. George’s Hill, as I 
mentioned. It’s a tremendous distance, and I want to thank them 
all for coming here and to introduce them to the Assembly, and 
ask all my colleagues to please join the group from St. George’s 
Hill. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce 
grade 4 students from the school of Montmartre who made the 
trip in this morning, and have travelled to many different sites 
in Regina, and I think they’ve enjoyed their trip so far. 
 
I had a chance to meet with a few . . . with them just before we 
came into the Assembly and I said that my meeting would 
probably be easier before they see question period than it would 
have been after question period. 
 
So I’d like to introduce the bus driver, Nadine Jensen; a number 
of the moms and chaperones, Deanna Seitz, Wanda Lang, 
Sharon Hewalo, Wanda Laturnus, Kathy Dusyk, and Colleen 

Fink, and teacher Sandra Brown. 
 
I hope you enjoy the proceedings today and would ask all 
members to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, 24 students from Davin School in Regina Lakeview. 
This school is located not that far from the legislature so they 
come and visit fairly regularly. These students are sitting in the 
west gallery and they’re accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. 
Wynne Edwards. 
 
I think the good thing to note and to celebrate with these young 
people and their teacher is the fact that the kind of work that 
was done in the legislature to firm up the foundation is also the 
kind of work that is going to be done at their school to preserve 
another historic landmark in Saskatchewan. And we would like 
to all welcome them here in the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I have two separate introductions to make but I will make 
them separately. 
 
There’s four people seated in the west part of the Speaker’s 
gallery. I have from Calcutta, India — we have Basanti Ghosh; 
we have from New Delhi, Shikha Majumdar; from Yorkton, 
Indra Datta; and accompanying them is the Yorkton . . . also 
from Yorkton, is Mary Ann Federko, who is the president of the 
Yorkton and District Labour Council. 
 
I ask all hon. members to help me make these four special 
guests welcome today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Also, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery I have 
from ACTRA (Alliance of Canadian Cinema, Television and 
Radio Artists), I have the president of ACTRA Saskatchewan, 
Chris Scott from Regina. We have also from Regina, Mike 
Burns, who is the national councillor for ACTRA 
Saskatchewan; Bill Siggins is the branch representative for 
ACTRA Saskatchewan. And visiting us from BC (British 
Columbia) we have Dan Goy, who is relatively new at his new 
position, which is that of ACTRA national organizer for 
Western Canada. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming these four special 
people from ACTRA. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to join with my colleague from Coronation Park in 
welcoming our constituents from Yorkton here and their 
associates from Calcutta. 
 



1776 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2001 

 

I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that in particular my two 
constituents, Marianne Federko and Indra Datta, are very active 
people in our community. It can be said on many occasions, 
particularly around the multicultural organizations, can be said 
around community work, the volunteer work that needs to be 
done in our community, you can always find these two people 
involved in what needs to be done helping communities and 
families. 
 
So I want to welcome them to the Assembly as well this 
afternoon on behalf of the constituency of Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

South West Terminal 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to speak today to the Assembly about another very 
successful business venture in the constituency of Cypress 
Hills. 
 
South West Terminal is located along the No. 1 Highway east 
of Gull Lake. This terminal is primarily owned by farmers in 
partnership with Cargill Grain. 
 
The mission statement of this terminal is to maximize profit 
through impeccable business practices, innovation, and 
outstanding service. And this team of enthusiastic employees 
has certainly lived up to their mandate. 
 
The staff at South West Terminal has doubled from 12 to 24 
employees. Profits have grown from $700,000 during the first 
year of operation, to over two and a half million dollars this 
year before taxes and dividends. 
 
The terminal has handled approximately 350,000 metric tonnes 
of grain. And 25 per cent of the durum in that amount has found 
its way to pasta plants south of the border. 
 
General manager Mark Schell, in co-operation with the board of 
directors, has been instrumental in implementing several new 
programs at the terminal. It’s the first inland terminal to offer a 
street malt program, and just recently they’ve entered into a 
contract agreement with Anheuser Busch. 
 
Grain producers along the former Noteku/Altawan line may 
now take advantage of a new producer car program 
administered by Great Western Rail company. Now this 
program offers a viable alternative for the producers of the 
south line to haul their product by rail as opposed to shipping 
by truck to the No. 1 Highway. 
 
Perhaps the most impressive statistic I can share with you 
today, Mr. Speaker, is that this terminal is now the third largest 
terminal in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

More Good News for Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

member from Regina Dewdney quoted I believe 60 good news 
stories about the Saskatchewan economy; clear rejection of the 
contentions voiced by the gloomy mugwumps, the nabobs of 
negativity that we see sitting opposite. But here’s one he 
missed, Mr. Speaker, because it just came out today. 
 
The Conference Board of Canada released its provincial 
outlook for the spring of 2001. What does it have to say about 
Saskatchewan? As my friend would say, more good news for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan’s economy, the board says, is weathering the 
slowdown in the North American economy with GDP (gross 
domestic product) forecast to grow by 2.5 per cent this year and 
2.9 per cent in 2002. The board anticipates the real output in 
Saskatchewan’s goods-producing sector will grow by 2.9 per 
cent in 2001 — a full percentage point above the national 
average, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me say very slowly, very clearly, the eighth and ninth 
straight years of growth in Saskatchewan. Some death spiral, 
eh, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The forecast also predicts that manufacturing will beat the 
national average and is very optimistic about growth in mining, 
construction, and personal disposable income. This report 
mentions favourably several megaprojects including the 
synchrotron. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Expanded Role of Farm Women 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the results are 
in, and while the members opposite are not going to like this, 
we have to say it: there is more bad news for Saskatchewan 
farm families. A recently released report gives a clear indication 
of just how far the effects of the agriculture crisis has reached 
here in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in today’s Leader-Post the report says that farm 
women have become the glue that holds the family farms 
together by taking off-farm jobs in addition to their unpaid farm 
and household work. Forty per cent of farm women work more 
than 13 hours a day doing 80 per cent of the household work, 
75 per cent of the bookkeeping, 21 per cent of field operations, 
and 17 per cent of equipment repairs. And more than half of 
them surveyed work off the farm. 
 
In addition to the amount of work that they do, these women 
also manage to find time to volunteer for various activities in 
their community and provide care to their family and farms due 
to inadequate health services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not surprisingly the expanded roles of these 
women is taking a toll on them. Sixty-eight per cent of women 
report they are also stressed over financial problems. The 
declining number of rural hospitals is also having a negative 
impact on farm families. 
 
I know that all women have busy, stressful life, Mr. Speaker, 



June 13, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1777 

 

but in light of this recent report and given the information 
surrounding farm women, the members on this side of the 
House want to know if the members on the opposite side of the 
House have seen the report and, more importantly, what plans 
do they have to address the issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Electronic Tax Service for Businesses 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, the headline reads, quote: 
“Government cuts red tape for businesses.” 
 
Today I’m pleased to draw the attention of this House to a new 
e-filing system for taxpayers, our government’s latest step in a 
continual process to reduce red tape, which has seen regulations 
for Saskatchewan businesses drop by 22 per cent since 1996. 
 
Our government recently launched the Saskatchewan electronic 
tax system, also known as SETS (Saskatchewan Electronic Tax 
Service). This technological innovation will greatly help the 
Saskatchewan business community. The e-filing system will 
allow Saskatchewan businesses to file and pay a variety of 
taxes, such as PST (provincial sales tax), over the Internet. 
 
The system was developed by the revenue division of 
Saskatchewan Finance in conjunction with the Minister 
Responsible for the Information Highway. On-line filing will 
save Saskatchewan entrepreneurs both time and money since 
the new Internet system reduces tax-related paperwork. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to promoting 
business-friendly environments. The e-filing system is a 
concrete example of how government is working to reduce red 
tape for Saskatchewan businesses and residents. 
 
The Saskatchewan electronic tax system is the first of its kind in 
the country, evidence that yet again our province is leading the 
way. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Students Ponder Future in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, Mr. 
Speaker, yesterday the grade 12 class from Robert Southey 
School were present in the east gallery and watched question 
period. 
 
Later in the afternoon I met with the students and we talked 
about the procedures of this Assembly and the duties of its 
members. The students were particularly interested in the 
dynamics of question period and we discussed it at some length. 
 
We also talked about their future plans, and many of these 
students will be furthering their education at one of our 
post-secondary institutions. Only one student will be attending a 
private college outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
However, when I asked the students where they thought they’d 
be working after they completed their education, a large 

majority, Mr. Speaker, indicated that they’d be working in 
Alberta. When asked why, a young lady answered: there are no 
jobs and no future for us in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Premier can tell us to up our attitude, but the reality of 
21,000 lost jobs is driving our young people out of the province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Common Weal Community Arts Inc. 
 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the things that 
distinguishes a community from a loose collection of 
individuals is the sense of unity that arises from having a known 
and recorded collective history. And one of the reasons that I 
am proud to represent the people of Regina Elphinstone is that 
it is a community which is consciously striving to ensure that its 
history is preserved and celebrated through story, through art, 
through drama, through community action. 
 
In particular today I want to bring to the attention of this 
Assembly an organization working in Elphinstone that is 
promoting community development and social change — 
Common Weal Community Arts Inc. got its start in 1992 
helping to create a community play in Fort Qu’Appelle called 
The Gathering. This was followed by a play which many of us 
saw called A North Side Story or Two, a musical drama about 
life in the neighbourhoods and on the streets of north-central 
Regina. It was written and performed by the actors themselves, 
Mr. Speaker, residents of our community, and it was great — 
good stuff. 
 
This season Common Weal is continuing its work for positive 
social change through the arts by just last week sponsoring an 
Aboriginal youth playwright festival at Scott Collegiate and by 
planning a summer improv theatre program called Urban Quest, 
which begins Thursday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Common Weal makes an important contribution 
to the common good in our city. And I am proud that Sask 
Water is, and Sask Culture are contributing to its success. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Cadet Corps 
Celebrate 42nd Annual Awards Ceremony 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Humboldt Legion Royal Canadian Cadet Corps No. 572, 
recently held their 42nd annual ceremonial review. The 
program consisted of the fall-in of cadets and presentation of 
awards. 
 
Three trophies were presented. The top recruit went to Robert 
Andrew, the dress and deportment award to Tim Eichinger, and 
the CO (Commanding Officer) trophy to Kristen Athmer. 
 
Major Penner, who is a cadet liaison officer and print 
production supervisor at the University of Saskatchewan, was in 
attendance to conduct the inspection. Major Penner was very 
impressed with the number of cadets, more specifically the 



1778 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2001 

 

number of new cadets to bring in. In his words: 14 new cadets 
showed the good quality of the program. He said, cadets is a 
wonderful organization with good training and an opportunity 
for travel. 
 
Corps commander, Kristen Athmer, a cadet for four years, says 
the best part of being a cadet is the travelling. She has already 
gone to Whitehorse twice in the last few years. 
 
The cadets have a training session from October through June 
and meet once a week for a session that includes lessons, 
lectures, and drills, among other activities. Besides the training 
there are weekend exercises, orienteering, and camp-outs for 
cadets. 
 
Congratulations to the award winners, and as well 
congratulations Humboldt cadets for a very fine program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Strike by Health Care Workers 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
The current labour dispute between CUPE (Canadian Union of 
Public Employees) and SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations) is having a very serious effect on patient 
care in this province. All areas of the health system are being 
negatively affected. 
 
Surgical waiting lists in Saskatchewan, already the longest in 
Canada, are growing with each passing day as elective surgeries 
are cancelled. Even urgent surgeries such as those for people 
facing invasive cancer are affected. The government’s own 
press release yesterday says the capacity to perform these 
urgent surgeries is limited. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell this House how many 
elective surgeries have been cancelled in this province to date 
and how many people are waiting in this province today for 
surgery that is deemed urgent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, at the present time there is a 
discussion going on between CUPE and SAHO along with a 
mediator, and they are attempting to resolve these labour 
difficulties that are causing us to use alternate plans in the 
health system. 
 
And what I would say is we want to encourage these people to 
resolve their difficulties so that the system can go back into 
place to provide the services that are needed. 
 
And what we know is that there are surgeries that are being 
delayed because of this, because their staff aren’t there. And we 
are going to continue to monitor that situation, make sure that 
those kinds of cases that need to be dealt with right away are 
dealt with right away. 
 

But what we really want is for all of the people to get back to 
work after they have resolved their differences. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the continued cancellation of 
elective surgeries and the delay of urgent procedures will only 
serve to lengthen surgical waiting lists. And many people 
whose hip replacement, for an example, is considered elective, 
believe that their quality of life will be further jeopardized by 
the wait. 
 
But of greater concern is those people needing an MRI 
(magnetic resonance imaging) or diagnostic services or timely 
surgery because of a potentially life-threatening condition. In 
many cases, it is the gift of time that allows them to beat their 
disease and with each day the strike continues, that time 
disappears. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister. We know the province has made 
arrangements with out-of-province health care facilities to 
provide some health services. How many patients have been 
sent out of province to out-of-province hospitals for treatment 
or surgery since this strike began? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re all very concerned 
about the people who require help. As of the last report that I 
have, which was late yesterday afternoon, there were eight 
people that were transferred out of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan Party MLAs, and I’m sure all members of this 
House, have received numerous calls of concern from families 
whose relatives are in long-term care, that have been moved to 
another facility in another home or facility in a great distance 
away. Some families received little or no prior notice of the 
move. In many cases the families believe the health of their 
family member have deteriorated because of the move. 
 
Mae Uhrich wrote to her health district after she was told her 
mom would be moved in less than 24 hours. Her letter states, 
and I quote: 
 

We feel that the transfer is going to be detrimental to her 
health, it may even end her life. This is not humane 
treatment of our seniors. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell us how many patients have 
been moved to date from their regular long-term care home to 
other facilities? And how many have actually been moved to 
homes in other districts or other provinces? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, we’re all 
concerned about the people whose lives have been disrupted by 
this labour dispute. And we are working towards getting a 



June 13, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1779 

 

resolution of that as soon as possible. 
 
But one of the things I would like to say is I would like to thank 
those members of CUPE who are doing some of the essential 
services. I want to thank the volunteers, the-out-of-scope 
people, all of those who have worked together to provide care 
for people. 
 
And I also would want to emphasis the fact that when people 
are moved, as the member has asked about, this is being done in 
a way where one community helps another community; other 
groups of people help those ones where there just isn’t enough 
support. And what we need to do is recognize that there will be 
disruptions but that people are working together to do this. 
 
What we are going to do is work with all the people involved to 
get a solution that allows us to have our system back in order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
government press release yesterday states that there are 
approximately 4,700 long-term care residents in the province 
that are affected by the strike and 1,600 of those who are not 
mobile. 
 
Some of the volunteers and family members who have called us 
are expressing grave concern about the condition of these 
residents. There are reports that some of the immobile patients 
haven’t been moved or turned. Their basic care needs aren’t 
being met, and in some cases, they aren’t being fed regularly. 
The government press release states that in some districts meals 
have been reduced to two per day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is unacceptable. It is clear that the health 
system is not providing for the basic care needs. Mr. Speaker, 
what we are hearing from the public is that the existing level of 
service is clearly unacceptable and people are being placed at 
risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the Minister of Health prepared to do to 
protect the health of Saskatchewan people who rely on the 
health system for their daily existence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the parties are working 
together with a mediator right now to sort out the problems 
between them. The Department of Health and all of the health 
districts are working to monitor the situation to provide the care 
that’s needed. There’s a request for volunteers to come and help 
in those places where that’s necessary. 
 
What I would say is that the Saskatchewan people work 
together in the spirit of co-operation when there are issues that 
need to be dealt with. Many people are doing that. What we 
don’t need is for further political debate in this particular place 
to exacerbate the situation so that the parties cannot resolve the 
matter. 
 
We are very concerned about all of the people who are suffering 
in this particular situation, but we’re also working with the 
health districts and with all of the others who are helping them 

to make sure that the best care can be provided for all the 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
received a phone call at home at 7 o’clock this morning from a 
lady who had just come home from providing care for her 
mother in a long-term care home over the last three days. 
 
She says the situation is progressively deteriorating. None of 
her mother’s basic requirements are being met. Her mother 
wasn’t being properly fed, washed or turned. And after three 
days of trying to do her best and help, this lady is exhausted and 
had to go home for a rest. 
 
As well intentioned as volunteers and family members are to 
provide care for elderly patients, they simply aren’t trained or 
equipped to provide the level of care that is adequate. Each day 
as this labour dispute continues, the health of patients is going 
to get worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister realize that the health system is 
near its breaking point? Will the minister do something instead 
of just sitting back and monitoring the situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in this 
particular situation, what we know is that all of the people have 
to work together to provide the kind of care that people need 
when you’re in extenuating circumstances. And what we will 
continue to do is work with the health districts. We’ll work with 
all of the employees who are there, and we’ll work with the 
volunteers and others to provide the care that we, that we need. 
 
But we are continuing to monitor the situation because we don’t 
want to be in a situation where there are people who are in 
danger. And so what we will continue to do is work with the 
districts, work with the other managers. And we are hopeful 
that the parties can resolve their differences so that the normal 
workers can get back to their jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, call 
after call to our offices from volunteers who are exhausted, 
family members who are extremely concerned about the health 
of their relatives, and people in general, relay the message that 
the situation in our health care facilities because of the strike is 
critical. They say the health of the long-term care patients they 
care for is deteriorating. They say that the situation simply can’t 
go on much longer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the two sides in this dispute are in mediation and 
we hope that they seriously attempt to reach a deal as soon as 
possible. In the meantime though, this Minister of Health is 
ultimately responsible for the health system in this province and 
he must take responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the minister spoken to the union as we asked 
him to do yesterday and encouraged them to send people back 
to work while mediation takes place? 



1780 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what this minister and this 
government believes in is using the processes that are 
appropriate to resolve disputes. And that is happening right 
now. We will not interfere in that process no matter how many 
times that member asks me to do that. Because that’s exactly 
the wrong way to sort out these kind of things. The parties need 
to work together using the appropriate processes. 
 
We are very concerned about all of the people in Saskatchewan, 
but we are going to support the systems that we have to resolve 
labour disputes. And we will continue along that path. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
union said yesterday that they would assess the situation and 
determine whether critical services were needed. It is clear from 
the public calls that they certainly are. 
 
But today the union has told the Regina Health District that they 
will not be sending any of their members back to work to help 
in this situation. The health strike is hitting our most vulnerable 
people — our senior citizens and the severely disabled — the 
hardest. 
 
Family members are very distressed that they aren’t able to 
provide the kind of care that their loved ones need and they 
believe that their health is at risk. They want to know how much 
longer this is going to go on. Mr. Speaker, we sincerely hope 
this mediation will be successful, but families are asking how 
long it might take. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the minister given Mr. Ready a deadline to 
mediate a settlement before the government considers further 
action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it appears that the line of 
questions that the member is asking shows that he doesn’t 
understand how these processes work. 
 
What we need to know is that the parties are resolving the 
issues that are between them at the bargaining table. There is an 
agreement between CUPE and SAHO around providing 
essential services and they are working at that process and they 
are providing help in some areas. They are continuing to 
monitor that as well, in the sense that the health district officials 
do work with local CUPE people to get them back in places 
where they are needed. 
 
What we do know is that there are stresses on the whole system. 
There are people that are suffering and we’re concerned about 
that. But what we want is to have this process resolved by 
mediation. 
 
Mr. Ready, the mediator, has only been here since last night. 
Let’s give him some time to work on this and we will then get a 
solution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the people of this province 
who are having to cope with the pressures that are being placed 
on their family’s health — their parents and grandparents — are 
not going to put up forever with this minister’s ineptitude in 
monitoring the situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, if the situation we’re currently 
in isn’t bad enough, we also know that there are further 
walkouts potentially facing the health care system. SEIU 
(Service Employees’ International Union) is in the midst of 
considering further job action. And, Mr. Speaker, as you well 
know, the communities that are neighbours that the minister 
talked about that are helping out are neighbours that are also 
under SEIU contracts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the rate this minister is going with his ineptitude 
and monitoring of this situation, before we know it, there’s 
going to be another strike on our hands. What is the minister 
going to do to assure the people of this province that he has any 
clue what’s going on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what the people of this 
province do not appreciate is when the members opposite take 
joy in the fact that people are off work and people are suffering. 
 
I think that I should remind the member of what he said on 
March 27 of this year. He said: 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, doesn’t the minister 
understand that what we’re concerned is about health care 
professionals, not about administrators and janitors. 

 
That’s a quote. Mr. Speaker, that member has said on a number 
of occasions that these people who are very important to the 
health system don’t matter. 
 
We don’t believe that on this side, and we would ask that 
member to be supportive of the processes that allow labour 
disputes to be resolved so that we can get on with providing 
good care in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investments by SaskTel 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP (New Democratic Party) Crown 
corporation spending spree continues. Three years ago the NDP 
government in British Columbia — I’m not sure if they’re still 
an NDP government in British Columbia — but the then BC 
NDP government privatized, the NDP in BC privatized a 
company called WestTel, which was a telecommunications 
branch of their Crown corporation BC Rail. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has learned that our NDP government 
is now actively trying to purchase WestTel in British Columbia. 



June 13, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1781 

 

In fact, we’ve heard that a memorandum of understanding has 
already been signed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the NDP government purchased WestTel? 
How many Saskatchewan taxpayer dollars are the NDP 
spending to buy up a BC telecommunications company? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all I could recite again all of the good investments that 
SaskTel has made and returned much good dividends to the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am advised in this particular situation that the 
only overtures that have been made to Crown Investments, to 
SaskTel specifically, have been from that company but there’s 
been no overtures by SaskTel directly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a little different than the president of SaskTel testified at 
the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations not long ago. 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel president, Don Ching, confirmed for the 
committee that SaskTel is actively — actively — pursuing the 
purchase of WestTel. That’s what he said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has SaskTel signed a memorandum of 
understanding to purchase WestTel? If so, how much is the deal 
worth? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I’m advised that 
the only overtures that have been made have been made by the 
company to CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) and specifically SaskTel. SaskTel has not been 
actively pursuing this in any way, Mr. Speaker, and to this point 
in time I specifically advise that there has not been a 
memorandum of understanding signed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, here’s the 
verbatim transcript from the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations meeting held on May 24 when I had the 
opportunity to question Mr. Ching about the interests of 
SaskTel in WestTel. And here’s a quote he says. Here’s a quote 
that Mr. Ching offered to us in answer to the question about 
their interests in this company. He said: 
 

I can tell you that there are ongoing activities related to this 
particular issue . . . But those discussions (that sounds like 
two parties speaking, Mr. Speaker) but those discussions 
are ongoing and active at the present time. 
 

That’s what he said. So the question is simple, to the minister, 
Mr. Speaker. Who’s right? Is the minister right or is the 
president of SaskTel right? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the member 
says a discussion has occurred when somebody talks to 
SaskTel, we don’t usually not respond. So in responding, I 
guess a discussion has occurred, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m advised that any overtures that have been 
made have been made from their company and not from 
SaskTel directly, Mr. Speaker. And as always, Mr. Speaker, we 
are looking to investments inside and outside of Saskatchewan, 
to spread risk, to earn revenues for the people of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, and in fact to be able to reduce and maintain the 
lower rates that we currently enjoy here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is truly amazing. 
Only a few weeks ago, on May 24, and I just read it for the 
minister here. Mr. Ching said, the president of SaskTel said: 
 

. . . those discussions are ongoing and active at the present 
time. 
 

The minister just got up and said they’re not having any 
discussions. So the question still hasn’t been answered: who is 
right. Mr. Speaker, Don Ching said SaskTel is looking at 
buying WestTel. They looked at it three years ago but they 
didn’t do it then. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because it was worth too 
much money at the time. 
 
However, since then, it’s devalued to the point that SaskTel can 
now afford it. That’s an interesting investment strategy. The 
company is becoming more and more worthless, so now’s the 
time to buy it, Mr. Speaker. That’s the same strategy they used 
with Clickabid, unfortunately take the value down to absolutely 
nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the president of SaskTel has confirmed they’re 
discussing the purchase of this telco. How much will the NDP 
be paying for this devalued company and how do they know 
that the devaluation is finished? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve pointed out a 
number of times, our Crown corporation has earned some $170 
million in revenues for the people of Saskatchewan. We will 
continue to have discussions with a variety of companies in 
order, Mr. Speaker, to continue to add to those revenues. 
 
With respect to the company that he’s referring to, I’m advised, 
Mr. Speaker, that we were, we were the ones who were 
originally approached. We will obviously carry on discussions 
with them as they continue to make overtures to us. Why 
wouldn’t we if it’s a good investment? 
 
There have been no formal proposals brought to the Crown 
Investments Corporation Board or to cabinet, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we will clearly as I’ve said, with any investment, do 
due diligence. We will contrive to earn additional revenues for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1782 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2001 

 

Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think Saskatchewan people 
on hearing that the minister will apply due diligence to this deal 
— NDP due diligence — I think taxpayers all over the province 
are a little scared at the prospect of NDP due diligence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last 12 months the NDP’s economic 
development disaster strategy has killed 21,000 jobs in the 
province. And what’s their plan to turn it around, Mr. Speaker? 
Well they want to buy an insurance company in Ontario, they 
buy a streaming audio/video company in Nashville, they buy a 
farm equipment Web site in Ottawa, and now they’re buying 
apparently or discussing the purchase of a telco in British 
Columbia. 
 
The NDP is using taxpayer dollars to employ people all over 
North America; meanwhile we’re hemorrhaging jobs right here 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how do any of these out-of-province purchases 
create new jobs in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said our 
company, SaskTel and its subsidiaries, have earned much 
revenues for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and they 
will continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said again, we’ve been approached by this 
company to consider investments. And we make no secrets 
about that; it was talked about that in the Crown Corporations 
Committee, Mr. Speaker. To this point in time there have been 
no proposals brought to the CIC Board or to cabinet, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In the chance that I may not be able to get up and speak again 
— you may not ask me another question — I want to report 
something else, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been talking about leaks 
lately. Well I heard there was a leak this morning, Mr. Speaker. 
I think maybe it came from CKSA or CKSW radio this 
morning. 
 
The question they asked me, amongst a number of other ones, 
was whether or not the member from Swift Current was 
interested in leadership of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thought, you know, it probably wasn’t my place 
to answer it. I thought it highly unlikely that the member from 
Swift Current would want to lead a party that’s likely going to 
stay in opposition for a long, long time yet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what the minister didn’t know of 
course is that the radio station, the people in the newsroom at 
the radio station who are good friends, were pulling his leg. In 
fact they played his interview for us at our office and it was 
played for me on the drive into Regina. 
 
The problem is, is what they were looking for was a serious 
answer to what they knew was a ridiculous question. But when 
they got on to serious questions, all the minister had was 

ridiculous answers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — This was such a leak that they leaked it straight to 
the front seat of the Honda Accord I drive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, quickly to the minister. The government . . . we’ve 
demonstrated clearly that the province has lost the greatest 
number of jobs since the Great Depression — 21,000 jobs have 
been lost. How does the purchase of companies outside the 
province of Saskatchewan and the protection of jobs in Ontario 
and Nashville do anything for the economy of the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if members of 
the opposition can control themselves, if they can calm 
themselves for a couple of minutes, I want to talk about a 
purchase of an out-of-province company myself. 
 
And I want to talk about that member negotiating a $150,000 
grant to bring to this province, to this province, the Country 
Music Hall of Fame to be situated in his hometown, Swift 
Current. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this master of due diligence negotiates a 
grant from his minister when he worked as a ministerial 
assistant. Then he leaves the employ of the minister, Mr. 
Speaker, after doing all this due diligence and goes to be the 
manager of the Country Music Hall of Fame in Swift Current. 
And do you want to know something, Mr. Speaker? He said 
they were going to bring in 34,000 visitors a year. 
 
But you know what happened, Mr. Speaker? It turned out that 
less than 3,000 people bothered to attend. The place went broke 
after his due diligence. Now that’s bringing a company from 
out-of-province into the province. What due diligence? What 
credibility? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 220 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 2001 (Votes of Confidence) 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of Bill No. 220, The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Amendment Act, 2001 (Votes of 
Confidence). 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Political Contributions Tax Credit Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that Bill No. 57, The Political Contributions Tax Credit Act be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Order. 



June 13, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1783 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORT 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the House, before orders of the 
day, I have received a copy of the annual reports on operations 
for the year ended March 31, 2001 from the Provincial Auditor, 
and I hereby table it. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
this afternoon to stand on behalf of the government and table 
responses to written questions 225, 226, and 227. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 225, 226, and 227 have been 
tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Request for conversion of 228. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to stand on behalf of the government to table written responses 
to questions no. 229 and 230, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for 229 and 280 are tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Tobacco Control Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, before I begin with my 
matter, I ask leave of the Assembly to introduce some guests. Is 
that possible? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery 
we have Mary Smillie who’s president of the Saskatchewan 
Coalition for Tobacco Reduction; Lynn Greaves who’s the 
advocacy chair for the Saskatchewan Coalition for Tobacco 
Reduction; Mr. Allyne Knox, Regina citizen who’s concerned 
about this; Dr. Syed Rasul from the Regina Health District; Lisa 
Williams, Rhae Ann Bromley, Sheila Steer, all from the Heart 
and Stroke Foundation of Saskatchewan; Joan Reimer from the 
Saskatchewan Public Health Association; Dr. Thakre from the 
Canadian Cancer Society, Saskatchewan division; and Eunice 
Misskey from the Public Health Services, Regina Health 
District. 
 
We’d like to welcome all of those people here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Tobacco Control Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to introduce 
tobacco control legislation directed especially toward the young 
people of this province. Smoking is a major cause of chronic 
diseases and deaths. In spite of this fact, young people are 
taking up smoking every day in this province. We are highly 
concerned about the effect this has on their future and their 
health. 
 
This legislation reflects our determination to reduce youth 
smoking while at the same time offering a practical, workable 
plan for our province. It is important to note that the legislation 
our government is bringing forward today is just one part of a 
comprehensive, multi-faceted plan to reduce youth smoking. 
 
I would like to share with you some of the reasons I feel 
strongly about this issue. I am sure we can all agree that tobacco 
use, whether it is . . . it be smoking or the use of chewing 
tobacco is harmful to users. The evidence is overwhelming. 
Studies by health groups, independent research, even tobacco 
industry reports provide the proof of its dangers. Smokers 
subject themselves to increased risk of lung cancer, heart 
disease, and stroke. They die younger than non-smokers and 
they are more susceptible to disease. 
 
Even more insidious is the effect smoking has on non-smokers, 
particularly children. Second-hand tobacco smoke increases the 
risk of asthma and heart disease. Children exposed to 
second-hand smoke are more susceptible to health problems — 
from sudden infant death, to pneumonia, and ear infections. 
 
The dangers should be clear. Still our province’s youth don’t 
seem to be getting the message about the harm that smoking 
will do. According to the latest statistics, almost one in four of 
our young people smoke. Take a moment to think about what 
that means — what it means in terms of our efforts to reduce 
infant mortality; what it means in terms of serious diseases like 
lung cancer, asthma, and heart disease; what it means in terms 
of future health care costs; and what it means in terms of our 
province’s future. 
 
It has been said many times that youth are our future. It follows 
that protecting the health of our province’s youth should be 
high on our list of priorities. I can tell you that protecting our 
young people from the harmful effects of smoking and from the 
dangers of second-hand smoke are our number one goals with 
respect to tobacco control. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — To do this it is important that we use all of 
the tools at our disposal — legislation, education, and 
prevention. Only through a comprehensive, multi-faceted 
approach can we reduce our children’s exposure to second-hand 
smoke and the likelihood that they will become smokers 
themselves. 
 
This legislation will not only clear the air of the harmful effects 
of second-hand smoke, it will also help to denormalize tobacco 
use — make it the exception rather than the rule among young 



1784 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2001 

 

people. 
 
Reducing youth smoking is essential to any effort to reduce 
tobacco-related illness. Statistics show that 50 per cent of 
smokers in Saskatchewan began to smoke by the age of 13. If a 
person reaches the age of 20 without starting to smoke, the 
likelihood that they will ever take up smoking is greatly 
reduced. 
 
I know that there may be concerns in some quarters about the 
restrictions in this Act. We understand the challenges for the 
hospitality industry, bars and restaurants, and vendors. We call 
on their co-operation to put the needs of children first. 
 
Think back a few years to the federal government’s decision to 
ban smoking on airplanes. All of the airlines predicted dire 
consequences, huge losses and empty planes. It hasn’t 
happened. Smokers adjust and non-smokers, who are clearly in 
the majority now, appreciate the smoke-free atmosphere. 
 
We have taken a reasonable approach that incorporates the 
following key points: a ban on smoking in enclosed public 
places where children have access; a requirement for 60 per 
cent non-smoking seats in restaurants, bars, bingo halls, and 
casinos implemented in phases and complete by January 1, 
2004; a prohibition on the sale of cigarettes to anyone under the 
age of 18; an increase in penalties for selling tobacco products 
to minors; and a ban on the display and promotion of tobacco 
products in places where youth have access and tobacco is sold. 
 
In addition to these legislative measures, we will focus 
activities across government based on five strategic approaches: 
to prevent tobacco use; to protect people from tobacco smoke; 
to enforce tobacco restrictions; to denormalize tobacco use, 
making it the exception rather than the norm; and to help people 
quite smoking. 
 
We will launch a media and public information campaign to 
reach young people with non-smoking messages. 
 
We will work with health districts and health organizations to 
set and achieve clear goals for reduced tobacco use. We will 
support district health boards and youth organizations to 
implement tobacco reduction strategies at the community level. 
 
We will work to ensure that tobacco vendors are fully aware of 
their responsibilities under federal and provincial laws. We will 
work with the Department of Education to integrate tobacco 
education not only in the health curriculum but across other 
subjects in high school as well. And we will also work together 
to ensure tobacco education is provided to students in the early 
and middle years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important that we acknowledge today the 
importance of the work done by the all-party Special 
Committee on Tobacco Control. The committee’s 
recommendations form the foundation of this legislation and 
our overall tobacco control plan. As well, the committee’s work 
has helped to shape public opinion on the issue of smoking and 
second-hand smoke. 
 
Recent polls indicate strong support for tobacco control in 
Saskatchewan, including the measures included in this new 

legislation. 
 
I want to also acknowledge the many individuals, health 
districts, and health organizations that continue to work 
tirelessly to reduce tobacco use. These groups have provided 
constant encouragement, persuasion, and advice to help us 
move forward on this important issue. And there are countless 
individuals who have contributed to gaining public support for 
measures to address this very serious health hazard. 
 
I want to thank in particular, the Heart and Stroke Foundation, 
the Lung Association, the Canadian Cancer Society, Students 
Working Against Tobacco, and the Saskatchewan Coalition for 
Tobacco Reduction. These groups have been strong advocates 
for change and that is much appreciated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, today we are standing up for 
young people and their right to a healthier environment. We’re 
taking a step toward the goal of a tobacco-free society. I hope 
that all members of the legislature will join us in this important 
step towards a healthier future for this province. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before I 
begin, I would just like to also recognize those people in your 
gallery that are here expressing their interest in this Bill. And I 
would, at this time, also like to thank them again for the input 
they have had. 
 
I am very privileged to stand in this Assembly today to speak 
on Bill 56, the Act to control the sale and use of tobacco and 
tobacco-related products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you and all members of this House are aware, I 
was the Vice-Chair of the Special Committee on Tobacco 
Control. Members and the citizens of this province are also 
aware that over the course of approximately one year we 
travelled throughout the province to hear hundreds of people 
voice their concerns regarding the use of tobacco. And we all 
realize the devastating effects tobacco has, whether it be 
through direct use or second-hand smoke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the House did have 
concerns regarding how people were notified of the meetings 
with the committee. Some stakeholders were contacted, others 
were not. 
 
In fact, during casual conversation with hoteliers and restaurant 
owners, we asked what they thought and that is when we 
realized that the food services industry and hoteliers were never 
contacted as other stakeholders were. 
 
We were somewhat disappointed in that. These are laws that 
will affect many different people in many different ways, and 
we should be willing to listen to what all people say — not 
necessarily agree with them, but nonetheless we should be 
listening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the focus of our committee was on youth: how to 



June 13, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1785 

 

get youth to stop smoking, or more importantly, how to prevent 
them from starting. We have to teach them how it should be 
deglamourized and denormalized. 
 
And as all members of the committee heard throughout our 
travels in the province, Mr. Speaker, is that the use of tobacco 
has some very devastating effects. And I’m sure the other 
members would concur that . . . for instance, I didn’t know that 
one plug of chewing tobacco had the same amount of nicotine 
in it as four cigarettes. And just things like that, that were really 
just unreal to me. 
 
We are very pleased to see this legislation brought forth, 
targeted at youth, Mr. Speaker. But we feel that the government 
could have gone one step farther in relationship to part II of the 
Bill which deals with transactions involving tobacco and 
tobacco-related products. And also to part V dealing with 
offences and penalties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in section (2) the Bill states that: 
 

(2) No person shall furnish tobacco or tobacco-related 
product to a person who appears to be a very young person 
unless the person produces, as proof that he or she is 18 
years of age or older: 
 

And it goes on to mention the various forms of acceptable 
identification. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, over we go to part V where it states what 
the fines are if you are caught selling tobacco or tobacco-related 
products to someone under 18 years of age. And this is where 
we feel that there must be some responsibility put on the 
underage purchaser and not just on the vendor. 
 
Many young people, 16- or 17-years-old, are working at the 
local convenience store, probably their first job, fairly new to 
the workforce. And these people will be charged or fired or 
maybe even both, and the person purchasing the tobacco 
product gets off scot-free. And we just don’t feel that this is at 
all fair or balanced. Some onus must be on the purchaser. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well many people know that when our final 
report come out the members on this side submitted a 
reservation. And this reservation was dealing with the issue of 
separately ventilated and enclosed areas for those wishing to 
smoke. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we are very happy that the government took 
our reservation as valid. And this would have had a very 
devastating effect on businesses. In fact, Mr. Speaker, many of 
the people told us that they would have to close their doors. 
They feel that this issue on top of their skyrocketing energy 
rates would have driven them right out of the province. And we 
all know, Mr. Speaker, that we have just seen a 21,000 job-loss 
figure in this province, and we certainly could not afford that. 
 
So I must say, Mr. Speaker, that those in the hospitality industry 
said that if the customer wanted them to have smoke-free 
establishments, they would go that route. And they would go 
that route because it would make good business sense to do so, 
not because it was dictated by this government. 
 

Despite the fact, Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the 
committee — on this side that were on the committee — we 
generally agree with the direction the government has taken but 
we feel it is necessary to study the Bill further to see how 
specific it is in relating to our final report. So I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(14:45) 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Mineral Resources 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise in the Assembly today to move second reading of The 
Mineral Resources Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on March 30, 2001, the Minister of Finance 
announced in the provincial budget a temporary 10 per cent 
non-refundable tax credit that builds on the federal tax credit of 
15 per cent announced on October 18, 2000. It will allow 
investors in eligible flow-through share offerings for 
exploration activities in Saskatchewan to claim a 10 per cent tax 
credit in their calculation of Saskatchewan income tax. 
 
The specific amendments, Mr. Speaker, will, one, provide clear 
authority for the province to establish a tax credit applied to 
flow-through share purchases that may be claimed by the 
purchaser under The Income Tax Act or The Income Tax Act, 
2000. 
 
Secondly, allow the development of regulations under The 
Mineral Resources Act, 1995 to govern reporting and 
administration requirements necessary to the operation of the 
tax credit program. 
 
And thirdly, provide authority for the minister to recover the 
value of credits issued by an exploration company that do not 
meet the eligibility criteria. 
 
And lastly, provide consequential amendments to The Income 
Tax Act and The Income Tax Act, 2000 to allow investors in 
eligible flow-through shares to claim the 10 per cent 
non-refundable tax credit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that this government is 
committed to the development of our mineral resources and 
recognizes the crucial role of the mineral exploration industry in 
discovering the mineral deposits. We also recognize that the 
mineral exploration industry has faced significant difficulty in 
raising funds for mineral exploration in recent years. Therefore 
the government is implementing this tax credit to encourage 
investors to consider mineral exploration companies in their 
investment strategies. 
 
I also note, Mr. Speaker, that a number of other 
mineral-producing jurisdictions in Canada have programs in 
place or are developing programs that are linked to or built on 
the federal tax credit. 
 
If Saskatchewan is to remain competitive in attracting mineral 
exploration investment, it is important that we too introduce this 



1786 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2001 

 

tax credit. By paralleling the federal tax credit closely, the 
provincial tax credit will be structured to minimize red tape and 
to avoid confusion for the companies working with both tax 
programs. 
 
Similar to the federal tax credit, provincial tax credit will apply 
to eligible expenditures made after October 17, 2000, and 
before January 1, 2004. The provincial tax credit will only 
apply to specific mineral exploration activities carried out in 
Saskatchewan for investors paying Saskatchewan income tax. 
Provincial tax credit, Mr. Speaker, is designed to benefit 
Saskatchewan taxpayers investing in Saskatchewan mineral 
resources. 
 
The amendment Act and accompanying regulations will also 
contain provisions that allow the minister to recover income tax 
revenues in the event that the company issues excess tax credits. 
The specific details of the eligibility criteria, the issuing of tax 
slips, and the administration of the program will be provided for 
in regulations. We will be consulting extensively with the 
Saskatchewan Mining Association and individual mineral 
exploration companies in the development of those regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that Saskatchewan’s geological potential 
is second to none, and the mining industry, already an 
extremely important part of our economy, has the potential to 
expand significantly. Our role as a government is to provide an 
environment that provides and promotes expansion. Mr. 
Speaker, we are doing just that. 
 
With those brief remarks, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading 
of The Mineral Resources Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
stand and enter the debate on Bill No. 50, the mineral resource 
tax credit Act. After listening to the minister speak on the need 
for this and the good that this Bill is going to do, I think for the 
most part after just briefly glancing through it, it looks like it’s 
moving in the right direction. 
 
I can just think back a number of years ago — many, many 
years ago, probably 20 years ago — when mining really was 
not that active in our province. It was kind of an issue that 
really wasn’t thought of too much, and it really needed a lot of 
help to get it moving and going; and it seems like over the last 
15 or 20 years that mining is taken a little more seriously in the 
province and is starting to move up and being looked at as a 
major, major economic force in the province. 
 
And we would agree with that, that we feel that there is a lot of 
potential in the mining industry and would really favour 
anything that goes to increasing the potential of either . . . 
whether it’s the energy, the gas, energy, oil, or into the mining 
and the mineral area, we feel is a good move. 
 
I find it very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that last year, I believe, I 
spoke . . . I was able to stand and speak on the film tax credit 
that was offered in the province and what a great job that that 
tax credit did to increasing the film industry in this province. 
 
I remember a number of the figures that were given and how the 

film industry was really not that active, and with a tax credit it 
got to be more and more active. Now there’s quite a thriving 
film industry in the province. And we’ll be looking to see if this 
tax credit that was introduced and we’re dealing with today, the 
mineral exploration tax credit, will have the same effect on the 
mining industry. 
 
And we certainly hope it would because I think it would be just 
one more piece of evidence that the government opposite 
should start realizing that increased economic development. To 
increase the business, whether it’s in the film industry or 
whether it’s in the mining industry, you’ve got to give tax 
credits, you’ve got to work . . . instead of just picking one. 
 
I guess they used the film industry to begin with, that that might 
be an area that with a bit of a tax credit that they could move 
towards and increase. And I think the proof was in the pudding, 
if I could say that. And I think the mineral industry will be 
certainly the same thing. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to go on beyond that. And 
any time this government, which I know it’s got to be very 
tough for them to do, start introducing tax credits to increase the 
business in that specific sector whether it’s mineral or film, we 
think is probably a good idea. And I think eventually they’ll 
start realizing that it needs to be done in many, many, many 
more sectors. 
 
Because what this province needs is more growth, it needs more 
investment, and one way to do that is through tax credits. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, until we . . . although on first blush this 
Bill looks like it’s going to hit the mark and certainly move 
towards increasing the mining industry and the mining business 
in our province, there’s a number of parties that we need to talk 
to and just make sure it’s gone far enough. Perhaps it hasn’t 
gone far enough; perhaps there’s other areas that it needs to 
address. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll move adjournment of debate on Bill No. 
50, the mineral exploration tax credit Act. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
The Chair: — I invite the member to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker. Seated to 
my immediate left is Sandra Morgan, the deputy minister. 
Seated behind Sandra is Pat Parenteau, who is the senior policy 
analyst in planning and policy. And seated directly behind me is 
Eric Greene, who is the acting executive director of labour 
services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and your officials to the House today. 
 



June 13, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1787 

 

I have a number of questions concerning Bill No. 30, The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act. I believe everyone would 
agree that the family is the foundation to our communities and 
our province and our country. And it’s very important that we 
take steps to enhance and protect the family and our children in 
every possible way to enhance our province and our 
community. Well-balanced individuals make for well-balanced 
families and communities. 
 
I’d like to ask the minister a few questions, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. The federal government passed the federal Bill, Bill 
C-32 about a year, a year and a half ago. And this has been on 
the books for quite some time and I would just like to know 
why the government has taken so long to introduce this Bill. 
 
The government had an opportunity last fall to sit, which would 
have been the appropriate time for the government to introduce 
this Bill to be effective January 1. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. member for 
the question. But I’d like to point out that last fall the 
government was in the middle of a leadership race, and it’s 
rather difficult to have a fall session when the party is in fact in 
the process of changing its leader. That’s point one. 
 
With respect to this question, the federal government introduced 
the legislation that this flows from on the final day of our spring 
session last year. This is simply a natural flow-through that 
brings Saskatchewan’s legislation in line; that it will enable 
Saskatchewan families to access the Employment Insurance 
benefits and the other provisions that the federal Act allows. So 
this is . . . in effect, this session is our first opportunity. 
 
And I’d further point out to the member that we required 
legislation. Not all provinces, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not all 
provinces required an Act of the legislature, but our Act is set 
up such that we did require this Bill. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
I feel that this Bill was important enough that the government 
should have taken steps to get this introduced. The government 
and people of Saskatchewan have been asking for fall sessions 
for quite some time. And I believe that the political interests of 
the NDP Party were not as important as this Bill and many 
other Bills that could have been introduced and passed in the 
legislature. 
 
As I understand, June 15 is a deadline, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for 
the passage of this Bill in order that some are not excluded from 
the changes. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — With the kind indulgences of the member 
opposite, I’d ask for leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(15:00) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would draw your 

attention to the fellow hiding behind the clock, from where I’m 
sitting at least. Seated in the Speaker’s gallery, a fellow by the 
name of Rick Kotowich who works at the Four Directions 
Health Centre in Regina Elphinstone and does a tremendous 
amount of work in terms of developing the community and 
making north central Regina and indeed all of Regina a better 
place to live. 
 
So I’d like you all to give him a warm welcome. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2001 

(continued) 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I was 
mentioning, I understood June 15 is the deadline for passage of 
this Bill in order that some are not excluded from the changes. 
The minister did not point this out when the Bill was introduced 
or in second reading, and I’d like the minister just to explain a 
bit more to make it clearer to the people of Saskatchewan about 
these deadlines and the consequences of them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to point out 
that this piece of legislation, this Bill was introduced in this 
House, in this legislature about six weeks ago so we’ve had 
ample time to get it to this stage. And I’m pleased that it is 
indeed at this stage; look forward to the passage of the Bill. 
 
With respect to the question I think the member was asking, 
about what’s the magic of June 14 or June 15. For an example, 
if a primary caregiver or mother began their leave four weeks 
prior to December 31 last year, in other words about December 
8 — that’s about the average time I’m advised that mothers 
begin their leave — then for those primary caregivers, in the 
case of adoption, or mothers, June 30 would mark the 30 weeks 
of maternity leave and that would be the end of their time under 
the existing legislation. So that’s why there’s the drop-dead date 
just later this week. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ve had a 
number of phone calls to my office, my constituency office and 
my legislative office, from very concerned mothers that are 
expecting and their concern was the deadline, the tight frame 
timelines that we’re having to deal with here. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . I’d like to ask the minister again about the 
introduction of this Bill. The Bill was introduced on May 14; 
second reading was May 17. That was the first opportunity we 
as the official opposition and the people of Saskatchewan had 
an opportunity to look into the Bill, hear what the minister had 
to say. 
 
And the member, even the member from Saskatoon Meewasin 
stated that everyone knew this Bill was coming. She said it was 
even included in many of the NDP leadership campaigns. So 
given this date deadline, why did the government wait nearly 
two months to introduce this Bill which was clearly ready to go 



1788 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2001 

 

earlier, and then tell the public it was the Saskatchewan Party’s 
fault for holding it up? 
 
It’s been very clear that we haven’t held this Bill up in any way 
whatsoever. We have no intentions of doing that. We would 
like to ask a number of questions which the people of 
Saskatchewan expect us to do. 
 
And I was wondering why the government has been sitting on 
this Bill really for over a year and then come in at the last 
minute to introduce the Bill and try to rush it through. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, second reading of this 
Bill was May 17, or I have May 18. I’m not going to quarrel 
over which particular day it was. But I want to point out that 
Saskatchewan is not the first jurisdiction to have introduced this 
legislation. 
 
The hon. member for Redberry has just said . . . it’s no surprise. 
Leadership candidates were talking about this, this being 
necessary. It should come as no surprise to the opposition that a 
government would introduce this legislation. It was included in 
our Throne Speech. 
 
The issue is not why the government took to May 17 to have 
second reading of the Bill. That’s not the issue. The issue is 
what does the Bill provide? 
 
And it provides increased access for Saskatchewan families, 
parents. It provides an opportunity, for particularly mothers, but 
for primary caregivers and for the other spouse — usually the 
father — to spend significant time with new children in their 
family. All of the studies that I have ever seen or heard indicate 
that early in life the time that is spent not simply bonding, but 
caring, tending for babies is very, very important. 
 
This piece of legislation is very progressive. It’s a piece of 
family-oriented legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’re 
very proud of. 
 
The issue isn’t so much the May 17 second reading. The issue is 
June 12 passage. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well it is of 
great concern, the timing of the Bill. The minister has said that 
they knew about it since the last days of last year’s sitting. The 
federal government had introduced the Bill. It was passed 
federally. They’ve had many months to look at the provincial 
legislation that they wanted to introduce, and the provincial 
legislature sat March 28 after the budget Throne Speech. 
 
Why did the government not introduce the Bill? One of the first 
items on the order paper should have been this Bill, because 
there is a deadline and it is an important deadline. 
 
And people are very concerned about the deadline and losing 
. . . being excluded from many of the changes. And I just would 
like to ask the minister one more time: why was this Bill not 
introduced in late March or early April? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have much more 
faith in members opposite. 
 

The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. I’m trying to listen to the 
minister’s answers as well as to the member’s questions, and 
I’m having difficulty. So would this committee please come to 
order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have more faith in 
the hon. members opposite than they have in themselves. 
 
This legislation, there’s no particular magic to it. It’s not like 
we are reinventing the wheel here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What 
we have is a piece of legislation that is common to virtually 
every jurisdiction in Canada. There are a couple of interesting 
little twists where our legislation is better than other places or 
equal to the best, but it is modelled essentially after legislation 
that is common throughout Canada. There’s no magic to this. 
 
The question is, why would you choose not to deal with it in a 
more timely fashion when it’s introduced? We have second 
reading, as you say, second reading May 17. I have faith that 
you’re capable of understanding legislation. And there’s just 
nothing in this legislation that would cause us to hold it up. So 
the real question is, why wouldn’t we simply move through that 
process? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well no one is holding the Bill up. The 
problem why the Bill is late is because you didn’t introduce it 
earlier in the session or even last fall when you had the 
opportunity to have a fall session. 
 
You said there’s a couple different little wrinkles that are 
different in the Bill from other jurisdictions. Could you explain 
those differences? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thank the member 
for the question. We provide in Saskatchewan with this 
legislation, a total of 89 weeks of job protection for parents, the 
birth mother and the father — 89 weeks total protection, job 
protection here. 
 
The other second area of significant difference is with respect to 
adoptive leave, where in Saskatchewan we treat an adoption 
similarly to a normal birth, if I can describe it that way, or . . . I 
better not try and further explain that one. I’ll just trust that 
people will appreciate what I’m trying to express here. 
Fifty-two weeks of parental leave coverage in the case of 
adoption, and that is greater than anywhere else. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How many 
provinces has implemented this increased job protection clause 
to coincide with the federal EI (Employment Insurance) 
changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, nine other provinces 
have passed similar legislation and three territories have passed 
similar legislation. For those of you who are maybe not great at 
geography, that means we’re the final piece of the puzzle. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. EI payments are 
made federally. Are there changes . . . are there differences to 
Saskatchewan law that allow EI payment to be made to parents 
that adopt children? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this legislation that 



June 13, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1789 

 

we’re discussing today does not deal with the payment to 
parents, the Employment Insurance payments. That is a federal 
jurisdiction and the legislation there is controlled exclusively by 
the federal government. 
 
We are providing job protection here in Saskatchewan with this 
Bill. It’s job protection; it’s not related directly to the payments. 
That the co-relationship, if I can describe, is the federal 
government expanded the Employment Insurance payments 
significantly, and this Bill allows Saskatchewan families or 
parents to capture that benefit. But we don’t speak to the 
Employment Insurance benefits in this. We speak to job 
protection. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, 
welcome to the minister and his officials. I just have a couple of 
questions to ask for clarification on the adoptive side. 
 
You talked about job protection as opposed to actual payments. 
So what you’re saying then is if I’m an adoptive parent, I could 
have my job protected for 52 weeks, but I wouldn’t be 
guaranteed EI benefits, or I wouldn’t receive EI benefits for 52 
weeks. Is that correct? 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the hon. member, 
yes; essentially the short answer is yes. My understanding of the 
Employment Insurance benefits is that would cover for 35 
weeks of payment, a maximum of 35 weeks of payment, 
assuming that the parent qualified for that Employment 
Insurance. 
 
But I don’t want to delve into the Employment Insurance too 
much. That’s not our area. Ours is the 52 weeks of job 
protection, and we provide for 52 weeks of job leave that is 
protected and guarantees the job for the parent on their return to 
work. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe I heard you 
say that Saskatchewan is the only province that is allowed 52 
weeks for adoptive parents. Is this both for the father and the 
mother, depending on their own choice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the hon. member. 
Nova Scotia and Quebec also provide 52 weeks of leave. All of 
the rest are typically 37, 35, some as low as 12 weeks. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, then this is an opportunity I 
guess for Saskatchewan to say that, you know, we’re leading 
the way here. But I’m wondering, have you talked to the federal 
government, to your federal counterpart, to determine if they’re 
looking at increasing the amount of time that you’ll be eligible 
for EI benefits? 
 
I would imagine there’d be lots of adoptive parents would enjoy 
the opportunity to be home with their new young baby, but if 
they’re not going to be given the benefits, the monetary benefits 
to stay home, they’re not going to be able to do it. 
 
It seems to me that there’s two different sets of standards here 
then, one for adoptive parents and one for natural childbirth. Is 
that correct? 

Hon. Mr. Trew: — I thank the hon. member, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Again the short answer is no, I have not spoken to my 
federal counterpart with respect to employment insurance and 
the rules. But the hon. member raises an interesting idea, or 
question, and this might well be an issue that we could take up 
at the next federal-provincial ministerial meeting. 
 
And I simply commit that I will add that on my list of items to 
propose for the agenda. So I thank the member for the 
suggestion. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure your office 
has had calls, as mine has, from parents who are adopting who 
have been told by the federal government that because they’re 
not natural parents, they won’t be given the same amount of 
time of eligibility under EI as a natural parent for some reason. 
 
I think it’s an issue that we brought up in the House a couple of 
years ago, something where we’re saying that adoptive parents 
have special circumstances. Even though it may not be the 
physical circumstances of getting over childbirth, there may be 
some special needs when it comes to bonding with an adopted 
child. So I’m asking if this is an issue that your department is 
going to be looking at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Again I thank the hon. member, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I think it’s an issue we have looked at. The 
proof of the pudding is that we treat adoptive leave in exactly 
the same way as we treat the birth mother, the more natural . . . 
I regret the choice of words because adoption is natural as well 
and I don’t want to leave the impression of anything else, this 
isn’t anything different. This is a serious, serious issue and I 
appreciate the member’s comments on it. 
 
But yes, we’re proud of what we have been able to do thus far 
and I absolutely commit to doing what I can to get this added to 
the agenda when the ministers meet. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for those answers. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, part of this whole Bill and the whole 
situation surrounding the Bill also impacts greatly on small 
businesses in the province. 
 
And in the Bill you have included a four weeks notice to return 
to work. And I know in consultation with small-business groups 
and individuals that they have been asking for a six weeks 
notice of leave of the parents when they take the leave. 
 
I would like to know if the minister has considered this notice at 
the beginning of the term and will you consider changing the 
Act to include the six weeks notice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m advised that with 
respect to the six weeks notice of starting leave — that’s the 
hon. member’s question — six weeks, there’s one jurisdiction 
in Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that currently has or asks for 
six weeks notice to start maternity/paternity leave, and that is 
our giant neighbour to the west, Alberta. 
 
We are at four weeks, as is the majority of other provinces. 
Again I reiterate there is one province that has a six-week 
demand on its employees, that being Alberta. We’re at four and 
we remain at four weeks with this legislative change. 



1790 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2001 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to continue 
on that same topic. 
 
The small businesses that I have talked to, they’re very 
concerned about that because they are in a position of having to 
hire part-time employees to fill in and they will have to train 
these employees. And they need the extra time in order to make 
their arrangements, their business arrangements and their hiring, 
to find the people and train them. And they need the extra time 
in order to do this. 
 
And I would just, would like to know if the government at some 
stage in the future, would consider amending the Act to include 
this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, business has raised 
this matter with us. We were able to reach the conclusion that 
the current practice of four weeks notice to leave before the 
birth has been working fairly well. We believe that six weeks 
notice is simply creating more hardship and more difficulty all 
the way around. But four weeks notice seems to be working 
fairly well and we do not contemplate changing from four 
weeks. We’re comfortable that that’s as good a number as there 
is. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to raise 
another issue. I’ve had young women and businesses raise this 
question with me. And I’ll just give you an example what 
they’re referring to. 
 
They are saying, given everything equal, let’s say a young man 
and a young woman are applying for a job, and if their training 
and education and skills are all equal there is a concern that the 
young man will be hired over the young lady. 
 
And I was wondering, what is the government doing, or what 
will the government do to basically stop this discrimination that 
could occur? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we do not have 
legislation saying who employers can hire. But I do wish to 
state absolutely unequivocally that the Human Rights 
Commission . . . we have legislation that has a basis of 
prohibition for denial of employment. And the basis of gender 
is one of the areas specifically banned from an employer 
refusing employment on the basis of gender. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Again on that topic, 
I understand that the laws are in place, but given everything is 
equal between the two people, the employer doesn’t necessarily 
have to state the reasons why he chooses one over the other, and 
it could be a problem. And I’m just wondering if there’s any 
thought put to trying to alleviate that possible circumstance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I appreciate the 
question. We simply assume that people are reasonable and 
would want . . . I know how I would want my sons treated. I 
know how I would want my daughter treated. I know how I 
would want my grandchildren treated . . . granddaughter thus 
far. 
 
I think employers are not that crass or that coldly calculating, if 
I can describe it that way. We have laws in place throughout the 

land and frankly, I just . . . I disbelieve that there’s going to be 
any significant number of employers that will follow that line of 
reasoning that’s put forward. I’m not attributing it to the hon. 
member, but the line of questioning that you were putting to 
me, I just disbelieve that there’s any significant number of 
employers would hire using that logic process. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I agree with the 
minister that I hope no one would view that situation and I hope 
that does not become a problem. A person has to consider all 
these aspects. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to be eligible for maternity leave, 
how long does a person have to be employed with a business or 
an organization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, 20 weeks in the 
previous 52. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you tell us how 
many provinces have a longer minimum period of employment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the qualifying period 
varies right across the country — for example, in Alberta, it’s 
one year; in Newfoundland, it’s 20 weeks; in Ontario, it’s 13 
weeks. But it just varies right across Canada. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Minister, officials. Mr. Minister, I was amazed to hear you say 
earlier in one of the initial questions that it was acceptable to 
shut down basic government operations to participate in a 
leadership campaign. The member asked why this legislation 
couldn’t have been brought forward last fall, and your response 
was well we were in the middle of a leadership campaign. 
 
Mr. Minister, the role of government does not end simply 
because you have some political activity to take place. You 
know that and the public knows that, so why are you abdicating 
your responsibilities? 
 
Mr. Minister, the federal legislation came into effect on January 
1. Provincial legislation at that time, if a parent went on 
maternity leave on January 1, ran for a certain period of time, 
they would still be on the provincial program as of today. But if 
a parent went on maternity leave in September or October, their 
provisions would have run out. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, perhaps you’re here now to accept 
responsibilities for your position and perform the role of 
government. Can you tell me how many parents were taking 
active part in the current government program — not the new 
legislation — the legislation that’s in force today, how many 
parents were taking advantage of that program on January 1, 
2001? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the hon. member for 
Cannington raises a number of interesting issues. 
 
I’m going to start with the question that relates more directly to 
this Bill than the others, and that was the question of how many 
families were involved in using the EI system on January 1 or 



June 13, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1791 

 

December 31. We do not have that number and I’m advised that 
the Employment Insurance people can not give us that specific 
number. 
 
But I can report, for information purposes, that in the year 2000, 
there was very close to 5,200 families that accessed the 
Employment Insurance maternity/paternity provisions. So you 
can do your own math or estimation based on that number — 
5,200 in the entire year. 
 
There was another question surrounding this legislation and the 
federal legislation, and I am not sure if the member opposite 
understands that the federal legislation that was passed last year 
was not retroactive to January 1 or to December 31. That’s 
when it came into effect. 
 
With respect to the beginning comments, I guess that might . . . 
you know, it might make it interesting that the legislature can 
never take into account activities, political activities. I guess I 
should maybe advise the House Leader the next time the 
opposition doesn’t want to sit in an evening because they’ve got 
something else on, that no, no, we’d best stay here. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, the official opposition is ready to sit every evening. 
It’s the government members that adjourn the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Not only that, Mr. Speaker, we carried 
out a leadership campaign in 1998, and we did it during session 
and did all of our job in the House and in the constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — But perhaps, Mr. Chairman, we’re more 
multi-tasking than the government is. 
 
Mr. Minister, at 5,200 people, 5,200 parents on the program last 
year, roughly 430 per month — let’s assume that they come on 
in a steady stream throughout the year — that means that in the 
month of January there would have been 430 families that 
would have dropped off of that program on the provincial sense 
because the program wasn’t in place. The same thing in 
February, the same thing in March, the same thing in April, the 
same thing in May — roughly 430 families are dropping off of 
the program. 
 
And yet the minister comes to us and says oh, no, it’s extremely 
critical that we pass this Bill by Friday because some families 
are going to drop off of this. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, they dropped off in May, they dropped off 
in April, they dropped off in March, they dropped in February, 
and they dropped off in January. Why wasn’t it critical for those 
families to have the same opportunities that you believe it’s 
critical for the families in July to have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you to the member for the question, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. The existing provision is for 30 weeks of 
leave. Included in that is up to four weeks leave before the birth 
of a child. And we have, under the federal legislation, the key is 
the birth of the child was December 31, 2000 or after — in 

other words, in this year. 
 
So we could have . . . we would have had a number of birth 
mothers on maternity leave prior to their birth, whose time is 
running out very, very quickly — the 30 weeks. From early 
December to end of June is 30 weeks. 
 
And so we’ve got a significant number — we may quarrel over 
significant — but I can assure the hon. member that it’s very 
significant to those roughly 200 who will be affected almost 
immediately. We have a significant number of women who, if 
we do not pass this legislation this week, will have a tough 
choice; the choice being to provide notice to their employer that 
they’re returning two weeks hence to work or to risk not having 
a job to go back to because they would not have any job 
protection benefits. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, that’s exactly the same 
argument that can be made for the birth mothers from October 
and November when they had to make that decision in May. 
They had to make the decision in May whether or not to give 
notice to go back to work. 
 
And you denied them the opportunity to access this program 
that you’re putting forward today by not having brought this 
legislation in earlier. Having brought it in in March, it could 
have passed in March or April. So you denied them that 
opportunity, just as you denied them the opportunity in April or 
February or January by not having brought the legislation in last 
fall while you were busy running around the province in your 
leadership campaign. 
 
So do you accept the responsibility for those parents that have 
dropped off and not had access to this program prior to the 
passage of this Bill last month, the month before that, up to 
January 1 of this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The issue 
here is the federal legislation talks specifically about the birth of 
the baby. December 31, 2000 is the critical date. A baby . . . we 
could argue whether it’s good, bad or indifferent; it does not 
matter. We do not have in this legislature the ability to change 
that December 31 date. 
 
Babies born December 30 — doesn’t matter. We’re not talking 
about them because we can’t. For babies . . . parents whose 
children were born December 31, 2000 and after, the first 
drop-dead deadline is later this week. The issue, the issue is . . . 
and I thank . . . one of the opposition members, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, said the drop-dead deadline is not a very good saying 
and he’s right and I’ve used it for the last time today. 
 
Because the first final opportunity that these parents have to 
serve notice that they’re returning to their former jobs, to their 
former employer, the final opportunity they have to give that 
notice is later this week. And it is only for children born 
December 31, 2000 and subsequent that this legislation will 
have any effect on them. So the fall-off time is coming later this 
week. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have a 
couple of more questions. Now who qualifies under this 
legislation? Is it all parents? Are there certain categories that 



1792 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2001 

 

qualify and certain categories that don’t? Or do all parents — 
both natural and adopted — qualify? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, employees who 
qualify — in other words who have worked a minimum of 20 
weeks in the previous 52 — qualify for the EI benefits. We do 
not differentiate in this legislation between birth parents and 
adoptive parents. We’ve made it clear that we’re treating them 
equally and they qualify regardless of whether it’s a birth parent 
or an adoptive parent. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. To qualify 
does a parent have to have paid Employment Insurance 
premiums? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, questions about 
Employment Insurance would be better answered directly by 
the Employment Insurance branch, because I am most reluctant 
to get caught in any details of the Employment Insurance 
program. So I’m not going into detail other than, generally 
speaking employees must have worked 20 weeks out of the 
previous 52. 
 
By definition employee means the employer has paid the 
Employment Insurance premium. So there must have been 
some contribution, employment for 20 weeks, to qualify. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Where I was going with that, Mr. 
Minister, was, does a member of this legislature or any other 
elected member qualify? We don’t pay Unemployment 
Insurance but we do work every week. Do we qualify? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s . . . I thank the 
member for the question. There’s absolutely no change, this 
legislation from the previous legislation. Regrettably it means 
that we’re not covered. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — This is not so much a question as a 
comment, that’s unfortunate perhaps. I could envision the 
situation where a member is approaching election time, goes off 
on maternity leave, the election is called. Is their job still there 
or not? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker. Interesting question. 
No, seriously, this legislation is federal legislation, about who 
qualifies. That’s federal legislation, Employment Insurance 
legislation. And I would urge the hon. member to take that 
question up with the feds. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like 
to know if the government is considering communicating with 
the employers and employees of the province concerning the 
fact that when an employee takes leaves, goes on EI, they may 
have no intentions of going back to work. And I would like to 
know if the minister will bring that issue up to the employers. 
 
Because if the employer knew that that employee was not 
returning, it has no effect on whether that employee is eligible 
for EI. They are. But it would be nice for the employer to know 
right upfront that this employee is not coming back to work. 
 

Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this legislation won’t 
change the existing situation with respect to notice of return to 
work. I shouldn’t say with respect . . . this legislation provides 
for four weeks notice of return to work. Others will provide 
four weeks notice to return to work. 
 
But your broader question is one of would the government 
somehow let employers know that there is some risk of parents 
not returning to work, of them accessing the benefits and then 
later choosing not to go back to work. Legitimate question. This 
Bill won’t change the current situation in that respect. 
 
But I just wish to remind the hon. member that people’s 
circumstances change. One of the things that I found is when I 
get up in a morning and I’m feeling really good, that doesn’t 
mean my day is going to go great. There’s illnesses in family. 
There’s all sorts of unforeseen circumstances. 
 
Maybe more directly in the instance we’re talking about, maybe 
a child becomes sick, maybe has an accident that would dictate 
that the parent spend considerably more time with that child. 
 
Maybe initially the parent had accessed the Employment 
Insurance benefits and the job protection benefits that we speak 
to here, were enjoying that, and then something goes tragically 
wrong, and return to work is not an option at that moment. And 
I don’t think there’s anything that we can do to protect against 
that. 
 
But further, I want to come back to the major point and that is 
this legislation shouldn’t significantly change the number of 
parents who access Employment Insurance and then later 
simply choose not to return to work. I think it’s pretty much 
business as usual in that regard. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Next question is 
about consecutive notices of leave. Families, it’s common that 
families have a child or adopt a child and within a few more 
months the mother is pregnant again. How does this Bill relate 
to that situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, our legislation deals 
with the job protection leave only, not with the Employment 
Insurance portion. At the risk of being wrong, and I urge 
anybody seeing this or reading this not to take this as the way it 
necessarily is, but my understanding of EI is that you must 
work 20 weeks, have 20 weeks of employment out of the 
previous 52 to qualify. 
 
And if you do the math, it means that you couldn’t simply 
adopt, adopt, adopt, or adopt and have a child. You couldn’t 
simply run this into a career of collecting EI and never, never 
going to work. Although if anyone thinks that they can, I mean, 
I welcome them to try it. Children are wonderful, but I’m not 
sure I’d want that many toddlers at the same time. I know 
biology happens. 
 
I think I’ve given the answer though. Check with EI for the 
certainty there. 
 
With respect to the leave provisions that this Bill deals with, 
that’s what we are guaranteeing is the job protection leave 
benefits. 



June 13, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1793 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Next question that he speaks to, the financial burden to small 
businesses concerning retraining, concerning leave. 
 
I’d like to know: has the Labour department calculated the 
added financial burden to employers concerning the need for 
the small business to retrain and train new employees 
concerning this Bill 30? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m advised that 
Deloitte & Touche did a study and came to the conclusion that 
the training costs associated with workers who will be filling 
the role of the parent who’s taking maternity or paternity or 
parental leave, the training costs associated with that is roughly 
$1 million province-wide in a year. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Given the 
considerable expense to small employees . . . employers, small 
businesses, has the government considered any help for the 
small-business person? And it’s not necessarily just out of the 
provincial treasury that I’m asking this. I believe the federal 
government has considerable responsibility in this area too. 
 
And a number of suggestions that I’d like to put to the minister 
is, one of them is providing a EI holiday for small businesses 
that have people off on maternity and parental leave; and also 
the other thing, which is a federal responsibility, is concerning 
the Income Tax Act. 
 
And right now the Income Tax Act really discriminates against 
married couples. And I would also like to ask the minister to 
consider requesting the federal government to change the 
federal Income Tax Act to look after this situation and also 
change any provincial Bills in the provincial Income Tax Act 
that may discriminate against married couples as well. 
 
And just my final comments. I believe that small businesses . . . 
we all know small businesses are the engine of growth in 
Saskatchewan and in all economies. And even though the 
government has reduced the small-business tax to a certain 
extent, I would like to encourage the government to eliminate 
the small-business tax as a further incentive to grow 
Saskatchewan and grow the economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — I thank you. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
member’s properly pointed out that small-business taxes have 
been going down. That’s not related to this Bill but I know that 
the Minister of Finance will be pleased that it’s duly noted. 
 
With respect to the suggestion that small business get a 
Employment Insurance holiday while they have a employee on 
maternity benefits, again this is a federal issue. And I would 
urge the hon. member to take that up . . . make that proposal to 
the federal government. 
 
And with respect to the Income Tax Act, again I’m going to 
refer it to the Minister of Finance. I know that in Saskatchewan 
the basic exemptions are the same for husband and wife. We’ve 
tried to address that but . . . it’s kind of pointless for me to 
expound on that. It’s better in the Department of Finance. 
 
So I thank the hon. member for his questions. 
 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
move an amendment to clause 2: 
 

“Section 23 amended 
2.1 Subsection 23(1) is amended: 

 
(a) in clause (a) by striking out ‘20 weeks’ and 

substituting ‘52 weeks’; and 
 
(b) in clause (b) by striking out ‘four weeks’ and 

substituting ‘six weeks’”. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d just like to make a few comments 
about our amendment, specifically the one to strike out 20 
weeks and substitute 52 weeks. 
 
We also have another amendment later on, if this amendment is 
passed, we’d bring in another amendment to not to exclude any 
parents today. This would not take place for another 52 weeks, 
so all parents would be looked after up to now and this would 
take effect later. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Clause 2, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on clause 2 
with respect to these two amendments, I simply point out that 
striking out 20 weeks and adding 52 weeks simply matches 
your friends in Alberta . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. I’m just advised that the 
amendment is out of order. And I refer the committee to 
Beauchesne's, 6th Edition, paragraph 698(8)(b), and it says: 
 

An amendment may not amend sections from the original 
Act unless they are specifically being amended in a clause 
of the bill before the committee. 

 
So I rule this amendment out of order. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I’d like to move another amendment: 
 

“(c) in clause (b): 
 
(i) in subclause (i) by striking out ‘four weeks’ and 

substituting ‘six weeks’; and 
 
(ii) in subclause (ii) by striking out ‘four weeks’ and 

substituting ‘six weeks’”. 
 
(16:00) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Labour on a point of 
order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — The point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 



1794 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2001 

 

this: we’re not proposing any change in our legislation now 
from what it was. So I’m urging you to consider this 
amendment out of order for the exact same reason the previous 
one was out of order. 
 
The Chair: — On the Minister of Labour’s point of order, the 
amendment is actually clause (c) of IV.1 so it would be in 
order. So I find the point of order not well taken. So we have an 
amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be not 
supporting this amendment. I’ve answered questions about both 
the front-end leave provisions and the notice of return to work. 
 
With respect to the part 1, (c)(i), there is in fact no change 
proposed in our legislation. There was four weeks notice of 
intention to leave previously; there is four weeks notice of 
intention to start maternity leave under this new Bill. With 
respect to . . . and we’re not . . . we have no mind to extend the 
four weeks to six weeks for reasons I’ve stated earlier. 
 
In clause (c)(ii), this is on the return to work, and we have, in 
our Bill, we have increased the notice of return to work from 
two weeks to four weeks. And quite frankly, we consider that to 
be an ample time in today’s world. Four weeks notice to return 
will serve everybody reasonably well. Six weeks we argue is 
simply too long. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, it’s our belief that employers need to be given 
sufficient opportunity in which to hire replacement staff at the 
initial start-up of a maternity leave. Obviously, you’re not in 
small business. In large organizations you will have 
replacement people available. 
 
But in small organizations you’re going to have to go out and 
do a search, you’re going to have to advertise, you’re going to 
have to be able to bring in people to replace the worker that’s 
leaving, and that doesn’t always necessarily happen quickly 
enough to deal with the four weeks notice, Mr. Chairman. 
That’s why it’s important at the front end to be able to extend 
that time period by a minimum of another two weeks to give six 
weeks notice. 
 
Most parents do not take maternity leave when they initially 
find out that: (a) they’re giving birth to a child; or (b) that 
they’re adopting. So they have a time frame in there in which to 
deal with this. 
 
On the tail end, Mr. Chairman, the same thing is also in place. 
The employer now has to give notice to the replacement 
employee that he has in place to . . . when the employee is 
going to be returning. In a lot of cases that may very well be a 
minimum of four weeks notice that they have to give. 
 
So if the employee that’s returning from maternity leave gives 
four weeks notice, that means the day they received notice that 
the employee is returning, they have to have given notice then 
that the temporary, the replacement worker, is now no longer 
needed. So, Mr. Speaker, that puts a great deal of constraints on 
the employer. 
 
Six weeks would allow them to be able to deal with that, Mr. 

Chairman. Therefore that’s why we’re proposing this 
amendment to allow employers the opportunity to hire 
employees at the front end and, Mr. Speaker, employers need 
that opportunity to deal with the replacement workers at the tail 
end of the maternity leave in the similar manner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to point out 
that with respect to the leave provision upfront, since 1977 in 
Saskatchewan we’ve enjoyed a situation of four weeks notice of 
intention to leave. And the issue, I’m advised, has never come 
up until we proposed to amend the legislation. 
 
When I say the issue has never come up, this has just not been a 
significant problem that has been raised with the department, 
nor with me in . . . since, well since 1977 when that provision 
came into effect. 
 
With respect to the notice of return. What the opposition is 
proposing, Mr. Speaker, is to make Saskatchewan the 
jurisdiction, the leader with Alberta, the jurisdiction with the 
longest notice of intention to return to work. I’m not sure if the 
idea is to make it so difficult for employees to return to work 
that they just give up or what. 
 
But the notice provision varies everywhere across Canada, from 
as low as two weeks in Newfoundland, three weeks in Quebec, 
four weeks in the majority of jurisdictions, including now under 
our proposal we go from two weeks previous to four weeks 
now. The majority of jurisdictions go to four weeks. 
 
One and one only, demands six weeks notice of any employee 
before they return to work. That one is Alberta, and I just . . . I 
listened carefully to the member’s arguments about employers’ 
needs, and it sort of begs the question of how on earth small 
businesses or employers anywhere in Canada can possibly exist, 
particularly in jurisdictions that have a lesser requirement than 
what we have. 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 5 and 6 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
thank the minister and his officials for attending today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I thank all of the opposition 
members who have participated, and the rest too, for their 
support. 
 
I am grateful as are a good number of families that we, in 
Saskatchewan, are now able to have our parents accessing the 
maternity/paternity parental leave benefits and it’s just a great 
deal of joy that I feel this day. 
 
So I thank all members and particularly the hon. member for 
Redberry Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 



June 13, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1795 

 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(16:15) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
(Subvote JU01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m 
pleased to introduce and ask the Chamber to welcome, on my 
left, John Whyte, who is the deputy minister of Justice and the 
deputy attorney general. On my right, Doug Moen, who is the 
executive director of public law and community justice. Mike 
Pestill, behind the deputy minister, is the acting director of 
administrative services branch. Colleen Matthews, behind me, 
is the executive assistant to the deputy minister. 
 
To the left of the deputy minister is Rod Crook, who is the 
executive director of registry services. And behind me to the 
right is Murray Brown, who is the director of appeals for the 
public prosecutions division. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I know 
a number of my colleagues want in, but I want to do a bit of a 
follow up with the minister regarding maintenance that we had 
been discussing the last time we met with the Justice 
department. 
 
A couple of issues that came to my attention in that time period 
and at the time as well I had raised a couple, I was using sort of 
a fictitious scenario, but I chatted with one gentleman who 
wants me to just raise his name and the problem he’s facing. 
And I’ll just drop his but raise a couple of other concerns that 
have come as well, Mr. Minister. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, one of the reasons I’m following up on this 
is, you’re probably no doubt aware of the Calgary boy who is 
biking across Canada. In The Leader-Post Tuesday, June 5, it 
said: 
 

A 14-year-old Calgary boy made a stop in Regina Monday 
as part of a cross-country trek to push for more input for 
children in custody disputes. 
 
“Kids want to be listened to. Kids need both parents,” 
Clayton Giles said in an interview. 
 

And it goes on to say: 

In 1998, a federal committee travelled the country to study 
child custody and access and filed its recommendations for 
a less-adversarial system. However, in May 1999 the 
Justice Minister put any changes on hold for three years to 
allow for consultation with the provinces. 
 

Now this young lad is travelling across Canada with his dad. 
And what he says, he decided to do this bike trek because: 
 

. . . he was spurred into action by his own frustrating 
experience. (And) In January, he staged a 19-day hunger 
strike in front of a Calgary courthouse over his parents’ 
10-year-old custody (battle). 

 
He also mentions that he’s heard from many young children 
who have faced the same situations. And he said: 
 

“All of the pain . . . there I saw — I had to do something,” 
(about it) he said. 

 
And then it goes on to say: 
 

A 1995 court ruling denied his father access to either 
himself or his sister for three years. 
 

And this young lad is saying: 
 

“It was terrible. I was depressed all the time,” he said. “It 
takes a terrible toll on your life.” 
 
During the dispute, (Giles goes on to say) Giles was 
constantly told that the courts were acting in the best 
interests of the children. 
 

And his comment here in The Leader-Post is: 
 

“That’s a load of crap . . . They don’t listen to the kids.” 
 
And that’s a quote. 
 
And Mr. Minister, I’m not going to hold back, I’m going to use 
the quotes because I think there’s . . . what we’re hearing here is 
the frustration of individuals who have had to work with the 
court system, and the fact that our whole legal system has not 
taken the bull by the horns and said we need to really readjust 
and refocus. 
 
Mr. Minister, as well, your officials might be aware of an April 
article in Reader’s Digest called “Myth of the Deadbeat Dad.” 
And I could take a fair bit of time to talk about the different 
things that have been printed in this. It’s from the National Post 
by Donna Laframboise, I believe is how you say the name. And 
just a few things out of this article. 
 

In July 1999, in a rundown part of Regina, a 39-year-old 
divorced father tied a rope around his neck and hanged 
himself in his basement. His children have not been told 
how their father died, so his family has requested that his 
name be withheld. We’ll call him Jim. 

 
Jim worked as a mechanic. In addition to his children, he 
left behind grieving parents and siblings. And a two-page 
suicide note (and I quote): 



1796 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2001 

 

“Since the separation, I tried my best to support my 
children and make a living. The end result was that it 
forced me into bankruptcy . . . This is the only solution 
because I see absolutely no light at the end of the tunnel.” 

 
And, Mr. Minister, the article goes on to talk about a gentleman 
in Ontario, and similar experiences of how the courts are 
treating dads today. And the facts are, Mr. Minister, a Toronto 
lawyer says: 
 

In the words of Pauline Green, a Toronto family lawyer, 
“Some judges think men have got off much too easily in 
the past with things like child support.” 

 
And then: 
 

Adds Susan Baragar, a Winnipeg lawyer, “There isn’t 
equality within the family court. There’s a standard joke 
among us family lawyers: ‘If you’re the guy, just put on 
your helmet and duck.’ Generally speaking, I know if I 
represent the woman, it’s going to go easily for me in 
court.” 

 
And, Mr. Minister, you might find this interesting, this article 
worth reading. Because it points out a number of scenarios 
where individuals, at the end of the day, basically said enough 
was enough. To get away from the court system actually they 
were going behind in many cases, because what they were 
ordered to pay by the court and the unscrupulous work of 
maintenance enforcement and the fact that maintenance 
enforcement says the court ordered, therefore we will, and this 
is what we’re going to do because we’ve got a court order. 
 
And yet I don’t find enough maintenance enforcement officers 
out there who are willing to at least sit back and maybe take a 
second look. It’s just the court ordered it and we must follow. 
And maybe it’s because we as legislators have not maybe put 
some safeguards in place, that if a court order has come through 
and if maintenance in their, in their bullish move to make sure 
they’re following up on the court order, may find that there are 
situations where the court order may . . . there might be some 
questions to be raised. 
 
And when a person has appealed on a number of occasions and 
there’s no changes, such as, and I mentioned earlier, Mr. 
Minister, the situation coming out of a Rocanville gentleman. 
His name is Mr. Tremblay and you’ve received this letter. And 
the fact is this gentleman borrowed $15,000 to keep 
maintenance off his back because he wanted to make his 
payments, but he works for the potash mine and he’s on and off 
work, and by the time everything was said and done, he’s 
falling behind. 
 
And yet at the same time, the last time, when we addressed this 
the last time, Mr. Minister, you had mentioned about the fact of 
going back to court. Well he did. Unfortunately the order 
wasn’t changed, even though his spouse now is making more 
money working at a job than he is. And that’s one of the 
situations in front of us. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, we have another one here, and I won’t use 
the name: 
 

I have faithfully paid 11 years of child support. I’ve never 
missed a payment. 

 
And then he says: 
 

We have had no visitation rights in over nine years with his 
family. 

 
And his comment is: 
 

It’s too late for myself and my daughters as we’ve been 
totally destroyed, but no one should go through the hell we 
have and continue to go through. 

 
Mr. Minister, this issue I think is an issue that has been put on 
the sidelines and shelved for far too long. I think, Mr. Minister, 
that you and your officials need to sit back and maybe if it 
means really working with the federal government to change 
the laws or maybe some changes at the provincial level, we 
need to bring some equality to this whole equation, Mr. 
Minister, because there is a lot of inequities. 
 
Like the article that I was quoting from, from the Reader’s 
Digest, made the comment . . . makes the comment about the 
fact that many cases at the end of the day were going after the 
so-called deadbeat dads who are actually very poor individuals 
because of the whole problem we have. 
 
And it’s not just the money, Mr. Minister. As we come back to 
Mr. Giles, this young Calgary boy, it’s a fact that children are 
really being abused, and that’s one of the major concerns, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, having said that, I’d like to hear your 
comments. I know we’ve discussed it back and forth, but I 
know . . . I would like to know exactly what your department is 
. . . what you’re doing as a government to begin to look at the 
major concerns that continue to be raised and to address the 
inequity that’s in the family court system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to . . . or in 
response to the member’s questions, if I could deal with the last 
one first. He raised the question about the maintenance 
enforcement office being faced with a court order and 
complying with that court order and enforcing that court order. 
And he will know that it’s not possible for the maintenance 
enforcement office to change or ignore the court order. That’s 
possible only for the judge to do. 
 
But what maintenance enforcement office does is work with the 
non-custodial parent to facilitate ways in which those 
obligations contained in the court order can be paid. They 
exercise a fair degree of flexibility. They provide advice. 
They’ll allow delays of payments when it appears extremely 
difficult for the payer to make the payments. So they do provide 
a good deal of advice and flexibility in responding to the court 
order. 
 
And before they do enforce the court order, they will provide 
the payer with the opportunity to seek changes to that order 
should he or she regard it to be inappropriate or unfair. 
 
So what I’d say really in response to the member is that while 



June 13, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1797 

 

the maintenance enforcement office is required to enforce the 
court order, it does nonetheless exercise a fair bit of discretion 
and effort to try to facilitate the process for the non-custodial 
paying parent. And it will continue to do that. 
 
But if the member has any specific cases, as he mentioned, 
which have generated particular hardship that we should look at 
further, we’d be happy to do that and see what the maintenance 
enforcement office could do to facilitate those particular 
non-custodial parents. 
 
In response to the first set of questions the member raised. He 
will have raised them before, and many of us would have heard 
this same claim, and heartfelt claim by some fathers, that the 
system is skewed against them; that it is not one which 
represents, or recognizes rather, the importance of both parents 
having a role in raising their children. It doesn’t always, in the 
minds of those fathers, represent a system which gives them 
equal or equivalent rights to the mothers. And we will hear this, 
and I think continue to hear this on a regular basis. 
 
(16:30) 
 
But I think it is fair to say that the existing system has a strong 
preference for joint-parenting arrangements and joint custody, 
and in particular has a primary concern for what is in the best 
interests, interests of the child. 
 
Now when a judge makes an assessment as to what is in the 
best interests of the child and what custody arrangements are 
appropriate in the circumstances, that will be done based upon 
arguments presented by both, by both parents, and based on an 
assessment by the judge of what, as I say, would be best for the 
child. 
 
Very often, and perhaps not unsurprisingly, the parent who feels 
that they don’t, that he or she does not get the access or is 
required to pay more maintenance than he or she would wish, 
feels aggrieved and thinks, I suspect feels strongly, that the 
system isn’t working either for them or for the child in question 
because obviously we each were to have a separate assessment 
as to what would be the best interests of the child. But I might 
say, or I might emphasize, that the system is designed to be 
focused on what’s in the best interests of their child and 
designed to be based on a preference for joint custody and 
joint-parenting arrangements. 
 
As I say, that is not always recognized by the parent who 
wishes to have more access and more input into the parenting 
process. But this does raise important and serious questions, and 
indeed as the member will know, these are not the only 
important and serious questions revolving around this whole 
question of custody and how best to represent the interests of 
the child, and how best to ensure that all those who have a 
legitimate, genuine interest in the child — parents, 
grandparents, and others — have their rights respected. 
 
And the member will know, and that there are serious 
federal/provincial consultations underway to address these and 
other questions. And those who have set up these consultations 
are concerned to ensure that there is effective participation by 
children and indeed on behalf of children whose rights may be 
adversely affected, as the member presented in his examples. 

So we are looking at this matter seriously, both at the federal 
and provincial levels. There are consultations going, taking 
place across the country. And in September, 
federal/provincial/territorial ministers will be reviewing these 
family law matters. And there are a large number of them and 
they’re complicated and generate significant concerns on the 
part of those involved. And certainly we’ll report back when 
that meeting takes place. 
 
But I share the member’s concern for the seriousness of these 
questions. We are working to try to address all of these and 
other difficult matters of how do you do what is in the best 
interests of the child, how do you ensure that the judge makes 
the right decision, and what do you do if you don’t think the 
judge does make the right decision. And we’ll continue with 
that consultation process. And I encourage . . . I know the 
member’s had input and I encourage other members to have 
input into that process. 
 
In conclusion on this point, if there are specific cases, then I’d 
be more than happy to look into them. And I know that Lionel 
McNabb in the maintenance enforcement office does the best he 
can to ensure that people’s concerns are addressed. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, thank you. Mr. 
Minister, you made the comments and I’m not exactly sure if 
. . . I think you did hear what Clayton Giles thought of the 
courts really representing the children. Should I say it again? I 
think the message has come through. But I think it’s very 
important that we really start thinking and addressing this 
seriously. 
 
Mr. Minister, there was a clinical psychologist in Toronto, 
actually quit doing clinical work because of these types of 
things coming across her desk, where parents were just really 
put at wit’s end because they didn’t . . . especially these 
so-called deadbeat dads, as the article basically is trying to point 
out. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I indicated before, the unfortunate part with 
maintenance enforcement is they’re forced to follow a court 
order. But, Mr. Minister, if the court order is $1,000 a month 
and a person’s finding his income is only $850 a month, so 
maintenance says, well we’ll now cut it down to . . . we’ll take 
$450 a month. And over a period of time, it could be 20 years 
that you’re going to have to pay this; if you get a higher paying 
job down the road, then we’ll recover that back. 
 
Mr. Minister, maybe what we need in maintenance 
enforcement, they obviously see some of these rough scenarios 
and rather than being heavy-handed, maybe they need to start 
looking at some of the court orders they’re handed and start 
looking at the situations they’re dealing with. 
 
And when an appeal is made, maybe that office needs to start 
taking on not an adversarial role but start maybe being there to 
point out to the court, listen, we have an order, but we’re 
dealing with a situation where that order far exceeds the ability 
of the plaintiff to comply with that order. And at least, Mr. 
Minister, maybe we need to offer that process. 
 
Mr. Minister, and when it comes . . . and also when it comes to 
the court system, Mr. Minister — another avenue I feel very 



1798 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2001 

 

strongly about — maybe we need to move further and further 
away from the court system and put in a real mediation process 
that totally removes the court system and the judiciary, where 
you have a panel that sits down and listens to the two sides, as 
well as the children, to address this issue so that we can come 
up with something that would be more . . . a lot fairer, a lot 
more equitable. 
 
And make sure that indeed the children are looked after, 
whether it’s through maintenance or . . . also the parents needs 
are looked after; the fact that both parents have joint and equal 
access and custody, and that those custody orders are indeed 
followed through so that both parents are treated fairly. 
 
So those are just a couple of things that I would strongly 
recommend we look at very closely. Rather than just 
condemning all the time, I’ve been trying to put some ideas 
forward where we can make the system work better. So I thank 
you, Mr. Minister, for this time. Thank you. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, by leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and my thanks to 
the minister for allowing this interruption. I’m pleased to 
introduce some guests from Toronto who are guests of my 
assistant. It is Josh and Lori Deuitch and their son, Mitchell. 
And they tell me that they’re very impressed with the 
Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
I’d ask all members to please join me in welcoming them here 
this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m sure 
that our visitors are mostly impressed because the member from 
North Battleford hasn’t had anything to say today, but that may 
or may not be the case. I’m sure he’ll get his own back before 
the day is out. 
 
Just in response to the member’s thoughtful intervention, he 
won’t find any disagreement from us that there’s a need to 
make some significant changes and a need to look for new 
options, new ways of addressing these concerns. 
 
Plainly, asking a third party, a judge, to decide what is best 
under the circumstances is not easy. Though these judges, as 
you know, spend a great deal of time on this, they receive a lot 

of training and education about these questions, but plainly it’s 
better if those most involved, the parents themselves, actually 
make these decisions themselves and, of course, in many 
instances they do. 
 
And there are a lot of examples of pretrial conferences. Most of 
them are family related, and there are efforts made to ensure 
that mutual agreeable decisions are reached at that time — 
providing reasonable access, providing reasonable maintenance 
arrangements, and so on. So more of that needs to be done. 
 
And more needs to be done to explore really any options which 
would make this process work better, and the member 
mentioned one particular, one particular issue and that is with 
regards to a person, a non-custodial parent whose economic 
consequences change. And there plainly needs to be . . . we 
need to explore options to help those people. And indeed we are 
pursuing that rigorously at the present time. 
 
So I think we are on agreement. I wouldn’t want to speak for 
the member, but I think we’re in agreement that we need to be 
much more creative and explore other ways of doing things to 
ensure that those who find difficulties with custody, find 
difficulties with maintenance, at least feel that their interests are 
being protected and responded to, and that they are being 
listened to and that their concerns are being addressed. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, you’d asked if there are any 
specific examples, just to give you a chance to address them. 
On the 21st you received a letter and it’s titled, “Re frustration 
with the family law process in Saskatchewan.” I believe you 
received it. I received it on the 26. And I’m wondering . . . It’s 
re Tremblay versus Tremblay. Mr. Minister, could you just let 
me know exactly whether your office followed up on this and 
what your office did in regards to this letter. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — If I can, I’ll just ensure that I get back 
to the member on that at the first opportunity. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I want 
to talk to you on a little bit different area about the divorce 
system that we have. And I’m sure the minister can relate to 
what I’m going to talk about today. 
 
And the reason I bring it up because it’s not a . . . there’s not . . . 
it’s not an easy thing for anyone to bring up in this House I’m 
sure, but I have the misfortune of being involved in a divorce 
myself right now. I guess good fortune or misfortune, I guess 
whichever day of the week you’re talking to me and at what 
part we’re at. 
 
But I feel, Mr. Minister, that we don’t bring these things up in 
here, we’re never going to change the rules and the laws in this 
province that make it more amicable, far cheaper than we seem 
to have the present system set up at. 
 
I would go on to say, Mr. Minister, I’m not only . . . have the 
misfortune of being involved in one divorce, I’m involved in 
two. And that’s not because I have two wives, it’s because I 
have a daughter that’s also involved at this time in a divorce. 
 
And you know, Mr. Minister, the first thing that I found out 
being involved in a divorce and seeing what’s happening in my 



June 13, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1799 

 

daughter’s case is who the winners and losers are. 
 
And in our case, in both situations, I feel that the only winners 
is the legal system and the lawyers involved. All I’ve heard 
happen in my case so far is ka-ching, ka-ching, ka-ching, and 
my bill goes up. And I know every time my bill goes up, my 
wife’s bill goes up. 
 
I’ve saw in my daughter’s case — and these are young people 
with kids and it’s a stressful situation — and the last thing we 
need is to drain anything that they’ve built up away so that 
when they finish with the divorce, the settlement is over, that 
they’re not broke and have completely lost everything that they 
have. 
 
To me, the way we have our system set up is that the minute 
there’s a disagreement on either party, we’re into the legal 
system; we have to have lawyers involved. And I guess my 
suggestion — and I would sure like your feedback on this, Mr. 
Minister — is why can we not have a mediations process set up 
at least at the start of this process and try and see if that 
wouldn’t work. 
 
I’m not so much worried about people, I guess, possibly in the 
situation I am. Our kids are gone and we’re along with the part 
of life where maybe we deserve to take our lumps. But I think 
when you come to young people like my daughter and her 
husband — and I’m not taking sides and I’m not pointing that 
here — but they’re caught in a dilemma where there’s little kids 
involved, and it’s costing them an arm and a leg, and the 
process goes on and on and on and there doesn’t seem to be any 
time limits put in place, Mr. Minister. 
 
There’s no situations where she can see or he can see that a year 
down the road we know this problem is going to be resolved 
one way or the other. It seems if one spouse disagrees with 
anything that’s happening, whether it’s in the settlement or with 
custody of the kids, we have to have the legal system involved. 
 
And I guess my question, Mr. Minister, is can we not put some 
kind of a mediation system in place that we have some avenue 
to turn to them and say, let’s use common sense here, let’s go to 
as far as at least we can to use this process before we have to 
jump to the legal system. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well the member raises another 
question which causes significant pain and concern for many, 
many people. And when a relationship between two people who 
once loved each other — and maybe still do — breaks up, it 
generates significant emotional and other difficulties, and ones 
which we would not want the system to exacerbate. 
 
And as the member so rightly says, it’s important not to 
completely destroy that relationship . . . for the law, the process 
not to completely destroy that relationship —indeed to try to 
save as much of it as possible. So we seek other alternatives too 
and there are other approaches than just the kind of 
litigation-oriented adversarial process. 
 
And the member will be interested to know we are 
implementing a pilot project in Yorkton and Saskatoon where it 

will be required for all couples who break up — whether they 
have children or not — to attend education counselling sections 
to discuss, if they have children, the needs of the children and 
the impact that such a separation will have on the children and 
how best to address them, the obligations, legal and otherwise, 
that exist between the partners, and indeed any other issues that 
might be helpful in ensuring a smooth transition and one which 
enables both parties to leave the relationship with some respect 
and some sympathy and sentiment towards the other. 
 
That process will begin in September in Yorkton and in October 
in Saskatoon. And our hope is of course that that will be then 
available shortly across the province. 
 
Also there are family mediation processes in place too, 
following on from a court order, so the judge can order the 
parties to mediate their dispute. I suppose in a sense that’s an 
odd thing, mediation being kind of imposed as an effort to try to 
help the process along. And that will be carried out by family 
. . . by counsellors who can help work out some of the disputes, 
financial support, parenting plans, custody and access, and 
those sorts of things. 
 
And obviously it’s better . . . best if those agreements can be 
reached by the parties, if they can be mutually addressed. And 
the member will probably know how much easier it is when 
property is divided after discussion and after some mutual 
understanding. But that is not always possible. 
 
So we are searching then for ways to make that process less 
adversarial, less litigious, and more in keeping with how we 
might want to deal with close relationships, which for various 
reasons are no longer close. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m glad to hear 
that there’s some initiatives being looked at to maybe facilitate 
what I was talking about. I guess maybe mediator is not the 
right word; maybe facilitator would be the right word. I don’t 
know exactly what type of a position this would entail but . . . 
 
Mr. Minister, I think if a lot of couples out there that are 
contemplating separation and possibly down the road divorce, 
knew of all the ramifications that a divorce involves and the 
settlement involves, I think a lot more of them would be giving 
each other a hug and saying, I think we better have another go 
at this because this isn’t going to be fun. Let me tell you, Mr. 
Minister, my experience will tell me that. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other part that I talked about before and I 
don’t think you addressed though, has there ever been thought 
to time limits where both . . . I think we’ve gone the time limit 
where we know there’s no turn back, there’s not going to be a 
change of heart by either partners, is there any thought been 
given to a time limit put on this for — well the divorce part can 
take place — but I’m thinking more of the settlement now of 
assets. 
 
I’ve had the lady call . . . a lady call me where their divorce is 
final and nine years later there’s been no settlement to separate 
their assets because one partner will not come to the table and 
get to that step. And to me that’s ridiculous, Mr. Minister. I 
think we have to have somewhere, somehow, in place where if 
both partners don’t agree, there’s a time limit put on so both 



1800 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2001 

 

members can get on, both people involved, can get on with their 
life. 
 
So has that been given any thought, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well the member raises a question 
which is not so easy to deal with. I think it’s generally the case 
that most people would resolve these matters fairly quickly and 
at around the same time. 
 
But if one of the former marriage partners decides that it is not 
in their best interests — based upon mostly legal advice, but 
perhaps not always — is not in their best interest to respond or 
give in to the other partner’s claim, then these things sometimes 
drag on for a long period of time. 
 
And one of the things that does have to be guarded against I 
think is the notion, is the problem, of one person being more 
powerful than the other. And to make sure that the more 
powerful doesn’t browbeat the less powerful into something 
that’s not in their best interests. 
 
But the member raises a question that’s difficult to address. 
How do you deal with that? Can you deal with it by forcing 
time limits? I’m not sure you can but certainly we would want 
to ensure that these things are addressed as quickly as possible. 
There’s nothing to be served by stretching out that process of 
separating a relationship. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and I 
understand that; I don’t think it would be easy to put timelines 
in place. But I think somehow, someway, we have to find a way 
to help people come to a resolve so that they can get on with the 
rest of their life. 
 
The other point that I wanted to make, Mr. Minister, we’ve had 
the misfortune in my daughter’s situation of going through 
family court and dealing with custody of little kids. And my 
experience in family court was that, I believe the judge that 
morning had 14 cases and she had about two hours to handle 
them. And sitting back as a spectator watching what was 
happening, and yet being very concerned because there were 
people that were near and dear to my heart — their lives were 
being affected by decisions made there — and I saw the load 
that that judge had on her that morning. 
 
I don’t think there was any way, shape, or form that that judge 
had any opportunity to really have time to look into the 
situation what was going on within this family. And I’m sure 
every situation is different. But it was like bang, bang — she 
could hear what was going on very quickly by both the lawyers 
and then had to make a decision, which affected both parents, 
but it also affected the children. 
 
And again I’m wondering if that isn’t where a case where a 
facilitator, at least to start with, couldn’t be set up where we 
could, number one, it would be a lot cheaper. It would keep a 
load out of our court system. If we couldn’t deal some way 
there and say to both parents, let’s go through this facilitating 
process and see if you can both be satisfied with what comes 
out of here and then we go on to the next part of the separation. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I would hope that this may work better than 

it seemed to me what was working there. Because I’m not 
faulting the judge in any way, shape, or form — she had such a 
load that morning — but I guess what the worrisome part for 
me was that she’s dealing with human frailties and little kids 
and their lives, where they’re going to be. 
 
For all intents and purposes, one partner could be very 
detrimental to the good well-being of these kids, and that judge 
only had a matter of minutes to say, I think we should do this. 
Even though the information was there I don’t believe she had 
all that much time to really go in depth into it. So I think I had a 
great concern there of how fast she had to make a decision with 
so little time and such a heavy workload. 
 
Maybe, Mr. Minister, would a facilitator or something like 
we’ve talked about before, come into effect here before, once 
again, we have to get into the court system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well plainly these situations were best 
resolved, as we’ve said before and as I’m sure the member 
agrees, by agreement between the parties involved. And that’s 
always available to the parties, but of course if one wishes not 
to mediate then it can’t take place. We used to have it 
mandatory and that generated its own problems. 
 
And I’ll be interested to learn a bit more about the day the 
member observed in court because it comes as a bit of a 
surprise that there was so much work in the court that day 
dealing with these cases. That I think is not normally the case. 
And we certainly would rather, and we would do what we could 
to ensure that these cases are considered seriously because they 
are plainly serious issues affecting, as the member indicated, the 
lives of many, including the lives of vulnerable children. 
 
So I’ll get some details maybe from the member and look into 
this . . . the question of work or load in that court. I think it 
would be unusual for that to be the case, but we can certainly 
look into it and ensure that there is . . . that we do what we can 
to ensure that there are . . . that there is enough time and enough 
resources to make these decisions properly. 
 
And I know that family court judges in Queen’s Bench take 
their obligations extremely seriously, do a lot of work, a lot of 
education in understanding the issues they’re dealing with, and 
these of course constantly change as new things are discovered 
and new issues arise. And that they do a good job on behalf of 
the province with families in resolving these disputes as best 
they can. 
 
So I’ll check into the member’s experience and we’ll talk about 
it maybe later and see what we can do. 
 
I’m sorry, Mr. Chair. Can I introduce Betty Ann Pottruff right 
there, who is the director of — what’s it’s called? — policy and 
planning, and a whole range of other things. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I 
appreciate your concern. I certainly would share the details of 
what happened that morning, if that wasn’t possibly just one of 
those mornings where her workload was up. 
 
I’m certainly not faulting the judge in any way. It just seemed to 
me there was such a workload I don’t think any person that’s 



June 13, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1801 

 

human could deal with so many cases as she did that morning. 
So we’ll share that, Mr. Minister, at another time. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:59. 
 
 
 


