















































Hansard: April 02, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 305 
 April 2, 2001 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Okay Mr. Speaker, I am again very 
pleased to speak on the 2001 budget that was brought down, as 
well as the speaking to the amendments in relation to the Sask 
Party. 
 
Just as a quick summary before I proceed into my commentary 
relating to the government and the relationship with Aboriginal 
people, you know, the relationship with First Nations and Metis 
people, I would like to say this as a quick summation of it. 
When I was speaking just before supper, I mentioned the 
importance of not only the connection to the people — you 
know, the connection in regards to education, you know, the 
connection in regards to health — the listening that this 
government had done in regards to what the people were saying 
in this province. The fact that we responded not only by words 
but by action was an important part of the speech just before 
supper. 
 
I talked about the record expenditures in health. Something that 
would be good in the North, in the urban area and the rural area. 
You know, I talked about response in regards to the agricultural 
situation, you know the 33 per cent increase to 95 million. You 
know the action we take in education where we’ve moved the 
percentage share from 40 per cent to 42 and a half per cent in 
regards to the province, $40 million to community schools. And 
indeed the respect that we show not only to the people of the 
province but the respect to the request by business in regards to 
the small business tax cut by 25 per cent, you know down to 6 
per cent now. The fact that in the North on a mining side, we 
had improved the taxation, the tax credit for the flow-through 
shares, which are now 25 per cent of which the provincial share 
is 10 per cent. 
 
These points showing that indeed not only do we cut taxes on a 
sustainable level, that we indeed cut down on the debt which is 
now in the $650 million figure, that we are also doing 
expenditures that people have been talking about for the past 
while. 
 
And the counter that I didn’t make is this, that for the Sask 
Party, I simply stated that they sounded a lot like what I knew 
when I first came to the legislature, that indeed when I first 
came to the legislature, I was in opposition dealing with the 
Grant Devine Tories. And I mention the fact that although they 
changed their name to the Sask Party, that policies are still the 
same. Grant Devine talked about cutting taxes and cutting taxes. 
And I remember the gas tax as a specific example which they 
did cut, but they had to bring it back up because what they did 

was unsustainable in terms of action. And in that regard I would 
say that they are not much better, Mr. Speaker, that indeed I 
hear the same old story from the same old Tories. They may 
change their name, but they are much the same. 
 
Now the other thing that I didn’t mention was this, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s a sense of values that you do have in this province, a 
sense of values where you respect people from all over the 
province, from the North, South, East, West, the farm areas, 
urban areas — all over. You pay this respect to people. You pay 
respect to people in business. You pay respect to working 
people as well. 
 
And what I saw was the same Grant Devine message again this 
past week because there was an attack on our expenditures, an 
attack on the amendment to this resolution which attacks 
working people in this province. You know, they are attacking 
the people who are doing the excellent work in the North on 
mining where we are trying to get people who will be doing the 
needed exploration, and that we will get the people to work in 
the geoscience area to help the businesses do exploration in the 
North. But their amendment attacks those workers. 
 
And then there’s people who are going to be employed by the 
health boards, and in those health boards those people attacked 
the janitors. And I thought to myself that is the divide-and-rule 
strategy that I heard from the Grant Devine Tories. They 
divided between business versus workers, and now they were 
saying the workers against workers, and that is a type of 
practice that people don’t like that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those people from across right now are talking while I’m 
speaking, but I know that there is a concern underneath some of 
them when they are really checking their values out. And the 
values are respecting not only the people, the doctors, but also 
to respect the janitor who works at the health centre. 
 
And that is a basic, critical point behind it and that is a very, 
very important point. The member says that it is important in a 
sarcastic way. I don’t deal with it in a sarcastic way. I say that . 
. . one of those things I learned as a teacher when I was first 
starting out is that when you’re doing work — and I saw the 
people who were doing janitorial work at the school, and I saw 
people who were doing secretarial and administrative work — 
they were an important part of the team in the school. That is 
what I knew as a teacher. 
 
And that is what I know when you look at the health team and 
you look at people who make sure that our health centres are at 
the top level spic and span stage. And they do a lot of the things 
that need to be done. And it’s part of the health system and the 
health system team. That is how we look at it, Mr. Speaker, on 
this side — a teamwork model, the co-operation, and the 
respect. 
 
Now the other thing that I’m talking about is this. I mentioned 
that . . . they were getting quite fidgety when I mentioned that 
they were going away from their traditional values. And it’s 
true. I saw that in the big debate with the Reform when they 
kicked out Preston Manning and they brought in a new glitzy 
guy in a swimsuit. And you know that they said they were 
going away from their values. And a lot of people saw that, and 



306 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

you see that being talked about in the rural areas. And I think 
that those types of things are very important when we talk about 
Saskatchewan values, Saskatchewan pride, and Saskatchewan 
respect. 
 
So on the latter point, I would say that I would deal with the 
question on Aboriginal people, on First Nations and Metis 
people in this province. And for me, when I was in opposition I 
saw the neglect in the North and the neglect in regards to the 
previous governments because they played more or less a 
conflictual role. And they always talked about the negative 
things. And in that sense, they were always saying the negative 
stuff about Aboriginal people. 
 
They never talked about those people that took an education, 
you know, that came through Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College, that came through Gabriel Dumont Institute. You 
know the pride that you have in regards to people getting an 
education and putting good work out there as they pass in 
regards to the famous different types of graduations that they’ve 
been through. 
 
And you see that very few times they will talk about that. Very 
few times they will talk about, for example, the success story on 
Lac La Ronge Indian Band and over $50 million worth of 
contracts on their businesses. You know the fact that indeed 
they pay a lot of corporate tax, that they pay a lot of income tax. 
You will never hear them say that. They will hide around and 
talk about the negative stuff on welfare, the negative stuff on 
this and that. 
 
But one of the things they forget, Mr. Speaker, is that a lot of 
the people in this province have taken a leadership role in 
getting an education and Aboriginal people are also playing a 
key role in that. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, I would say this on that whole issue, 
that in regards to Aboriginal people and the economic 
development dimension, there is always an attack also on the 
Crown corporations. And they attack our Crown corporations 
all the time. 
 
And one of the things that I did notice on the Crown 
corporations is this: that we have the best rates in regards to the 
Crowns anywhere in Canada. I was looking at even the SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) rates just before supper 
and there were places in Canada where the SGI rates for the 
youth — you know these people talk about the youth — there 
were over $5,000, $3,000, $2,000, where our rates were at 5 to 
$800 in SGI. And yet they will say privatize those Crowns. 
 
And I will tell you when you look at those rates, and I saw even 
the rates on SaskPower as my fellow seatmate was talking 
about the other day, ours was a little over $108 and theirs in 
Alberta was $150 — a $150. Yes. There was an outrageous 
response over there. 
 
So I would say this on the question of Aboriginal people and 
the Crowns, I would say that I was very pleased with the 
Crowns and their co-operation and their partnership with 
Aboriginal people. Because when I looked at the issue of 
SaskTel when we first come into as government there was 
about 30 per cent of First Nations homes that were hooked up 

on SaskTel. When we examined it there was old, worn-out lines 
that were in. There were insufficient lines, etc. We put in an 
extra 25 million, SaskTel did, and now over 60 per cent of First 
Nations are hooked up across this province — double, over 60 
per cent. It used to be in Grant Devine era 30 per cent. In about 
a 10-year period we have doubled the number of people that 
were connected on in regards with SaskTel. 
 
The other thing too is that I notice although in the ’80s Grant 
Devine had put in about $300 million on SaskEnergy and the 
development of lines, natural gas lines throughout the province, 
when I examined the record there was only 6 First Nations 
reserves that were hooked up during that era. In the past 10 
years we have improved our partnerships. We are now over 50 
and even going up into the North country with Montreal Lake, 
and to me that is progress. 
 
So when I looked at it in regards to the issue, I might say that as 
people are listening in on treaty land entitlement, and I looked 
at the whole history of treaty land entitlement and land issues in 
this province, I recognize the importance of Dominion lands 
policies in the 1930s when Saskatchewan became a province. 
And when I looked at those facts and figures, Mr. Speaker, the 
tremendous policies in the agricultural area provided 31 million 
acres of land for free homesteads and about 6 million . . . about 
5 million acres of land in regards to paid homesteads. So there 
was 31 million acres of land on free homesteads in 1930 during 
the natural resources transfer agreement. 
 
And during that time the railroads had gotten about over 15 
million acres of land in this province. And when I looked at that 
history, I also recognize that the schools, when they talked 
about the politics of tax policy and the school loss in there, 
there was 4 million acres in regards to what the schools got. 
 
But how much did the First Nations get in that regard? Just over 
1 million acres of land. Now we’re restoring the fairness. We’re 
doing the issue on treaty land entitlement. Out of the 550 
million over a 12-year period, the province of Saskatchewan’s 
share will be 200 million. Again that is true partnership and that 
is respect and that is what I mean when we do not only listening 
to people and connecting to people but taking action with 
people. 
 
In regards to that, I would say that with our new . . . we have a 
new strategy in regards to Metis people and off-reserve First 
Nations people particularly living in cities and smaller towns 
and so on, because many times the federal obligation occurs on 
reserve. There’s definitely problems there in regards to the 
funding mechanisms but improvements have been made. But I 
would say this, that we are moving forward with a new plan, 
about $10 million in this budget and that I’m very pleased to 
see that happening in the different areas in regards to health, 
education, roads, and so on. 
 
So when I looked at it, Mr. Speaker, I was very, very pleased 
with this historic budget. It was a budget that indeed provided a 
connection to the people. It provided a sense of pride and 
respect among peoples. We saw action being taken by this 
government in regards to that connection and that which I am 
very proud. 
 
(19:15) 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 307 

 

On the idea of good communications, I will say a few words in 
regards to Cree so that our elders who are out there listening 
right now, in regards to the people who are in bed, in regards to 
the nursing areas, the elders, then I know that a lot of people 
who are listening in who are sick in bed are in our health 
centres can be listening in and understanding what is going on. 
So now I will switch off and do a summation in Cree, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
So I guess, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the budget, again I am 
very proud of this budget. I am proud with the listening. I am 
proud with the connection we have made in regards to the 
people of this province — their wishes and their dreams and 
their calls for action. 
 
That indeed we have seen the nightmares of the Tory past and 
the nightmare of the Sask Party. Although they changed their 
name, but they haven’t changed their game — as one of my 
members says — that indeed it’s the same old story. 
 
All they would say is cut taxes and spend more money — no 
sustainability. But for us, we have had eight straight balanced 
budgets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — We have record support in Education and 
Health. We have roads, close to a billion dollars over the next 
three years . . . 33 per cent increase in Agriculture, 95 million. 
This is commitment and action by the coalition government. 
This is commitment and action for the future. As we’re hitting 
this new century, it makes me very proud that indeed I stand 
here in support of the 2001 budget and in opposition to the Sask 
Party’s doom and gloom and their attack on the working people 
in this province. 
 
So with that, I close my remarks and will continue to work with 
a fantastic team in the coalition government, who is proud of 
the people of the province and who is proud of this province. 
 
So with that, thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak on behalf of 
the constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy. The people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy are a proud, hard-working people who 
have contributed much to their communities and to this 
province. 
 
Our area has been blessed with rich farmland, good grazing 
land, and abundant oil fields. Mr. Speaker, farming is the 
mainstay of our area, and the people directly and indirectly 
involved with farming have for some time now been facing 
some very tough times. Today, Mr. Speaker, many are 
struggling to stay on the farm; struggling because of 
circumstances, many of which are beyond their control. 
 
On the first day of this spring session, Saskatchewan Party 
proposed sending all 58 MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) to Ottawa. We did this, Mr. Speaker, because we 

believe it is time that we make known to Canada, all of the 
people in Canada and to the Government of Canada, the 
seriousness of the crisis in agriculture. Because this crisis is not 
just about farmers and their families, this crisis has and will 
continue to impact all of Saskatchewan. 
 
The agriculture sector is of vital importance to Saskatchewan’s 
entire economy. I have talked to many businesses in and around 
Weyburn and the hurt is being felt everywhere. In Weyburn we 
know when it is seeding or harvest time because the town is 
dead. So it is very clear that we all need and depend on a 
vibrant agriculture economy — both farmers and businesses 
alike. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an example of how business depends on 
agriculture is Bengough, which is located in the southwest part 
of my constituency. Over the last year, Bengough has lost four 
businesses. And with these businesses go direct jobs, children in 
schools, jobs in the service sector, and a loss of the tax base. 
 
Many towns in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, are but a shell of 
what they used to be. And many of the people have been left 
struggling — struggling to make a living, struggling to keep a 
sense of community. They’re struggling to keep their 
community centres open, their towns, their halls, their rinks. 
Every time we lose another farm family we are threatened with 
losing businesses that service these farm families and we are 
threatened with losing more schools and more health facilities 
and with these loses we also lose teachers, nurses, and the list 
goes on. 
 
Mr. Serby says he supports small farms . . . oh, Minister of 
Agriculture, says he supports small farms. He should ask the 
farmers on these farms if they think the policies of this 
government support them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has had a plan over the last few 
years, but sad to say their plan has been to deliberately 
devastate rural Saskatchewan. And now the NDP are telling us 
that they realize there is a problem in the agriculture sector. And 
their solution — write a letter to Ottawa. This has failed before 
and it will surely fail again. 
 
Or in the budget, talk of the crop cover protection program, 
which is an insult to all farmers. Or telling the farmers to haul 
their grain in the winter. Or the AIDA program which was 
designed to fail. And this government’s continual support of the 
Canadian Wheat Board which has done nothing but devastate 
the farmers in my area and throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP long ago lost the trust 
of farm families because they turned their backs on rural 
Saskatchewan when they tore up GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) in 1992. Since then we’ve heard nothing 
but empty promises, and in this year’s budget there is not even a 
mention of a long-term safety net program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is devastation, discouragement, and despair 
in many farming communities because farmers realize that this 
government has no plan, they have no vision, and they have 
failed to offer them any hope or opportunity. 



308 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have very few young farmers left in rural 
Saskatchewan, many are getting older, many wanting to sell out 
or pass their farms to their sons. Many of these farmers are near 
retirement and are using up their life savings to keep the farm 
afloat, and there are many heartbreaking stories of a lifetime of 
work and savings now gone. 
 
Our farmers have diversified, worked off the farm, their wives 
have worked off the farm, and they still can’t make it. This 
budget does nothing to address the need for immediate help for 
farmers and spring seeding is just weeks away. It is very clear 
that agriculture is not a priority of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House believe in farmers 
and we will continue to recognize them and their vital 
importance to the economy of Saskatchewan and we will 
continue to fight for farmers and their well-being. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, farming is the backbone of 
Saskatchewan and we were once proud to be called the 
breadbasket of the world. It is time this government made 
agriculture a priority and gave agriculture back the respect it 
deserves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy are industrious 
people who believe in hard work, who believe in helping their 
neighbours and friends. They will go the extra mile to make 
their communities successful. But we have a government who 
for 10 years has set about to systematically tear apart rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have watched this government destroy what our 
grandparents and parents spent a century building — building 
the railroad, elevators, schools, hospitals, highways, farms, and 
businesses. And then they built churches, rinks, fairgrounds, 
town halls, community centres. A proud people; proud of their 
accomplishments and their communities. The people in rural 
Saskatchewan are now losing or have lost many of the things 
they spent a lifetime building. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance declared over 
and over again in his speech when he was delivering the budget 
that this is progress. Let’s take a look at the progress NDP-style. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have lost schools and yet do the people pay 
less education tax? No, they pay more, and yet their children 
spend long hours on the bus to go to some other community. 
And when this happens a little bit more of their community 
dies. How is this progress? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have lost hospitals. Premier Calvert was one of 
the architects of the health care disaster that closed 52 hospitals 
and forced the closure of the Plains hospital that serviced all of 
southern Saskatchewan. In my constituency we now have only 
one facility that provides acute care, that is Weyburn where we 
fluctuate between 30 and 50 beds. 
 
In other towns we have health centres. How are we to keep 
doctors in small towns if they cannot even provide service to 
their patients? Mr. Speaker, in Radville we have two great 
doctors. People come from all over to see them and what a great 

asset for Radville and area. It allows seniors to have a sense of 
security and enables them to stay in their community knowing 
they have a doctor when they need one. Doctors in these small 
towns also take the weight off of Regina hospitals. 
 
(19:30) 
 
The doctors in Radville would like to have up to five more beds 
— acute-care beds — so that they can keep their patients in 
Radville. But no, this is not allowed under the NDP’s wellness 
model. In these centres we can only have observation beds, 
palliative-care beds, or respite-beds. Many of these seniors are 
moved from bed to bed because their respite beds can only be 
kept for a month and then they have to move on. This has 
caused great hardship for many seniors and their families and is 
completely devoid of any common sense . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Dr. Oberholzer of Radville has 
told me he could open five acute care beds with no additional 
staffing, but no one will give him approval. So the people of 
Radville and area must go elsewhere. Is this the idea of NDP 
rural revitalization? Is their idea of progress? 
 
In the Minton-Gladmar area it makes sense to go to Plentywood 
to access health care, and many do, but they have to pay the 
bills themselves. Mr. Speaker, the people are only asking to be 
reimbursed for the same dollar amount it would cost in 
Saskatchewan for the same service. At a time when we have a 
shortage of doctors and a shortage of hospital beds, this too 
would help take the weight off of our overtaxed health system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health refuses to even look at this 
as an alternative. Mr. Speaker, the people of southern 
Saskatchewan will never forget how this government has 
devastated health care, and they will never forget who was one 
of the masterminds behind it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people have been promised for years that they 
would have 911 service; yet it still is not provided 
province-wide. The latest news release from this government on 
February 26 of this year, when talking about 911 states . . . upon 
full implementation. No deadline given as to when this will 
happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Big Muddy, if you dial 911, guess who 
answers? The sheriff’s office in Scobey, Montana. Then they 
call the US (United States) customs. Then they call the 
Canadian customs. Then they call central dispatch in 
Saskatchewan. Then they call the local ambulance. How is this 
time sensitive? Mr. Speaker, 911 is about emergencies. How is 
this progress? 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan have been promised for 
years that cell service would be province-wide. In many parts of 
my constituency there is still not reliable cell service. And in 
Big Beaver and area when you use your cell phone, guess who 
answers? Sage Brush Cellular in Glasgow, Montana. This is cell 
service NDP-style. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is bad enough that many residents in my 
constituency do not have cell service. But, Mr. Speaker, in at 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 309 

 

least two of these small towns — Viceroy and Kayville — 
SaskTel has now removed their public pay phones. SaskTel 
says that it costs too much to keep pay phones in these towns. 
And, Mr. Speaker, in Kayville the local people have 
disconnected the phone in their community centre and in the 
rink because they cannot afford the high rental imposed on 
them by this government. SaskTel has removed the pay phone. 
They have taken out their other phones, so they have no access 
to a public phone in their town. It means in an emergency you 
must knock on the door of a private home. A community 
without a public phone, Mr. Speaker, what have we come to? In 
this world of revitalization, is this progress? 
 
And now the NDP are promising enhanced Internet services to 
rural communities across the province. Individuals wanting to 
access Internet in rural Saskatchewan have to pay up to $700 
for a second line, and businesses $5,000 or more just because 
they are located outside of a town or the city limits. For many, 
this is cost-prohibitive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP promised 911 to everyone in the 
province, they promised cell service to everyone in the 
province; they have failed to deliver. Now they are promising 
Internet service to everyone. Will this be yet another broken 
promise? Mr. Speaker, this shows why the people of 
Saskatchewan have lost all trust in this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has lost its highway system. The 
highways have been left to crumble, to become a maze of 
potholes, loose pavement, gravel shoulders, in many areas 
unsafe even to drive on. Highways are the lifeline in 
Saskatchewan for school buses, ambulances, transporting grain, 
and the economic well-being of all. We have had 10 years of 
neglect by this government. Last year the NDP’s highway 
program was to convert highways to gravel. The people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy said no, this is not acceptable, and they as 
well as others in Saskatchewan came up with a plan and fixed 
their own highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s latest plan: build a parallel grid road to 
the highways and leave the existing highways full of potholes. 
How does this make sense? Is this rural revitalization, and how 
is this progress? 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have lost many things. 
Communities have been split apart; people now go in all 
directions to access services. And now, Mr. Speaker, residents 
of Saskatchewan are afraid they will lose their locally owned 
and run ambulance services. 
 
I’d like to read parts of a letter that Dr. Oberholzer of Radville 
wrote to the Minister of Health expressing his concern over the 
recommendations in the EMS (emergency medical services) 
report. I believe he speaks for many people in Saskatchewan. 
He, as well as many others, know the system that we have now 
is working well. They do not want changes imposed on them. 
They remember all too well when health reform was forced on 
them. This time they are on their guard. 
 
And I’d like to quote from the doctor’s letter from Radville. 
The letter reads: 
 

It is with fear and amazement that I write this letter to you 

after reading the proposed changes to the current 
ambulance system. We now rely on an efficient and reliable 
ambulance and crews. Transfers, emergencies, and help 
were available within minutes without exception. Now your 
department proposes to take the service away from the 
community. This community which has paid for this 
ambulance with fundraisers like rodeos, rallies, and a 
variety of community events for years, a service which 
made them proud and provided a feeling of safety in a 
medical system that is perceived to be on the verge of 
collapse. 

 
And the letter continues: 
 

For the statistical purposes you have used a current road 
map of southern Saskatchewan and based your response 
time on actual distances to travel. When was the last time 
you travelled the road between Radville and Regina? If you 
may be so fortunate you will realize that the actual distance 
travelled through and around the potholes does not fit the 
ideal you used in the statistical outline. 
 
Try the journey of picking up a patient on a farm with a 
driver or crew that does not know exactly where the turnoff 
or grid road should be, or does not know who to phone to 
find out at which farmhouse the accident occurred. Add a 
little bit of snow to this mixture and monitor response time 
again. These variables do not appear in your document. 
 
We need to remind you that Radville Marian Health Centre 
is only a 24-hour emergency centre in our region, and with 
your department’s previous cost-cutting incentives we are 
limited to only three beds. That is three beds per 2,000 
patients — one acute bed, one observation bed, and one 
palliative bed. We need not remind you that some 
developing countries have better statistics than this. So 
when we need to transfer a patient we need to do it on an 
emergent basis. There is simply nowhere to go with some 
patients. 
 
We certainly get the idea that your proposition is purely to 
save money as it will do only harm to the people relying on 
this ambulance service. This community has endured more 
than their share of health provision cutbacks. We try to deal 
with shortages in bureaucracy on a daily basis while trying 
to provide the accepted standard of health care. Why 
impose another burden on the community? Why try to fix 
something that is not broken? 
 

And this is signed by Dr. Werner Oberholzer of Radville. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the letter speaks for itself and clearly 
shows the frustration being felt throughout this province. In the 
budget the government states revitalizing rural Saskatchewan 
will be a key focus for the government in the months and years 
ahead. This government has spent the last 10 years tearing 
Saskatchewan apart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if any one of my colleagues on the other side of 
the House think they can strip rural Saskatchewan of their 
well-being, that the province can remain strong, they are sadly 
mistaken. In Saskatchewan we need each other. We need rural 
and urban. We need to work together for the betterment of all. 



310 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, they want us to believe that they care 
and they have a plan. Well the people of this province have lost 
trust in the empty promises of this government. Look at the 
promises made in last year’s budget which were never kept. 
 
They promised to create jobs but Saskatchewan actually lost 
13,000 jobs. They promised to reduce high input costs facing 
farmers and implement a long-term safety net program. But, 
Mr. Speaker, it never happened. They promised more health 
care providers. They promised to cut waiting lists, to have 
15-minute access to emergency care, and improved access to 
health services no matter where you lived. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know these promises have not been kept. 
Just ask the people whose lives have been on hold because of 
this government’s mismanagement of the health care system. 
This government has no plan to fix the problems in the 
workplace, no plan to hire health care workers or doctors. Their 
solution — throw more money at the system. This has not 
worked in the past and it will not work now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP even refuse to admit the health system is 
broken. They get up in this House, day after day, and tell the 
people of Saskatchewan about how good our health care system 
is. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this government is not fooling anyone. The 
health care system is broken. We have emergency wards where 
day after day people are lined up. In a Saskatoon hospital, the 
hallways in emergency have become a new ward. The beds in 
the halls have numbers above them. This new ward is called 
stretcher alley. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are not enough beds on wards, or adequate 
staffing levels, and so patients are held in emergency. Doctors 
are operating in the middle of the night so that . . . because this 
is the only time available to them. Patients waiting days for 
surgery that should have been considered emergencies, and as 
they wait they become more critical. We have the longest 
waiting lists in Canada for surgery and tests. Mr. Speaker, 
doctors are frustrated; nurses are stressed; patients lives are in 
jeopardy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is this progress? I could, as well as all MLAs 
on this side of the House, go on for hours about health care 
issues in our constituencies. But the pain and the hurt, the plight 
of Saskatchewan people, has fallen on deaf ears. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget shows clearly that this government has 
lost touch with the people. They are sitting on $500 million 
from windfall oil and gas revenues, yet are there any new tax 
cuts — no. No cuts to the PST (provincial sales tax). No cuts to 
gas tax. No cuts to property tax. No new cuts to income tax. 
Absolutely no new tax relief for Saskatchewan families. And 
the income tax reductions from last year and this year have been 
wiped out. Last year by an expanded PST base and this year by 
rate increases in SaskEnergy, SaskPower, and SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a letter written to me by a 
constituent of Weyburn-Big Muddy, a small-business owner, 
which expresses how most people in Saskatchewan feel about 
this government and their gouging of the people. And the letter 
reads: 

How does the NDP government justify a rate increase in 
SaskTel, SaskEnergy, and now SaskPower? In my business 
in farming industry, we would love to increase our income 
every time an increase comes along. When we get an 
increase, we have to cut within our operation or find other 
ways to make money to pay the added expense. In our area 
we have a rough enough time making it without more 
expense from our government. It is truly a big rip-off and 
makes us really mad at what is going on. I think the 
government Crown corporation should be cutting within 
their own operation instead of passing it on to the users or 
taxpayers. 
 

End of letter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government believes in bigger government, 
while the families in Saskatchewan struggle to make ends meet. 
This government unbelievably has added 550 new government 
employees 
 
An Hon. Member: — 570. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — 570; it’s going up daily. The cost of this is 
$500 million, Mr. Speaker, yet there is not a dime for 
municipalities in revenue-sharing grants. This will result in 
more downloading and another increase in property tax. 
 
The government grows and the taxpayer just keeps on paying. 
Mr. Speaker, no thought to families, business, or farmers, or a 
recognition of the struggle with continued increased costs 
imposed on them by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last thing the people in Saskatchewan want or 
need is bigger government, but that is exactly what they are 
getting from this administration. People in Saskatchewan love 
their province and they want to stay here, to raise their families 
here, to own farms and businesses. They were looking to this 
government and this budget to give them a reason to stay, to 
give them opportunity, and to give them hope. They were 
looking for a plan and a vision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget has failed the people of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. This budget has failed the people of Saskatchewan and 
so, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment and I will 
not support the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 
opportunity to thank you in your election to Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker. I haven’t had an opportunity to be on my feet since 
you’ve been elected Speaker, and I’d like at this time to 
congratulate you and thank you for the wonderful job that 
you’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — I’d also like to take the opportunity to thank the 
Deputy Speaker, the member from Regina Sherwood; he isn’t 
here at the moment but he also is doing a wonderful job as 
Deputy Speaker. And I’d also like to take a minute or two to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order! I would just remind the 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 311 

 

member that he should not be referring to the presence or 
absence of members in the Assembly. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I forgot the member 
doesn’t sit beside me any longer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to congratulate the new Premier on 
his election and the opportunity that it brings to and for the 
people of this province. As well, my seatmate, the member from 
Regina Elphinstone, who was newly elected just a few weeks 
ago is making wonderful contributions to this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to start by outlining 
what the government was trying to do in this budget. Mr. 
Speaker, under the leadership of a new Premier, the government 
will move an exciting new direction that was stated in the 
budget speech. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we’re 
doing. The budget was designed to look to the future, to present 
hope and opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan in the 
upcoming years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people on this side of the Assembly believe 
Saskatchewan is a great place to live, and every single day you 
hear us talk about the great things the people of this province 
do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite may not think this is 
such a great place to live. We hear every day the doom and 
gloom as they put down our province — unfortunate for them, 
unfortunate for the province. But, Mr. Speaker, they may yet 
catch on that this is a vibrant economy, a vibrant province in 
which we want to move ahead. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, if you looked in the papers over the 
weekend, there was a number of very, very interesting things in 
the papers, Mr. Speaker. It talks about . . . Out of the Macklin 
Mirror — not exactly one of the ridings that we represent — 
but it says, “new medical equipment benefit patients,” Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It goes on in Regina Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker, to talk . . . 
Bruce Johnstone — not exactly a friend of this government — 
goes on to talk about that: 
 

. . . there’s a big difference between this spending spree and 
the orgy of overspending in 1980s that made drunken 
sailors look like paragons of fiscal rectitude. 
 
Instead of Jacuzzis and decks, the (new Premier’s) 
government is lavishing more money on such frivolities as 
community schools, early childhood (intervention) 
programs to reduce fetal alcohol syndrome, highways . . . 
farmers . . . and school operating grants . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, not the spending of the 1980s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go on to talk about provincial initiative. 
“Good first step,” the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations) says. The people of this province are looking and 

judging the budget favourably, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And last but not least, Mr. Speaker, Bruce Johnstone, again, The 
Leader-Post: “Budget applauded by business.” Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t know, I keep hearing how bad everything is from the 
members opposite, yet when those people who judge our budget 
from the outside — right in the newspapers, Mr. Speaker — 
they talk very favourably. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about what’s in this 
budget. I’m going to start with the fair, simple tax system that 
was put in by this government a year ago, Mr. Speaker, and 
continues each and every year up until 2004, Mr. Speaker. 
There are income tax cuts. Just as an example, Mr. Speaker, in 
2001 Saskatchewan people will pay 317 million less in 
provincial income tax then they did prior to tax reform, Mr. 
Speaker — $317 million and they’re saying nothing. Mr. 
Speaker, something’s wrong here. I don’t know. They just don’t 
add up. They don’t get it. They don’t understand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our tax system is both competitive and fair. In 
1993 the average Saskatchewan family had the second highest 
personal income taxes in Canada. In 2001 they’re the fourth 
lowest, Mr. Speaker. And our top marginal tax rate is now the 
second lowest in Canada, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know what these 
members opposite are reading. Obviously they don’t read the 
budget. They don’t understand the budget. I don’t know, we 
have to help them, Mr. Speaker, and we’re trying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on January 1 of this year we eliminated the flat 
tax, the high income surtax, and the debt reduction surtax, Mr. 
Speaker. The members opposite just need to go to their own tax 
returns last year and look what they paid on those taxes, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s not that difficult, even they can do it. Their 
accountants may fill the forms out for them if they have 
difficulty understanding them but they can go and see how 
much they paid on those three taxes, Mr. Speaker, and know 
what they stand to save next year, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know, 
it’s not that difficult. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this budget continues to 
increase provincial tax credits. They recognize greater tax 
credits for post-secondary costs. Persons with disabilities and 
caregivers, Mr. Speaker, continue to get enhanced benefits this 
budget year. As well as that, Mr. Speaker, our Saskatchewan 
tax credits for CPP (Canada Pension Plan) and EI (employment 
insurance) contributions, tuition fees, charitable gifts, student 
loans will match those provided by the federal government 
every year, Mr. Speaker. And they’ll be indexed in our tax 
system, Mr. Speaker, they’ll be indexed. 
 
Beginning in 2001, Mr. Speaker, provincial income tax credit 
amounts for senior persons with disabilities and caregivers and 
medical expenses will be fully indexed to inflation, Mr. 
Speaker. During this fiscal year as well, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
adding to the tax credits. Effective January 1, 2002, we will 
increase the child tax credit from $1,500 to $2,000, Mr. 
Speaker, and they say there’s nothing in it for families. I don’t 
know. Mr. Speaker, pretty simple document — I don’t know 
why they don’t understand it. 
 
We’ll increase the senior tax credit from $500 to $750, Mr. 
Speaker — another increase, more money in people’s pockets. 



312 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

They don’t seem to get it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also very, very important to note that 
Saskatchewan is the only province that has a universal child tax 
credit program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — The only province in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
Yet we live in the land of gloom and doom in their mind, Mr. 
Speaker. There seems to be problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what has happened to the members 
opposite, but in this year we continued tax cuts. We announced 
effective July 1, 2001, that small-business corporate income tax 
rate will be cut from 8 to 6 per cent. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 25 
per cent reduction. Yet they say nothing. 
 
Effective January 1, 2002, the amount of income eligible to be 
taxed at the small-business rate will rise from $200,000 to 
$300,000. We represent the same types of people. Your 
constituents get that benefit, just like mine do. 
 
And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, to deal with some of the 
problems we have in this province in dealing with professionals 
and retention of professionals, from now on all 
Saskatchewan-regulated professionals will be allowed to 
incorporate their practices, Mr. Speaker. Another move to help 
us retain those high-paid professionals that we need in this 
province to continue to prosper. 
 
We listen and we respond, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know about the 
members opposite. 
 
And I think the members opposite are learning something here. 
They’re sitting and they’re listening, at least some of them. 
That’s good. That is very good, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last year our province’s economy was more diversified than 
ever in our history, Mr. Speaker, and it grew by 3.4 per cent, 3.4 
per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan will continue to grow its economy, despite world 
pressures to the contrary, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll have a range 
of about 2 per cent over the next two years, due largely to the 
innovation of the people in our province, Mr. Speaker, and their 
hard work and effort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about being fiscally 
responsible. This government has delivered its eighth 
consecutive balanced budget. Eight balanced budgets in a row. 
That’s far, far different than the 1980s. The 1980s were a 
pattern that put us in massive debt, Mr. Speaker. This 
government has had to deal with that debt, and they’re doing it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in a year like this, when we have unusually 
high resource revenues, we didn’t go on a spending spree. No, 
Mr. Speaker. Fiscal responsibility made us consider the future, 
consider our children’s future, Mr. Speaker, and we put aside 
$775 million to deal with the instability and resource revenues, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

You can either have a little bit of a savings account or you can 
spend it all. The members opposite will spend it all. Not us, Mr. 
Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s true. The pattern 
of the past was they wouldn’t only spend 775 million, Mr. 
Speaker. They would have went in debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House don’t believe in that. 
Mr. Speaker, this government put substantial amounts of money 
into health care this year. Mr. Speaker, we put $229.5 million 
more in health care this year than last. That’s an increase of 
11.6 per cent, Mr. Speaker — 11.6 per cent. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
an investment in our future, in our children, and in our families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that included a 22 per cent increase for the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. The purchase of a second air 
ambulance to help people in rural Saskatchewan get to much 
needed care in our urban centres of Regina and Saskatoon. And 
they refer to that as simply throwing away money, Mr. Speaker. 
Trying to do things to help people of rural Saskatchewan reach 
our primary health care centres in Regina and Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They do not want to spend that money, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
know who they represent. Mr. Speaker, this government 
believes in spending money for the people and on the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we made an additional commitment of $95 million for the 
federal/provincial farm income program that works for 
producers. We put $95 million into a program because, Mr. 
Speaker, it may not have been the perfect program, we may not 
have liked all aspects of the program but, Mr. Speaker, we are 
not going to leave our farmers in the lurch. This government is 
going to do what we can within our fiscal capacity to help 
farmers. We’re not going to leave people in the lurch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they ask when did we change our mind. I tell you, 
we were trying to negotiate a better deal for our farmers and 
guess who sold us out not once but for the second time in two 
consecutive years — the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. I 
don’t know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we put a 35.5 per cent increase into agriculture 
this year. An unprecedented increase, Mr. Speaker. But the 
members opposite they find little, little did they look forward to 
in our budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a budget for the people and about the 
people. It is a budget that looks to the future needs of people. 
We, as a government, are working to reduce poverty and to help 
those most vulnerable in our society, Mr. Speaker. Things that 
they don’t care about over there, Mr. Speaker, they simply don’t 
care. We’re trying to ensure that all the people in Saskatchewan 
have a high quality of life, Mr. Speaker, not just those who are 
rich and well off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our vision is what is guiding us in our battle to 
reduce poverty. Our innovative strategy to reduce poverty has 
reduced the number of people on social assistance in each of the 
last six years, Mr. Speaker — fewer people on social assistance 
each of the last six years. Now the members opposite, they 
seem not to care about those things, Mr. Speaker, and we were 
the only province to reduce the incidence of child hunger. Mr. 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 313 

 

Speaker, we’re very proud of helping those most vulnerable in 
our society — our children. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they seem not to care. They seem 
hard-hearted about some of those things. They seem to care 
more about cutting taxes than helping people. They seem to 
think that cutting taxes, of course, puts money in some people’s 
pockets, but there’s a good portion of our society, Mr. Speaker, 
that don’t, don’t pay taxes and those are the most vulnerable in 
our society. And that is why you have to increase programs to 
deal with poverty, Mr. Speaker. Dealing with poverty is very, 
very important. 
 
This budget is not about limiting future obligations. It’s about 
creating future opportunities, Mr. Speaker. Things that they do 
not share . . . a shared vision with us, Mr. Speaker. We want all 
our citizens to enjoy a high quality of life. We want all our 
young people to build and live in a province of growth and 
prosperity. It’s about providing quality services to all the people 
of our province, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know 
if they’re sleeping over there or what, but I hope they’re 
learning something. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about how our province is 
connecting to the future, Mr. Speaker. We have three key 
strategic investments in the future, Mr. Speaker, in education, in 
transportation, and in technology, Mr. Speaker. Now the 
members opposite, of course they think you can build roads 
without having more employees, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know 
how they think it can be done but if you want to spend money 
on transportation, Mr. Speaker, somebody has to build the 
roads. There has to be more people to do the work. If you’re 
going to do more work, you have to have more people. 
 
(20:00) 
 
Now the members opposite, you know, they don’t seem to catch 
on to that. If you want to have better education, spend more 
money on education. You want to increase benefits for disabled 
children in schools, Mr. Speaker, that requires resources; it 
requires people to deliver those benefits, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 
investment in our children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, technology, they may not understand the 
benefits of technology yet, Mr. Speaker, but they will learn. 
Technology might go right over their head right now, Mr. 
Speaker, but we hope they will learn. 
 
We are going to put CommunityNet in, Mr. Speaker. By the 
spring of next year, 30 per cent of Saskatchewan schools will be 
hooked up to CommunityNet, Mr. Speaker. Virtually all schools 
will have the Internet access by 2005, Mr. Speaker. 
CommunityNet will provide students, no matter where they are 
located, with instant access to the world of learning, Mr. 
Speaker. To schools, to schools, we care about children in 
school. CommunityNet helps them access information, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to give CommunityNet to the children in 
all the schools in rural Saskatchewan. That’s our goal, Mr. 
Speaker. We are spending $2 million per year for the next three 
years to improve our connections to rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Three million in each of the next three years for 

schools to develop on-line learning resources, Mr. Speaker. All 
about our children, it’s all about our children learning and being 
better prepared to face the world of the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, we have put an historic amount, $950 million 
into Highways and Transportation over the next three years. 
That includes $312 million this year, Mr. Speaker, 25 per cent 
higher than last year. And Mr. Speaker, last year member after 
member from the opposition stood up and talked about our poor 
highways. Well this year, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to have to 
stand up and complain about the amount of construction on the 
highways and how it takes them a little longer to get home, Mr. 
Speaker. Well we can’t make them happy, but we’re trying, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, primary pavements will be upgraded to a 20-year 
life cycle, Mr. Speaker, a 20-year life cycle, Mr. Speaker. 
Pavements to a 25-year life cycle for regional pavements, Mr. 
Speaker, 25-year life cycle. Well the members opposite wanted 
us to do something in Highways, Mr. Speaker, and we’re doing 
it. But what did they do? They still complain it’s not enough. 
It’s not the way they wanted it. Mr. Speaker, it’s very difficult 
to please them at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and this government is committed to twinning the 
No. 1 Highway, west of Gull Lake, by the year 2004, Mr. 
Speaker. Four years ahead of schedule, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to have No. 1 West twinned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And over the next three years, Mr. Speaker, 800 kilometres of 
the province’s thin membrane surface will be upgraded to 
handle heavier traffic, Mr. Speaker. That’s a significant amount 
of highway rebuilt and upgraded, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about education. 
Education, one of the most important foundations of any 
government, economy, or our future, Mr. Speaker. We are 
going to spend more than $1.1 billion on education, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now I want to make a little comparison that the members 
opposite should be able to relate to because many of them 
helped create the problem that we had to face as a government 
in 1991. But in 1993-94 we spent $865 million on education, 
Mr. Speaker. The same year, interest on the debt was our 
second highest expenditure — $873 million, Mr. Speaker. Our 
debt was higher than our ability to pay for education, Mr. 
Speaker, in 1993-94. 
 
Today, this year, Mr. Speaker, we will be able to spend twice as 
much on education as we do on the public debt, Mr. Speaker. A 
phenomenal change in eight years. It shows what eight years of 
good government can do, Mr. Speaker, compared to nine years 
of very poor government . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker, K to 
12 education will receive a 9.9 per cent budget increase. The 
largest budget increase in many, many years. Foundation 
operating grants will increase by 16 per cent in two years, Mr. 
Speaker. A phenomenal increase, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite still complain it’s not enough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On one hand the members opposite want to freeze spending, 
Mr. Speaker. Can you believe that? Freeze spending on key 
services like health care, education, highways and cut taxes. Yet 



314 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

they stand everyday in the House and say those services aren’t 
good enough, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know. It just doesn’t add up, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
How can you spend more and cut the available dollars to spend, 
Mr. Speaker? It just doesn’t add up, Mr. Speaker. The only way 
that could happen is by running massive deficit and debt like we 
saw in the 1980s. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know but if it looks like a 
duck, walks like a duck, and quacks like a duck, to me it’s a 
duck. So the way they want to deal with the province, Mr. 
Speaker, is the sorry Tories use the same old story. I don’t 
know but it’s the same as the 1980s the way they want to do 
math, Mr. Speaker. If it looks like a Tory, walks like a Tory, 
talks like a Tory, it’s a Tory, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know. Mr. 
Speaker, it all adds up. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, our commitment is to more community 
schools to help children and their futures, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 
to freezing education spending for five years. We’re going to 
have 42 new community schools in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
42 more community schools, Mr. Speaker. That’s progress. 
That’s caring about our children, Mr. Speaker. It’s definitely 
not freezing education spending, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, still 
they’re learning. The Leader of the Opposition is at least 
listening. He’s learning. Their solution was zap; you’re frozen 
— to education, health care. 
 
Not ours, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to put 20 per cent more for 
special education for disabled students this year, Mr. Speaker; 
20 per cent more to help those most vulnerable in our society to 
do better, Mr. Speaker — things the members opposite should 
be happy about. In fact, in fact, business leaders are happy 
about it. But Mr. Speaker, they’re not happy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know. We’re going to put money into 
provincial training programs, Mr. Speaker. There will be 25,000 
more people involved in training programs this year than last 
year. 
 
I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, to me this is a budget that talks 
about progress in the future, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know what 
they talk about. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this was a budget that was built on a vision of 
the future, not about living in the past or complaining about 
what might be if we had all the money we wanted in the world, 
Mr. Speaker. It is a budget based in reality, founded in our 
province and for the people of our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are moving forward with a vision for the people of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, strengthened by our value that all people 
should benefit from our enhanced position, Mr. Speaker. We 
will progress by investing in education and job training, by 
creating a better tax system, cutting taxes for businesses, small 
businesses, Mr. Speaker, by preserving a public health care 
system, but the members opposite would just privatize, Mr. 
Speaker. By connecting to the information highway. By 
rebuilding our roads, Mr. Speaker. And by fighting poverty for 
the most vulnerable in our society, Mr. Speaker. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that leads me to the second part of my 
speech, Mr. Speaker. Now I want to talk a little bit about . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The second of ten parts. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Well, maybe 12. Maybe 12 parts to the speech. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about intercity comparisons of 
taxes and household charges in various cities across the 
province, Mr. Speaker. Now okay, Mr. Speaker, we put a nice 
chart in the budget for them so that they could understand it. It 
wouldn’t be too difficult. It’s simple. It gets all the 
explanations. We’re trying to help the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a single person at $25,000 total income — looking 
at their taxation, their living expenses and their household 
charges, Mr. Speaker — in the city of Vancouver the total is 
$12,663 per year, Mr. Speaker. In Calgary it’s 11,246; in 
Winnipeg it’s 9,370; in Toronto it’s 14,984; in Montreal it’s 
10,387; in Saint John it’s $10,013, Mr. Speaker; in Halifax the 
total cost is $12,124, Mr. Speaker; and in St. John’s, New 
Brunswick . . . or Newfoundland, pardon me, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
11,152. And what do you think it is in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker? The lowest in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. And the 
members opposite still complain about how difficult it is to live 
here. Mr. Speaker, it’s only $9,348 — the lowest in Canada, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. We’re trying to get them to 
understand this isn’t such a bad province to live in, Mr. 
Speaker. Now we have a couple other comparisons I think we 
need to run through, Mr. Speaker, so they understand the whole 
picture. 
 
Next we’re going to talk about a family at $50,000 total income, 
Mr. Speaker. In Vancouver their total taxes and living 
household charges are $23,214 in Vancouver, Mr. Speaker; in 
Calgary, $17,264, Mr. Speaker; in Winnipeg, $15,323, Mr. 
Speaker; in Toronto, $23,085; in Montreal, $16,897; in St. John, 
$16,040, Mr. Deputy Speaker; in Halifax, $18,797; in 
Charlottetown, $15,088; and in St. John’s, $15,463, Mr. 
Speaker. And what about Saskatchewan people? Well stay 
tuned because in Saskatchewan it is the lowest in Canada once 
again at $14,526. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Now, Mr. Speaker, if they haven’t caught on to 
the trend yet we’re going to talk about a family at $75,000 total 
income. Mr. Speaker, there is a pattern forming here. They will 
catch on I think when we get to the sixth and seventh example. 
In Vancouver, Mr. Speaker — in Vancouver, Mr. Speaker, it 
cost $26,005; in Calgary, $19,642, Mr. Speaker; in Winnipeg, 
$19,205, Mr. Speaker; in Toronto, $25,714, Mr. Speaker; in . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tory government there. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Tory government, that’s part of the problem. The 
member opposite is very intelligent over here. In Montreal, 
$23,289, Mr. Speaker; in St. John, 19,654; and Halifax, 
$22,438; in Charlottetown, 18,423; and St. John’s, 19,388. And 
in Saskatchewan what do you think it is, Mr. Speaker? Again 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

 

the lowest in Canada, Mr. Speaker, at $17,837. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(20:15) 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, that’s three examples, 
Saskatchewan having the absolute lowest costs, Mr. Speaker, 
but the members opposite talk about the doom and gloom and 
how bad everybody is off here. Mr. Speaker, I don’t know. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that this is a budget for the people 
of Saskatchewan and it’s clear that this government is trying 
very, very hard in very difficult times to meet the needs of the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Now we didn’t have 
easy times. This government inherited a terrific debt in the 
1990s. We’re able to deal with that debt and build a solid 
foundation, Mr. Speaker, for the future. 
 
And through building that solid foundation for the future, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s through that foundation and through the desire of 
this government that they are able to now — now start to turn 
the corner and provide some of those essential services with 
new resources that have been difficult over the last decade. First 
you have to get your house in order and then you can spend for 
the future of our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, because of the great work of this 
government, I stand very proudly to say I will not support the 
amendment of the members opposite and will support the 
budget. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
honoured to stand in my place tonight to respond to the budget 
speech on behalf of the good people from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Before I proceed, I would like to take this opportunity to 
congratulate the member from Regina Sherwood and the 
member from PA (Prince Albert) Carlton on their respective 
positions as Deputy Speaker and Speaker. 
 
At times, those of us who work here in the legislature take the 
Speaker’s presence not only for granted but perhaps also as an 
annoyance at times, getting in the way of some perfectly logical 
arguments and discussions we have with the members opposite. 
At times, Mr. Speaker, I’d want to believe, were it not for 
untimely interventions, we may be able to convince the 
government members of the error of their ways. 
 
We in opposition continue to hope that the democratic system 
as we know it will weave its magic in this Assembly and before 
long perhaps the hon. members opposite will just throw in the 
towel. Then we in the Saskatchewan Party will get on with the 
challenging and exciting task of allowing the people of this 
province to take hold of the vision and the opportunity that this 
province holds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also to congratulate the new Premier on 
his two elections — that of Premier and the member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale. The last position was won in a fair battle 
on March 19, 2001. The first title, that of Premier, will be more 
correctly debated when the Premier calls the next election. In 
the meantime, we ask the Premier to give it his best shot 
because the people of Saskatchewan deserve that. 
 
I also would like to welcome the new member from Regina 
Elphinstone. He must have been still in Utopia from his victory 
in the by-election when he made his maiden speech here in the 
Assembly. Being a senior member here gives me the right to 
perhaps warn the member that some of his statements have left 
him marked as fair game the next time he rises in the Assembly. 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps the member should be warned that if you 
want to give it, you also have to be able to take it. And I await 
the next round with impatient expectation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you may not have noticed it, but I didn’t respond 
to the Throne Speech this year for two very important reasons. 
Firstly, the verbal dexterity of my very capable colleagues ably 
voiced my opinion of your bland and directionless 
conglomeration of platitudes and promises. 
 
Secondly and more importantly to me, I spoke to constituents 
who asked me why I’d even want to bother. They wondered 
why the people of Saskatchewan were paying their elected 
people to stand in their place for a week to debate a nothing 
speech. After studying the volumes of verbiage the members 
opposite spouted about the speech, I’m amazed to realize that 
no one on the government side of the House realized what was 
missing in the Throne Speech. It was so obvious and you just 
didn’t see it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the people of Saskatchewan wanted to hear 
was a vision. They wanted to hear a plan for the future. The 
government was so busy looking for the trees, they just didn’t 
see the forest. They can’t or didn’t see the big picture. They 
didn’t see what . . . or tell people what was going to happen in 
the next five years, the next 10 years. That’s what people in this 
province need. They need a hope and a goal and a dream, and it 
just wasn’t there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Sadly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that lack of goal, that dreamless, 
visionless theme, was noticeable again in the budget speech. 
The closest thing to a compliment about the budget was, it was 
a good first step but what’s next? Where is the plan? Where is 
the direction and where is the vision of this government? 
 
There was one underlying obvious philosophy that frightened 
me last Friday, and that was the addition of 570 new 
government positions. It clearly shows what the NDP lack in 
vision they’re going to try and make up for in size of 
government. Bigger government, more bureaucracy to invade 
the citizens’ lives here in this province. That’s supposedly your 
answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan has approximately 
one million people. That’s about the same number we’ve had 
for the last 50 years. I’m wondering how many people it took to 
run the province 50 years ago when we had the million people. 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe we have 6,700 fewer people than 
we had just one year ago. So I’m wondering if anyone can give 
me one logical reason why we need 570 more people to govern 
6,700 fewer people, keeping in mind of course there are 6,700 



316 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

fewer people to pay the additional $30 million of the wages for 
those extra 570 people. 
 
I should have realized this was going to happen when the 
government announced their changes to the summer 
employment program. That employment program only allowed 
people who work for . . . bureaucrats to actually hire young 
people. That’s their way of actually thinking they can grow the 
economy is to train people from government. Small business 
just does not fit in with the NDP philosophy of governing. You 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I should probably save my breath to 
cool my coffee rather than try to explain that recycling 
government wages does not grow the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I spend the greater part of the evening 
telling you what I don’t like about this budget, I’m going to 
spend a few minutes telling you about one aspect of the budget 
that I do applaud. The program government is continuing and 
perhaps improving deals with one of society’s sad and grave 
problems — fetal alcohol syndrome and fetal alcohol effect. 
 
As a mother and a grandmother I am saddened and appalled at 
the statistics on the number of children born with FAS (fetal 
alcohol syndrome) and FAE (fetal alcohol effects). This 
syndrome which does irreparable organic brain damage to an 
unborn child through no fault of their own is 100 per cent 
preventable. Mothers that consume alcohol during pregnancy 
are at a very high risk of bringing a child into the world with a 
problem that will detrimentally affect the mental growth of that 
child all their life; a problem that will cause their families, the 
community, and society heartache for that child’s entire life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I implore all members, or Deputy Speaker, I 
implore all members to read a recent article written on FAS and 
FAE entitled, “Born on a Bottle, Drunk for Life”. It is the 
heart-wrenching story of a mother who came to the sad 
realization that by drinking when she was expecting she had 
deprived a child of the opportunity to live a normal life. She had 
sentenced that child to a lifetime of disconnection with the 
world, a world where there is no relationship between action 
and consequences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members will know that there is really no way to 
diagnose FAE. We have read lately of the attempts of one of 
our judges to deal with the victims of FAS and it was decided 
that the problem had to be dealt with in this Assembly, not by 
the courts. It’s up to each one of you in this Assembly to work 
towards a solution. 
 
There is no way to tell how many children in Saskatchewan are 
affected by FAS or FAE, but stats say that it is probably one in 
a thousand. We do know that we have more than our share of 
babies at risk in this province. And we also know that the 
financial cost to society through our health, social services, 
justice, and education system is very, very high. Estimations 
run as high a $3 million per child. 
 
Your government has recognized the problem in the last three 
budgets. Nationally and internationally work is being done not 
only on prevention of FAS and FAE, but dealing with the 
children who are already battling the syndrome. The task may 
seem daunting but the key word in the whole issue is 
preventable. This is not a political issue; this is another issue 

dealing with our children. Hopefully, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
money laid out in this budget will take some concrete actions, 
some ground-breaking steps both on the prevention side of the 
issue as well as the program and training side of the issue to 
help children with FAS and FAE. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the major areas of increased spending in 
the budget was in education. The budget laid out plans to spend 
an additional $33.7 million a year on education. That’s a 
laudable goal indeed, especially in light of the fact that it will 
require $32 million just to keep the status quo from last year. 
 
I heard the member opposite saying a few minutes ago that 
there was an increase in education. I believe he said it was 9 per 
cent, but the book, the budget book, says it was 7.9 per cent. 
But the member failed to tell everyone in the Assembly that 
there was actually $375 million taken out of education since 
1991 by your government. And you know where that came 
from — the taxpayers of this province. Right on the backs of 
the property taxpayers of this province, we’re pay . . . they paid 
for education, tried to backfill, and now all of a sudden you can 
put a few pennies in and pat yourself on the back saying life is 
wonderful. Well the problem laid with your government in the 
first place. 
 
The SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) has 
estimated that the teachers’ salary increases, support staff 
increases, additional utility costs, transportation costs, and 
supply costs will leave about one and a half million dollars to 
begin implementing the recommendations of the role of the 
school; or as the Minister of Education commented, it was the 
first step in reversing the 40/60 split. I’m sure that the members 
opposite noticed that I said “or” because you can’t have it both 
ways. 
 
Last year the Minister of Education tried to say . . . spend the 
same money two and three different times. I’m saying that you 
either are spending the money on programming or you are 
reversing the 40/60 split with the same dollars. You can’t do 
both. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new property reassessment will have a huge 
impact on education. Many school divisions won’t know how 
the budget will affect them until they work through the 
assessment and the pupil enrolment. Last year there were 44 
school divisions out of the 100 that received less than the 40/60 
split. With the higher assessment this year, will the number of 
zero-grant school divisions increase? I’m not sure if your 
government knows the answer yet but until you start telling 
people that you’ve really helped them, find out what higher 
assessment is going to be doing to them. 
 
This question will not be answered for two or three weeks until 
the boards have the opportunity to do the math but I’m sure by 
then we will be hearing from them. 
 
The small schools grant was reduced in the budget so at first 
blush there was a concern about the number of schools that are 
in jeopardy of closing. I know that my office has had a number 
of calls and I’m sure yours has too. The schools in our 
constituencies are saying we may not be able to remain open. 
 
But in the area of capital funding, there was not one extra dollar 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 317 

 

allocated beyond last year’s budget commitment. This is 
definitely sending a conflicting message to the announcement in 
the Throne Speech, and I’m going to quote from the Throne 
Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Supposedly the government is renovating, expanding, and 
building new schools in K to 12 and post-secondary education. 
And supposedly they’re providing additional schools in rural 
and urban and northern communities. But at the same time, Mr. 
Speaker, there isn’t one extra penny put in for capital funding. I 
don’t know how that’s going to be accomplished. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget has not 
addressed the fact that the Minister of Education’s own 
department has indicated we’re going to be losing 30,000 
students over the next eight years. There isn’t one way that you 
can just departmentalize this government and say this is 
Education’s problem, this is Health’s problem, this is Social 
Services problem. It’s everybody’s problem. Until you start 
working together, we’re not going to be able to solve it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister again may need reminding of 
the importance of schools in community. In fact the Minister in 
charge of Rural Revitalization may want to set up a lengthy 
meeting with the Minister of Education to ensure that this point 
is driven home. We cannot close schools and at the same time 
revitalize the community. The school is the heart of a 
community, whether it’s in urban Saskatchewan or rural 
Saskatchewan. People’s lives revolve around their children, 
wherever their children are, and if you force the kids to move 
from the community, the community will die. 
 
One of the biggest fears of school divisions across the province 
came from the rumour that the government was considering 
removing the industrial/commercial assessment from local 
divisions and taking the funds directly into government coffers. 
This, of course, would be the preliminary step towards 
government control of the assessment like our neighbours to the 
west have done. Not everything Alberta does is right, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. This is for the information of the members 
opposite. 
 
Removing the ability to raise money through local taxation 
removes local autonomy from the boards. Financial decision 
making at local levels, whether it’s school boards or 
municipalities, is the most cost-effective and true 
value-for-money way to gather and disperse tax dollars. There 
is no way the government bureaucracy can collect and spend 
money more efficiently than a local board. They have the 
hands-on knowledge of the community, and they can adjust 
their spending to coincide with the needs of the people and the 
dollars available. All school boards, as well as the opposition, 
will be paying . . . watching for any signs of this government 
infringing on their right to tax — industrial, commercial, or any 
other category. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the recommendations of the Role of the School 
Task Force set out a powerful plan for change. Most of these 
changes we support wholeheartedly, and I expect we’ll debating 
the few that cause concern here in the House. In the mean time, 
the Minister of Education should be in his office right now 
setting out his arguments for getting the additional $43 million 
he’s going to need next year if he’s going to put his money 

where his mouth is, by accepting the recommendations of the 
Role of the School. 
 
(2030) 
 
Unless of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he’s no longer Minister 
of Education, or minister of anything, which brings up the issue 
of coalition government and its status or non-status depending 
on your viewpoint. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from North Battleford, 
supposedly the only Liberal in the House, continues his attack 
on the Saskatchewan Party. Of course this may well be his part 
of the political aspirations to be the new Leader of the Liberal 
Party. But there are many of us, myself included, who are free 
enterprise individuals with a social conscience who take great 
offence to the member’s acquisition . . . accusations that we are 
mean-spirited people. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would like the member for North 
Battleford to give me a few examples of what he considers to be 
mean spirited by this party. Wanting people to have a job? 
Wanting every able-bodied person in the province to have a 
well-paying job to give him a feeling of self-worth and 
confidence. Is that mean spirited? Is it mean spirited to believe 
that God created men as equals and everyone should have the 
luxury to explore their own goals? I challenge the member from 
North Battleford to give us of mean-spirited policies. Unless of 
course he was just spouting political rhetoric. 
 
If that’s the case, then his leader has had too much of an effect 
on him and he should just reach inside and find the personal 
strength it would take to admit that Liberals are alive and well 
in Saskatchewan and living within the Saskatchewan Party. 
Their ideas are not only heard here but they are listened to and 
they are in the plans for the next election and the next 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Kelvington-Wadena are interested in 
hearing about the money allocated within the budget for 
highways. My colleague from Cypress Hills will undoubtedly 
go into each detail and each aspect of the department but my 
constituents would like to remind the minister that 
Kelvington-Wadena is a long way from No. 1 Highway where 
the twinning will be done. 
 
We understand the importance of twinning the highway and we 
are horrified when we hear of the many accidents and deaths in 
the area. But, Mr. Speaker, we need highways as well in 
Kelvington-Wadena. Our many businesses and our tourist 
facilities require immediate improvement of the highway and in 
order to remain viable. It’s not good enough to get individual 
companies to pay for their share of the highway. Some 
companies just can’t afford it. 
 
In the area of health care we have only one question to ask. By 
adding more dollars, will you just be throwing good money 
after bad? The member from Canora-Pelly pointed out that 
really there wasn’t $200 million put into the budget this year. If 
you look at the mid-term report there was an additional $35 
million thereabouts put into the budget over last year. So 
touting 200 and some million dollars is not the correct message 
to be sending out to the people in this province. My colleague 



318 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

from Melfort-Tisdale will no doubt raise the argument that 
you’re preparing for it this time. 
 
In the area of agriculture and rural revitalization I’d like to 
remind the members opposite that if they wouldn’t have made a 
determined effort over the last 10 years to drain the life out of 
rural Saskatchewan, you wouldn’t have to revitalize it. 
 
Rural areas are still receiving lip service from this government. 
We now have three separate departments to deal with the 26 
seats the NDP no longer hold. Maybe their goal is to hire 
enough people to just give everyone out there a job, so they 
think they’re . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, we know that the 
provincial coffers cannot compete against the coffers of the 
United States and Europe when it comes to the agricultural 
crisis. We know that long-term subsidies are not the answer. 
The answer lies within the power of the provincial government 
to raise the level of the bar and to bring the issue to such a point 
of importance that the federal government will take notice. 
 
Former premier, Mr. Romanow, said when he was in opposition 
that the true measuring stick of a premier was that if he could 
go to Ottawa and bring money back for the farmers. I know that 
that former premier didn’t do it, and I’m waiting to see if the 
Premier that we have right now can actually live up to that 
measuring stick. But I’m suggesting to the Premier that he goes 
to Ottawa. Don’t go to Ottawa and ask if they have a plan. Go 
to Ottawa with the plan. Tell them what has to be done. We 
have the best, most entrepreneurial, most determined farmers in 
Canada. In fact we have the most farmers in Canada. Use their 
collective wisdom, and come up with a short-term solution. And 
I underline while the long-term safety net is being designed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we just can’t say that value added is the solution 
and that we just have to wait until all those industries are in 
place to save our farmers because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
farmers won’t be here. 
 
You can relate their story to the horror story your government 
designed with the wellness model for health. Everyone knows 
that staying well is better and more cost-effective than fixing 
people when they’re sick. But it didn’t work to say; we’re going 
to close the hospital because we have a wellness system. We 
have to have people believing in it. We have to have people 
actually living a wellness style, and then they wouldn’t need the 
hospitals. 
 
The same thing is true in agriculture. Value added is the answer, 
but in the meantime, we just can’t ignore the problem because 
farmers cannot hang on. Value added isn’t there yet, and we 
need some interim answers. Our farmers are not getting it from 
the government, and they’re not getting it from AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) or from CFIP 
(Canadian Farm Income Program), and you’re killing three 
generations of farmers with one fell swoop. And just standing 
there, wringing your hands and saying, I don’t know what to do, 
isn’t the answer. 
 
By the way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, farmers are asking for high 
speed Internet. They are asking for cell phone coverage, but it’s 
not going to save their farms. The members opposite just don’t 

get the real, big problems. That’s part of the solution, but it’s 
not the big one. I guess it’s again an issue of not having a 
long-term plan, so instead you just are 
kept busy spinning your wheels. Keep busy with details, rather 
than designing the broad plans and letting individuals fill in the 
details. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to further address the new Department of 
Rural Revitalization, but like everyone else in this province I 
have no idea of what it’s going to do, what its mandate is, or 
who will evaluate the outcome. Does it mean it fails if we lose 
more schools, more communities, and more farmers? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the one small area of government no one really 
talks about is the Women’s Secretariat. It has an awesome 
responsibility, which will be made even more difficult with the 
intention noted in this budget to decrease the staff by one. The 
mandate of this secretariat is broad. How can one office look 
after all the responsibilities given to it? 
 
The government is giving lip service to the whole issue of 
women in this province by relegating all the problems, policy 
advice, and new proposals to a handful of women and expecting 
them to carry on women’s issues for the whole government. 
Luckily, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re women. 
 
I congratulate the women from the secretariat for the successful 
conference they just had. They did the government proud, even 
if the government doesn’t do the women of this province proud. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to . . . before I take my place, I’d like to 
remind the Minister of Municipal Affairs, the member for 
Melville, though although he’s told the Assembly that 
everything is wonderful and peachy-keen in Melville, he must 
know that his ministerial responsibility has failed the people in 
this province. He has not addressed the real concern of 
municipal governments who have been crying for years for the 
money to be able to keep up with their infrastructure program. 
 
And I’m asking that this minister, who still would like the 
people of this province to believe that he’s a Liberal, decide to 
do the right thing, to vote for the amendment, to know that the 
money that should be put into municipal government instead of 
building new jobs, 570 new jobs for this province, would be 
better spent out for the municipal department that he’s 
responsible for. 
 
Before I’d like to take my place, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like 
to say big government is not the answer to Saskatchewan 
problems. In fact, the conclusion of the Saskatchewan people is 
that the NDP is not the answer to Saskatchewan’s problems. 
Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the 
amendment and I will not be supporting the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
want to say it’s indeed a privilege for me to stand and support 
our eighth balanced budget, the first budget under our new 
Premier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to speak against the 
amendment that has been proposed by the members opposite. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, tonight we’ve heard a lot about vision, and 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 319 

 

one thing I would have to say is I was listening and trying to 
glimpse a visionary statement from the members opposite. 
Nothing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’ve not shared their vision 
— unless you call tearing down and trash-talking Saskatchewan 
a vision, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They have not talked about, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that you cannot have a vision unless you 
establish values. And it’s very clear, Deputy Speaker, what 
we’ve established in this budget, a stark contrast, a contrast 
between our vision of connecting to the future, connecting with 
communities, and connecting with people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and they, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I could say a lot tonight about that, but I think I’ll save 
some of my comments for tomorrow because I would really like 
to share with many people in Saskatchewan the glimpse I have 
of the debate that’s been unfolding about this budget already. 
And many of the faces opposite who were here pre-1991 when I 
would come in as member of city council and want to talk about 
issues . . . So they may say they’re not Tories, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but they’ve cut their teeth on the right-wing 
philosophy of the Tories of the government before 1991, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I want to share that with the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So at this point, I think I’ll save those comments for tomorrow, 
and I would now move to adjourn debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 20:41. 
 
 


