















































Hansard: June 25, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  
 June 25, 2001 
 

 

2125 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I have 
one official with me this evening, Darcy McGovern, with 
legislative services. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Many of our members have made the points of their concern 
about this Bill and in the second reading debates. And I think 
that what I’d asked the minister at this stage is for him to 
explain and justify why he feels it’s important for the third party 
be treated any differently than it has in the past. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think when I 
raised under my comments under second reading on Bill 33, 
that what this does is really brings this legislation as it treats the 
caucus funding into the new century. We have never under this 
funding formula had a coalition government. The former Act 
did not represent this, represent this change. It didn’t 
contemplate it. 
 
So what it did is, the amendments brought it up to speed. So 
what it does was allow the third party to be entitled to the same 
resource allowance for staff, supplies, stationery and services 
for the Leader of the Third Party, whether he’s in opposition or 
whether it’s in a coalition situation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
realistically speaking do you think there’s the same onus or 
responsibility of holding a government accountable when 
you’re part of that government as it would be if you were in the 
opposition in the traditional methodology? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think it’s fair to say to the 
member that I personally have never been in a third party 
position. I don’t ever plan on being there. Now it may be that at 
some point in time, members on that side will experience third 
party position and some have. 
 
But I would think it’s fair as a member of a caucus to suggest 
that a critique and input from constituents — input from 
constituencies, input from party members with respect to 
proposed legislation as an example — it would be very much 
appropriate for the third party to have the kind of staff that the 
Leader of the Opposition would because that’s the formula, and 
that’s how it’s based. The only difference is now the third party 
is treated in a coalition situation the same way they would be if 
they weren’t. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee report the Bill without amendment, and I would like 
to thank the member for his insightful questions, and I’d also 
like to thank Mr. McGovern for his support this evening. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Land Surveyors and Professional 
Surveyors Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I’d ask the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
introduce the following officials to the legislature. On my right, 
Fraser Nicholson who is the president and chief executive 
officer of the Information Services Corporation. On my left, 
Ron Hewitt . . . on my right, Ron Hewitt, senior vice . . . shall 
we start again. Senior vice-president and chief operating officer 
of the Information Services Corporation. 
 
Behind me is Darcy McGovern, Crown counsel for legislative 
services, who was here just a minute ago. Further to the right is 
Mary Ellen Wellsch, who is senior counsel with the LAND 
(Land Titles Automated Network Development Project) Project, 
Information Services Corporation. At the back over there is 
Kathy Hillman-Weir who is registrar of titles in the land titles 
registry. And beside her is Ed Desnoyers who is controller of 
surveys, Information Services Corporation. I’d ask you all to 
welcome them. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to 
the minister and his officials for this evening and the discussion 
on Bill No. 20. 
 
I’d like for the minister, if you would please, to clarify two 
terms that are fairly significant I believe in this Act, and that’s 
primary and secondary monuments — exactly what they are; 
what makes one a primary one and what makes one a secondary 
one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, I think the member raised 
the question of primary surveys rather than monuments. Is that 
what he is referring to? Primary surveys and secondary surveys. 
 
The primary survey is the original grid survey system 
developed during the 1800s. Originally . . . the original map 
out, if you wish, of the province, and the secondary surveys are 
any subdivisions, consolidations, anything which has taken 
place in relation to that since. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I am glad the minister is here this evening, I 
must say, with his officials to give us some good answers. 
 
This particular Bill is basically under consultation with land 
survey groups and the legal community. And what would be the 
significant change of this Bill as has been presented to us here 
this evening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asks the purpose of the 
Bill. He will recall that The Land Surveys Act, 2000 was passed 



2126 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

last year and this provides for some further consequential 
amendments to further facilitate the implementation of the 
LAND project flowing from consultations and so on which 
have taken place. 
 
For example, the Bill provides amendments to be made to The 
Land Surveys Act, 2000 to clarify the extent to which survey 
records in the registry may be searched and to replace the 
existing sections regarding primary and secondary monuments 
with one section applying to all monuments. 
 
So some fairly technical amendments primarily to The Land 
Surveys Act passed last year. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe 
essentially, because this is largely a housekeeping thing, 
straightening out some of the situations from the previous Bill, 
we have no more questions on Bill No. 20. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(19:15) 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2001 
 

The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister to introduce any 
new officials he may have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — No, the officials are the same, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. A term used in Bill 
No. 19, I was wondering if you could sort of clarify, and that’s 
the term that’s called an abstract registry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question 
originally, as the member will appreciate, the land in the 
province was all Crown owned. When the grid system was 
established the Crown land, in the process of settling the 
province, transferred land to other individuals. But in the event 
that land is not being transferred in that way, that is the abstract 
the member is referring to. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I’d just ask for a bit more clarification on 
that. The definition of abstract was anything that doesn’t fit 
underneath the one heading has all been considered abstract. 
Okay, I got a nod on that, so I’ll take for granted that’s a yes. 
 
I note that both the Land Titles registry and the abstract 
directory are public registries for people in Saskatchewan and 
that information in both of these is the property of the 
Saskatchewan government. The section also indicates that 
access to and disclosure of information in the Land Titles 
registry can only be provided in accordance with the Act and 
regulations. What exactly are those regulations at present that 
allow for that disclosure? 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member I think raises the 
question of . . . well a couple of questions. The proper use for 
the information which is contained in the registries and the 
nature of those registries which are public registries and are 
therefore designed to share as much information about the items 
contained within them as possible. On the other hand, of course 
the application or the enforcement or the procedures whereby 
this is conducted, conducted only under the rule . . . only in 
compliance with the rules under the Act to ensure that in fact 
that information is available for the purposes for which it was 
intended. The registry is public and consequently is accessible 
by the public in this way. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and that’s I think 
the only questions we had on Bill No. 19. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 35 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 36 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To amend this 
clause: 
 

Amend Clause 134(1.1)(a) of The Planning and 
Development Act, 1983, as being enacted by Clause 36 of 
the printed Bill, by striking out “of survey”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 36 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 37 to 44 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 45 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I have an amendment, Mr. Chair: 
 

Amend subsection (2) of Clause 45 of the printed Bill by 
adding “, 23” after “sections 20”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 45 as amended agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2001 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister. Do you have 
any new officials to introduce? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — No, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I believe, having 
gone through the other questions dealing with land surveys this 
evening, we basically covered our positions on this one as well. 
So I have no questions on this one at all. 
 
Clauses 1 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2127 

 

Bill No. 43 — The Police Amendment Act, 2000 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister, and if he has 
any new officials, please introduce them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m joined by 
Murray Sawatsky, behind me, who is the director of police 
commission services in the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Yes, thank you, and welcome to the 
minister’s new officials. I think on this particular Bill we’ll 
probably have a number of more questions than we had on 
some of the other ones. 
 
There’s quite a number of changes that take place here and I 
guess I’m interested in knowing what kind of research input 
was done and what kind of input came in and from where into 
these changes, and particularly, were the police forces involved 
in some of the changes that are here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asks the extent to which 
consultations took place leading up to this Bill, and indeed the 
Bill is the product of an extensive consultation process with the 
police community. And consulted were the legal counsel for 
municipal police boards, municipal police boards themselves, 
the Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police, the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Police Officers, the Saskatchewan 
Police Commission, hearing officers, public complaints 
investigator, the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan, and the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 
 
(19:30) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — To a large part we’re dealing here with 
methods of investigation and disciplining members of the police 
for the province. And I’m wondering were these changes 
basically initiated — precipitated is probably a better word — 
by specific incidents that have occurred in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question, 
The Police Act, as the member will know, is a little over 10 
years old. And, in response to concerns raised and suggestions 
made by the Police Officers Association and by police boards, 
some changes were made to make the process more efficient, 
more effective. Rather than a wholesale, new process, it’s a 
process of updating and responding to concerns raised by 
affected parties. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Sort of moving in a bit of a different 
direction on the same topic, in what specific ways was the 
present statute deficient when it comes to investigating and 
disciplining? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well one change here, Mr. Speaker, 
relates to the possibility of mediation. Police officer 
associations were concerned to see if when charges were laid — 
disciplinary charges were laid — whether or not the matter 
could be dealt with in the mediation process rather than through 
the other — the normal adversarial process. And over, after 
discussion, the chiefs of police were prepared to, to support 
such a move. So we now, for example, then have moved from a 

process where mediation was not possible to where mediation 
is, can take place if a chief of police wishes to refer that matter 
to a matter of disciplinary investigation to a mediation. 
 
So that there is an attempt to try and to find some middle 
ground, some solution to the process, and then present that to 
the, the complaints investigator. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, it’s been rather 
interesting. Usually I’m accused of having a barrage of 
questions. Today I’m getting a barrage of answers. So I’m 
getting about two or three of my questions answered with one 
set of answers. 
 
Had this, this Bill 43 as we are going to be passing it tonight I 
believe been in place, would anything different have occurred in 
Saskatoon with the dismissal of the police chief that we heard 
of this week? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, it’s not entirely clear to me the 
process followed in Saskatoon other than what I have seen in 
the newspapers. But the short answer to the member’s question 
is that there are no changes made in this Bill to the contractual 
relationship between the . . . a police board and the chief of 
police. So in that sense, there would be no changes flowing 
from this piece of legislation in terms of the way in which a 
matter of that sort could be handled. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. That concludes the 
questions we have on Bill No. 43. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I take your nod 
to be to go ahead, and I’m selflessly not to go ahead, it’s to sit 
down and wait till you’ve said something. 
 
To my left is Andrea Seale, from the Department of Justice, and 
behind me is Ron Kruzeniski, who is the Public Trustee, with 
his dog, Toby. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and welcome to the minister’s 
officials. And I heard a number of people on this side 
expressing admiration for what apparently is a yellow Lab as 
contrary to a golden Lab. I don’t really think that individual 
who was talking about that knew much about dogs but maybe 
he does. So welcome here. 
 
Bill No. 35, Public Trustee Amendment Act, as you’re probably 
well aware the auditor’s report is very critical of what’s been 
happening in that particular department and I’m wondering 
does Bill 35 address the concerns mentioned in the auditor’s 
report, and if so in what ways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — This Bill, Mr. Chair, deals with 



2128 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

personal guardianship and not with the measures raised or not 
with the issues raised by the Provincial Auditor. But I would 
say that the matters raised by the Provincial Auditor relating to 
a period of time some time ago have all been addressed by two 
or three small items which will be addressed . . . which are in 
the process of being addressed and will be addressed by the 
summertime. So steps have been taken to ensure that the issues 
raised by the public . . . by the Provincial Auditor have been 
addressed. 
 
This piece of legislation deals with the powers of the Public 
Trustee. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. There’s one particular part that I 
think raises a fair bit of fear in some people, and myself 
included, and that’s I believe, Section 40.9 that talks about the 
public guardian and trustee may apply to a judge for warrant 
authorizing him to search a premises for a record the officer 
needs. 
 
That’s a fairly scary piece of legislation, I think, for Canadians 
when we sort of expect that these things will be in our home 
and most of us, rightly or wrongly, do consider our home our 
castle and this seems like it can just be broken into without even 
having the first option to turn over those documents. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises the question of the 
Public Trustee’s ability to obtain documents when those 
documents are refused by the person from whom the Public 
Trustee is seeking them. And so, Mr. Chair, in response to the 
member’s question, the person would first be asked to provide 
. . . document the record in question. 
 
If that person refuses or neglects to produce it, the Public 
Trustee may apply to a justice of the peace or a judge of the 
provincial court for a warrant authorizing him or her to enter 
and search any premises and to take possession of the record in 
question. But first there needs to be a refusal, and secondly 
there needs to be an application to a justice of the peace or a 
judge, and then the entry can take place. 
 
So I think, Mr. Chair, there are numerous safeguards, numerous 
protections, in that section. And plainly the provisions in that 
section would only be pursued in the event of the person in 
question not co-operating with the Public Trustee. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. In the past year approximately 
how many times has the department been refused documents 
that they have felt they needed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — At the present time, Mr. Chair, the 
Public Trustee doesn’t have the power to respond in the event 
that a person refuses to hand over a record which the Public 
Trustee needs. 
 
So what would happen in those situations now is that there 
simply wouldn’t be an investigation conducted by the Public 
Trustee. This permits an investigation in the event that 
documentation isn’t handed over when the Public Trustee 
requests it. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in 
your last response you made a number of reference to the 

justice of the peace. And I think you will appreciate that there 
has been more and more responsibilities delegated to justices of 
the peace over the last while. 
 
And a lot of these are individuals in communities that are 
having to make a commitment in order to stay in the community 
so that they can be called upon — often times there’ll only be 
one justice of the peace in the community, and often times there 
will be only one justice of the peace within a 60 to 100 mile 
radius as well. 
 
And as you have indicated, there are more and more 
responsibilities being added . . . or more expectations being 
added to the role of a Justice of the Peace. And one of the things 
that I think really needs examined is the remuneration of the 
Justice of the Peace. The remuneration I guess at this point 
could be best described as a pittance, and while the training is 
being improved around the role of the Justice, and I think 
certainly the Justices are starting to feel more confident in terms 
of their ability to be able to do their job. Is there any plans in 
your department to review the remuneration of Justices, and if 
so, where is that at? 
 
(19:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I thank the member for the question 
and the member does raise an important issue of the workload 
of Justices of the Peace. He will know that many of them are 
called out in the middle of the night to respond to requests from 
police services and so on, and that many of them may not feel 
that the remuneration is as much as they would like. 
 
The department constantly is looking into how best to use 
Justices of the Peace, how many we need, and what 
remuneration they should receive. And the member is quite 
right that as time is going on we’re asking Justices of the Peace 
to do more things. We’re asking them to, in particular, respond 
to many minor offences and at times when judges aren’t 
available. So I can assure the member that these are matters 
which we are constantly looking at to ensure that our Justices of 
the Peace get paid appropriately for the work they do. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and I believe that concludes the 
questions that we had on Bill No. 35. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Public Trustee Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2001/Loi de 2001 apportant les 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée 
The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This job is 
probably seldom more fearful than when we’re asked to pass a 
piece of legislation with which one is not that comfortable and 
has a difficult time understanding, not because of the content 
but because of the language used. So we have no questions on 
Bill No. 36. 
 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2129 

 

And I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the 
minister and his officials that have been present here this 
evening. 
 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Prairie and Forest Fires 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
would like to introduce, to my immediate left, Stuart Kramer, 
who is my deputy minister. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good evening to 
the minister and welcome to Mr. Kramer. 
 
Mr. Chair, this Bill, Bill No. 44, puts the supporting legislation 
into place for the Forest Fire Contingency Fund. This Forest 
Fire Contingency Fund, however, was actually established last 
year. 
 
And I guess the first question I would have to the minister, Mr. 
Chair, is how is it that the Forest Fire Contingency Fund was 
established and that funds, monies from that fund, were 
expended without the supporting legislation last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
just wanted to advise the member that the allocation last year 
was provided and authorized by the budget, and this year of 
course it’s a separate Act and we are doing it through the 
legislative process. But clearly last year it was approved 
through the budget process. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, given that this 
now has . . . this fund now has legislative legitimacy, will the 
money actually be set aside physically? Will the $50 million be 
set aside and under what circumstances will expenditures from 
that fund be authorized? And at the end of the budget cycle, 
what will happen to any unused monies from that fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
That’s a very good question. I’ll point out that the amount that 
we are setting aside is 40 million; it’s not 50 million. 
 
And what happens is the Act will allow these funds to be rolled 
over from year to year. So the money that isn’t used last year 
will certainly be rolled over to this year . . . or sorry, this year 
will be rolled over to next year. And the circumstances in which 
we use that fund is any escape fires that are greater than a 
hundred hectares. And that’s when we initiate these funds for 
use. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I 
apologize, my error. The fund is in fact $40 million this year. It 
was $50 million last year. 
 

When I first addressed Bill 44, I raised some issues around the 
spending of firefighting monies in this province, Mr. Minister. 
And I indicated that I am aware of a review that was undertaken 
in Alberta that actually ended up saving the Government of 
Alberta and the Alberta taxpayers large amounts of money in 
terms of being able to, I guess, better streamline the whole 
forest firefighting operation. There were a number of areas 
where there were concerns around the health and safety of the 
firefighters themselves. There were instances of the agreements 
between the government and contractors not necessarily being 
monitored to the degree that they should have. Consequently 
money wasn’t always being spent in the best interest possible 
way. 
 
And I guess given now that we have a separately legislated $40 
million fund, and that is a considerable amount of money, are 
you and the government giving any thought whatsoever to 
undertaking a similar type of review in this province where 
perhaps if there were some efficiencies to be found and we 
could save some money through better monitoring, those kind 
of things, that that is something the government might be 
interested in doing. 
 
And then the other side of that is through the review in Alberta. 
As I indicated, they also found a number of concerns about the 
health and safety of the firefighters. So it would be in the best 
interests perhaps of those out there fighting the fires, as well, if 
such a review were to be undertaken. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, the question is then: are you considering or is 
the government and the department considering undertaking 
any review of this kind in the near future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the very 
good question. I just want to point out that one of the conditions 
of the $40 million that was granted for this Act was the Minister 
of Finance, and of course the entire cabinet, has asked that 
SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management) undertake on a constant basis ways and means in 
which we could improve our firefighting activities and to make 
sure that we always watch the bottom line. 
 
And the review that was done in Alberta . . . certainly there’s all 
kinds of lessons we learn from all kinds of jurisdictions. And 
after the very, very tough year in 1995 where Saskatchewan had 
a record fire season, we looked at how we fought fires. And a 
private consultant not only looked at the 1995 fire season but it 
also looked at the 1998 fire season which was of course also a 
difficult year. 
 
(20:00) 
 
And since those ’95 and ’98 forest fire seasons we looked at 
how we can improve this, and I guess the proof’s in the pudding 
because we have made some major changes in the past few 
years. I can tell you that Saskatchewan leads the nation in my 
opinion in terms of fire preparedness and fighting fire overall. 
 
In fact we’ve gone to a certain level in terms of our ability to 
fight fires that Alberta and BC (British Columbia) are now 
coming to Saskatchewan to investigate our fire program. So 
certainly the lessons of ’95 and the lessons of ’98 and having 
private consultants do an outside analysis in the manner in 



2130 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

which we fight fires and a few changes that we have made — 
major changes — is certainly paying dividends for the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
And as always every fire season teaches us new things and we 
are constantly on alert to make sure that we monitor how we 
spend this money and that we prepare for fire seasons. 
 
The Chair: — Will the minister please introduce his new 
official? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to 
introduce Dave Pelech. He’s with the forest fire management 
services. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to 
the new official. 
 
Mr. Minister, the new section 8.6 designates the financial 
reporting requirements, which are consistent with the financial 
reporting requirements of other government special purpose 
funds. I wonder if you could just give us a brief overview of 
what those requirements are with respect to government special 
purpose funds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Just to point out that there’ll be an annual report . . . a separate 
annual report as a result of this fund, and secondly that there’ll 
be an annual audit report done by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, in 
the new subsection 30(8) there are provisions for regulations to 
be developed for the size and nature of the fire to be fought, and 
it also indicates here that there are provisions for any other 
expenses not previously addressed. 
 
Firstly, Mr. Minister, could you give us an idea of what the 
regulations around the size and nature of the fire might be. And 
I know you have talked about that a little bit, but if you could 
perhaps expand on that, and could you also indicate what those 
other expenses not previously addressed might be as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question 
again. I point out that as you’ve indicated that the reason, or the 
regulations point out that we use the fund if there is a fire 
greater than 100 hectares. And terms of the other expenditures, 
it’s standard clause. We don’t anticipate any other cost, but we 
anticipate the regular forest fire fighting cost would be 
associated with the fund, and I’ll point out again that the other 
expenses, primarily a standard clause for any cost that we may 
not anticipate . . . but again as I mentioned, we don’t anticipate 
these costs, but sometimes things do come up, and of course we 
don’t anticipate these, and we would minimize that as well. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister and Mr. Chair, 
that concludes the questions that we have on Bill No. 44, but I 
would like to first of all thank the minister and thank his 
officials. 
 
And then I think on occasion, the government is sometimes 
critical of our perceived inability to be supportive of certain 
initiatives that they might take, and I would just like to take this 
opportunity in this instance to congratulate the minister and the 

government on establishing the Forest Fire Contingency Fund. I 
think with the unpredictable nature of forest fires and the degree 
of difficulty that governments have had over the years in terms 
of trying to budget around that unpredictability, I think setting 
aside a Forest Fire Contingency Fund of this nature is probably 
a really good idea, and hopefully it will allow that little bit of 
cushion that we do need in those years where there is maybe a 
little more difficulty than what we originally anticipated. 
 
So thank you to the minister, thank you to the officials, and I 
once again commend the government on establishing the Forest 
Fire Contingency Fund. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2001 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 50 — The Mineral Resources Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 11 – The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 3 – The Historic Properties Foundations Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2131 

 

Bill No. 34 – The Saskatchewan Natural Resources Transfer 
Agreement (Treaty Land Entitlement) 

Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 29 — The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund 

Amendment Act, 2001 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Land Surveyors and Professional 
Surveyors Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(20:15) 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Land Titles Amendment Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that the amendments be now read 
the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move that Bill No. 19 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 43 —The Police Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Public Trustee Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2001/Loi de 2001 apportant les 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée 
The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Prairie and Forest Fires 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 
 
Subvote (SR01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 35 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 2000-01 
General Revenue Fund 



2132 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

Saskatchewan Research Council 
Vote 35 

 
Subvote (SR01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 35 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 
 
Subvotes (PS01), (PS02), (PS06), (PS04), (PS03), (PS07) 
agreed to. 
 
Vote 33 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 
Subvotes (SP01), (SP02) agreed to. 
 
Vote 53 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
Subvotes (ER01), (ER02), (ER08), (ER15), (ER04) agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — Does the committee have leave to revert back to 
administration, (ER01), for questions? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To 
my extreme or to my immediate left is Stuart Kramer, deputy 
minister, and to my right is Bob Ruggles, the assistant deputy 
minister for programs, and directly behind me is Mr. Dave 
Phillips . . . sorry, Dave Phillips is to my right; Bob Ruggles is 
behind me. Bob is assistant deputy minister for programs, and 
Dave Phillips to my right is assistant deputy minister for 
operations. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good evening to 
the minister and welcome to his officials. I have just one 
question, and then I will be relinquishing the floor to my 
colleague from Shellbrook-Spiritwood. But the question relates 
to the general departmental inquiries that were made of your 
department quite some time ago, and we were wondering, are 
you prepared to table those this evening? Are they ready, and 
are you prepared to make them available this evening? 
 
(20:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The question . . . I just want to point 
out that we have prepared the information. We don’t have them 
tonight but we’ll have them very shortly for you. 
 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to you and to your officials tonight. 
 
I want to start off tonight where I left off on the last part of 
questioning and that’s in regards to CWD, chronic wasting 
disease. At the time when I was finishing off I remember asking 
a question regarding the number of deer that was shot around 
the Marsden area, and at that time there was 213. Of that 213 
there was 212 that tested negative but there was one that tested 
positive. 
 
At that time you had mentioned that the head was being sent 
down to Toronto, I believe, to the university down there for 
testing. Have you heard back from Toronto in regards to that 
deer head and what are the results? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the very 
important question. Just before I answer the question, Mr. 
Chairman, I want to introduce another official that joined me — 
Dennis Sherratt. And Dennis is the director of fish and wildlife 
branch. 
 
I’ll just point out what happens in terms of a suspicious head or 
a suspicious test, is we send the head to Ontario — Nipigon — 
and then we also forward the head to Colorado for second tests 
and a second opinion. And we do anticipate that that head will 
indeed be testing positive, and at this stage, the head is in 
Colorado, as we speak. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you for the answer, Mr. Minister. In 
regards to the deer head, I understand that it was another mule 
deer that was taken that was tested positive. If this does come 
back and that you say there’s a good chance that it will come 
back positive, is the department going to be going out again and 
taking some more animals in that area to see if they can find 
some more specimens that do test positive for that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Just 
before we go on to answer the question, I want to point out that 
we have been joined by another official. Lynn Tulloch is the 
executive director of corporate services. 
 
And the question that we have is . . . First of all, I want to really 
paint a very real picture of what’s been happening with chronic 
wasting. Over the last number of years — three to four years — 
we have tested 2,000 heads of different deer. And the good 
news, I guess in the sense of the 2,000, so far we’ve had one 
confirmed case and another case that is probably going to be 
confirmed as positive for chronic wasting. 
 
The other positive development I guess in the sense is that the 
second anticipated positive deer head was harvested within two 
miles of the first case. So we anticipate that the exposure may 
be localized to that particular area. And what we plan on doing 
is we plan on consulting with the landowners and the wildlife 
groups for an action plan this fall to try and look at reducing the 
herd and to also look at ways and means in which we could 
work co-operatively to address this fairly serious challenge to 
our wildlife population. 
 
So it certainly confirms our suspicion that it is out there and we 
want to test to make sure the prevalence we hope is not as great 
as some people might anticipate, but that work continues. 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2133 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for the answer. In 
regards to my other questions that I asked before, it was stated 
that the department, when they took the 213 animals, they were 
all of older age. In other words the older animals were taken, 
the younger ones were not taken, at that time. 
 
Now in concurrence that both animals were taken within a 
2-kilometre span, would it not be possible to take all the 
animals in an area, say 5 kilometres, to see if that problem is in 
one area or if it’s isolated problems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question 
and I thank you for the notion that a 5-mile radius would be 
adequate. It’s really an educational exercise event we’re 
undertaking here as well. 
 
And I’ll point out that while 5 miles is a fairly significant area, 
the Manitou Sand Hills, in which both these animals were found 
in, covers approximately a thousand square miles and, as you 
know, animals move freely. So the most effective ways and 
means in which we can depopulate the herd, it’s more effective 
to do so in the wintertime because that’s when the animals 
congregate. 
 
So this is the reason why our strategy now is to look at the 
easiest and the quickest way to depopulate the herds and winter 
is when they congregate, and certainly that’s where our window 
of opportunity is to depopulate the herd as much as we can. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. In 
regards to that, I did say 5 miles, but maybe even 5 kilometres 
would even help. 
 
I guess the path I’m going down in regards to that is the fact 
that CWD does spread. You’ve only taken the older animals to 
check and see if they’ve got it. There is nothing saying that the 
younger animals that are two-year-old or three-year-old or 
four-year-olds would have CWD. 
 
Therefore, in order to help prevent the continuing spread of this 
disease, would it not be in the best interests to continue with the 
slaughtering of those animals, but only in a small sector of the 
area, and take out everything at that time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I just wanted to point out there that the whole notion that the 
5-kilometre radius option of trying to harvest as many animals 
and to completely clean out the animals from that particular 
radius — if that is the question — that option is not a very good 
option because first of all we need a larger area and secondly is 
that in our test we did take young and old animals. 
 
The first one we took was a two-year old, and the second one 
that we have suspicion that it’s going to be very . . . it’s 
positive. It was a four-year old. So the other challenge with 
harvesting young animals is sometimes chronic wasting disease 
can be recognized in animals that are less than a year old. 
 
So as you know chronic wasting disease, there are many 
questions about the disease, and there’s limited information. 
And basically the approach we’re taking in terms of trying to 
alleviate this particular challenge in our wildlife . . . we feel that 
the most effective method of controlling chronic wasting 

disease appears to be in reducing the herd. 
 
A number of options will be used to promote the reduction of 
herds, which includes increased bag limits, additional licenses, 
and adjustments to the length of hunting season. So I think the 
5-kilometre radius — well in theory — would be most effective 
way to eliminate the problem in that specific area. 
 
What I can say is due to our information, we need a much wider 
area, and we certainly need more animals to test. And basically 
that’s the approach that we’re going to take. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. I 
guess I was going down the path of younger animals in that area 
because when I asked the question the time before it was just 
older animals taken not younger animals. 
 
Also being in that area where this animal was tested plus the 
other one that was tested and they both tested positive for the 
CWD. Was there any thought of taking more whitetail in that 
area to test them to see if they would be susceptible to CWD at 
this time? 
 
(20:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Just to point out, we took both animals. 
I think we also took elk, and I’ll get the specifics on the elk. 
 
What I want to point out is the harvest total. We had 75 per cent 
of the mule deer and 25 per cent of whitetail. And both of the 
positive cases are the mule deer and none of the positive cases 
came from the white deer population. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
You mentioned there that it would be better probably waiting 
until fall time so that the animals would congregate in a certain 
area. Also you stated that through hunting licences it may be a 
way of taking more animals. 
 
Do you believe that hunters will come to that area with the 
anticipation of taking an animal and to utilize it for meat, or are 
they going to get a special permit to shoot an animal and have it 
brought into your department just for testing only? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — There again one of the most important 
things that we want to do, as we mention time and time again, is 
we want to consult the landowners and the wildlife groups on 
how we could meet this challenge together. And I guess, based 
on those consultations, we’ll then determine what the best way 
to thin the herd out. 
 
For example, one of the things that we need to look at is if 
hunters do want to go in there and they do want to harvest deer 
for consumption, that perhaps we would encourage them not to 
eat any meat until we do the actual testing on the head. And if 
the head were to come back negative and all indications are that 
this animal was negative for chronic wasting, we can then 
advise the hunter of those findings. 
 
So that being said, again we don’t want to speculate that’s what 
we’re going to do. What we want to do is sit down with the 
stakeholders and the hunters’ groups and go through this 
process very clearly so people know what the objectives are. 



2134 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

And I suspect once we get that consultation under way that a lot 
of people will co-operate and that we can look at the most 
effective ways and the safest way to thin out the herd and begin 
to control and find out what the chronic wasting disease 
prevalence is in the wild — in particular for that area. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister and Mr. Chair. In 
regards to that, what would be the time frame for a person to 
wait? Having taken an animal, sent the head away to get tested, 
and have the game processed, put in his deep freeze — in a 
special deep freeze or whatever you want to do with it? What 
would be the time frame this person would be waiting for that 
information to come back? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — There is no question that as a result of 
the increase in the number of heads that we’re testing that the 
firm that does the testing certainly has a backlog. And they’re 
continuing working to reduce that backlog and now that 
backlog may take you a couple of months. 
 
While SERM is now working on a plan for this fall where we 
hope to have a process worked out where the results could come 
back in less than a month. And as you know there’s the whole 
process of testing the heads have taxed the entire testing system. 
And what we would encourage people to do is to be patient 
with the process. While we’re fairly confident we could have 
the results back within a month, there could be further delays. 
But we’re working on trying to minimize those time problems 
and get people some of the results back as quickly as we can. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. In 
regards to your answer then, if I myself was out there taking an 
animal and I bought a licence to go out there and take an animal 
and had that animal, put it in the freezer, processed or whatever, 
and in a month’s time it came back negative, or even positive, 
what would happen with my money I spent already on that 
licence to take that animal? Would it be refunded or what’s the 
process with that? 
 
The reason I’m going down this path is I’m trying to establish 
why you would want to wait till fall time to take animals when 
the chances of hunters coming back to that area and going 
through all this whole process at a price tag, I have my doubts if 
you’ll have any come over there. That’s why I’m stressing, if 
it’s got a CWD problem in a certain area, take it upon the 
department itself to look after it in a proper way. And waiting it 
out till the fall time at the hunter’s expense, I don’t think is 
going to work. 
 
Could I have your comments on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I want to point out that this stage of the game, farming 
operations are in progress, and as you know that’s a very busy 
time for a lot of folks that live in rural Saskatchewan, and the 
animals are dispersed as well. Very, very difficult to track 
animals down. And of course as you’re probably aware, we 
have the full leaf flush, which adds to the problem of hunting 
animals at this stage of the year. 
 
What I will point out is there will be special permits allowed for 
any animals that are found unfit. We’ll look at if there’s a 
licence refund that is required, we’ll certainly do that. There’s 

special permits that we would authorize if this permit were to be 
used to help us check into this problem. So you look at all these 
different scenarios of the farmers being very active, leaves 
coming out, animals are dispersed, that we continue working 
with the hunting groups and to see how we’re able to come up 
with a strategy to resolve this issue. So quite frankly the best 
and clearest time, which we would look at having significant 
progress against this particular fight, would be in the fall time. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in 
1990 the Saskatchewan Agriculture Development Fund 
published a document titled “Review of Wildlife Disease Status 
in Game Animals in North America.” There’s one particularly 
intriguing paragraph in this document and I would read it to 
you. 
 

Johne’s disease, chronic wasting disease, and malignant 
catarrhal fever are three additional diseases of immediate 
concern to game farmers. These diseases occur in 
Saskatchewan but would have devastating financial 
consequences if introduced to game farms, as no reliable 
treatments are available. These diseases do not pose a 
major threat to free-ranging wildlife populations. 

 
Now I think you probably, Mr. Minister, are very well that there 
are some people are looking at this particular document and 
they’re interpreting it as meaning chronic wasting disease 
pre-existed game farming in this province. And I’m just 
wondering if perhaps you could clarify the understanding of the 
department in terms of the origins of chronic wasting disease 
and whether it pre-existed game farming, or as some like to 
think that game farming has somehow had an effect on the 
introduction of CWD in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
In terms of the 1990 Ag Development Fund, in terms of the 
document that you made reference to, the disease status in 
North America. The question I think you asked was, did CWD 
pre-exist game farming in Saskatchewan? 
 
An addendum put out . . . that was attached to that report 
indicated that CWD is not in Saskatchewan. And at that point it 
also pointed out that the only place in North America that CWD 
existed in 1990 was in Colorado. 
 
(21:00) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I 
have a couple of questions around the issue of the elk disposal 
sites — the elk that are being slaughtered as a result of positive 
tests or as a result of herd eradication. 
 
I managed to tour one of these disposal sites in the Nipawin 
area approximately a week or so ago, and I must say I was quite 
surprised. I hadn’t thought it would be as large a site as it was. 
And certainly with some of the evidence that was left behind, it 
appeared that there had been a relatively major operation take 
place there over a long period of time. 
 
And I guess I have a couple of questions. First of all, how is it 
that the sites are chosen? Secondly is, where are these animals 
coming from to these sites? Are they coming from all other 
parts of the province? Are they coming from certain areas? Is 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2135 

 

there any geographic sort of logic behind how these sites are 
chosen? How are the animals transported there? Are they 
transported live and then slaughtered on site or are the carcasses 
transported from the farms? Perhaps if you could answer some 
of those questions. 
 
I know that in that area, this particular site has created quite a 
bit of controversy over the last while because as you and I’ve 
discussed before, Mr. Minister, the science around CWD isn’t 
all that good. And we have people in the outfitting industry, for 
example in the Nipawin northeast area, who are very, very 
concerned. There’s fear that perhaps there could be some type 
of contamination into the wildlife population, and of course 
these people earn a living from their outfitting businesses. 
 
So perhaps if you could respond on the questions around how 
the sites are chosen, where the animals come from, how are 
they being disposed of, and what is the process around all of 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
What I want to point out is that the Canada Food Inspection 
Agency, CFIA, and SERM, of course, are collaborating on this 
particular challenge with CFIA taking the lead. 
 
In terms of transporting some of the animals, I just want to 
respond in terms of saying that CFIA is taking every precaution 
to ensure that any risk related to the transport of game farm elk 
animals, game farmed animals, for chronic wasting testing is 
minimized. The Saskatchewan government has consulted with 
Canadian and American chronic wasting disease expert who 
agreed that the CFIA approach is valid. 
 
The vast majority of animals being transported test negative. If 
an animal were showing signs of chronic wasting disease, it 
would be put down where it is, wrapped and transported to the 
disposal pit rather than taking the chance of spreading the 
disease through urine or feces associated with live transport. 
 
And I would point out that some of the areas that are chosen are 
generally close to infected farms so we’re not introducing some 
of the animals to non-infected areas. And SERM, along with the 
environment folks, approve the site and they do this by ways of 
eliminating the risk of water contamination. So having a good 
clay bed is so very important. 
 
And there are about seven or eight sites throughout the 
province, and usually the sites are associated on a regional 
basis, where you see transportation to one specific site from a 
certain region. 
 
And I would point out that the importance of having these sites 
minimized is so we don’t have a hundred, a hundred and fifty 
burial sites throughout the province that could create a greater 
problem in the future. What we want to do is minimize these 
sites — there’s seven or eight of them — and try and ensure 
that they’re environmentally sound so there’s no risk of water 
contamination, and it’s in infected areas. 
 
So we’re doing that very closely with CFIA, and CFIA is 
certainly taking the lead on that, and we’re collaborating with 
them. And so far it certainly sounds like a very reasonable 
approach. Things are working quite fine in terms of the 

disposal, so we continue being diligent in that fashion. But 
clearly it’s a very serious matter, and we’re taking every 
precaution possible. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, first 
of all would you confirm that animals were transported to the 
Nipawin area from as far away as Lloydminster? 
 
And secondly, I certainly appreciated your reassurances, and I 
know that the CFIA certainly have some very stringent 
guidelines that they follow and that they would like all of those 
involved in this operation to follow. But one of the things that I 
was very concerned about in touring the site and in talking to 
neighbours and people farming in the area, I actually had one 
person indicate to me that there was one particular evening 
where — and this site was left open for a period of time while 
the animals were being disposed of —where apparently wolves 
actually drug some of the remains out of the site and then the 
next morning, SERM personnel, CFIA personnel had to go and 
retrieve various body parts from out of the bush. 
 
And if that is the case, then I think the people who are 
concerned probably have reason to be concerned. So if you 
could address those two issues, Mr. Minister, please. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — In terms of the question whether 
animals were transported from Lloyd to Nipawin is I can’t 
confirm nor deny whether elk was transported that far. We 
don’t have that information with us. But it would not be unusual 
for this to happen. Naturally, as I mentioned, CFIA certainly 
does have a lot of that information and we’ll certainly check. 
Secondly, we would normally deal with the disposal on a 
regional site. 
 
In reference to your second question, CFIA did indicate to us 
that it did find the animal parts and that they took corrective 
steps. And they also reminded us that the majority of the 
animals that were put down in that area were tested negative for 
chronic wasting disease. But nonetheless, they certainly have all 
the resources put on full max where they continue to work with 
this problem. 
 
They have a number of animals they have to put down so 
they’re constantly under the gun so on occasion — and this 
occasion certainly happened — they admitted that this was not 
done. The animals weren’t buried in a timely fashion; some got 
out but they took corrective steps and they continue to be 
diligent in reference to making sure that doesn’t happen again. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, are 
there any other disposal options? When I viewed the sites in 
walking over the mound obviously you have this large number 
of carcasses buried in the ground and as they’re decomposing 
you’ve got the site is actually caving in. There was one area 
there where there was probably a cavern of two, two and a half 
feet deep already where the pit was starting to collapse in on 
itself. 
 
And I mean it’s probably not that big a stretch to imagine that at 
some point those animals could very well end up being exposed 
again. So firstly, what kinds of steps are taken to guard against 
the site failing in the long term? And are there other disposal 



2136 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

options that CFIA and your department could look at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — First of all, in terms of the question, is 
there any other way to dispose of these animals, what I will say 
that . . . it is accepted worldwide for such a large volume of 
animals in terms of showing infection of some sort that burial 
would be the best option. 
 
In Great Britain, for example, with the foot-and-mouth disease, 
most of the animals were buried. And certainly based on the 
information that CFIA and SERM have at their disposal, again 
following some of the worldwide standards . . . a large volume 
of this nature, burial is the best option. Certainly in terms of 
incineration, they’re going to have to find an incinerator that 
could burn at that . . . at such a large rate to keep on top of this. 
 
So clearly I can also point out that with burial there’s so many 
questions about chronic wasting. A lot of scientists are looking 
at this. There’s a lot of information they don’t know. So at this 
stage of the game, with CFIA advising alongside of SERM 
following the worldwide disposal options, we feel that burial is 
probably the best option for the province. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. I 
have a couple more questions regarding the CWD in deer before 
I go on to some other things. In your last answer that you gave 
me in regarding your department, you said that your department 
takes CWD very serious and work pretty hard to try and solve 
this problem. 
 
I know that is true. I know a couple of your members that are 
here tonight that I’ve known for many years, even when I was 
back in the wildlife federation. And I know their work is very 
hard-working and diligent, and I know that they’re trying their 
best to get a hold of the CWD. 
 
In the questioning I did before, I also found out that Alberta was 
also doing some testing and they’d taken at that time . . . I don’t 
know how many animals, but it was quite a number of animals. 
At that time of my questioning, 60 per cent of those animals had 
been tested already and they came back negatively, but you had 
no results from the 40 per cent left. Do you have any results at 
this time from those 40 per cent of animals? 
 
(21:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Yes, I can confirm that there was 241 
head that were taken. And the latest information is of the 241 
heads that were tested, they all proved negative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That is positive 
news for the Alberta side. Now hopefully you can do the same 
on this side. 
 
In regard to those animals that were taken, they were right 
adjacent to the area that you had tested. Do you know at this 
time if Alberta is going to go further with their testing, or are 
they going to wait until fall time like the Department of SERM 
is doing in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 

I can also advise you, based on our information, that Alberta is 
going to do some further testing but they are also going to wait 
until fall; and to also point out that all four of the Western 
provinces, BC (British Columbia), Alberta, Manitoba, and 
Saskatchewan will be doing further testing this fall. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, in that 
regards I’d like to go on now to the elk problems. And my 
colleague, who just left for a few minutes, started regarding elk 
problems. 
 
Is there any disposal sites in the Lloydminster-Maidstone area 
to deal with the elk problems there? As you know, in the 
northwest corner that is where there’s the most abundant 
problems with CWD. Are there any disposal sites in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Yes, I could confirm that of the 
disposal sites, we have a major site in the Lloydminster area. 
We feel that it is the biggest site. A wild guess would be about a 
thousand head or a thousand animals are buried there. 
 
So to confirm your question, yes, in the Lloydminster area . . . 
we can’t give specific information. There is a major burial site 
where we anticipate that as many as a thousand animals are 
being buried . . . or have been buried around the Lloydminster 
area. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and, Mr. Chair. 
With that answer then I guess I’m going to go back a little bit in 
talking to my colleague’s question. If there is a disposal site in 
Lloyd — which I knew there was — why then might there be 
some animals taken from the Lloydminster-Maidstone area and 
taken all the way across the country to Nipawin? It doesn’t 
make a whole lot of sense. Your comments on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I think it’s very important for us to 
remember that SERM is certainly doing their part and continue 
to collaborate with the Canadian Food Inspection Agency. 
 
And the CFIA are the lead agency and they are certainly the 
ones that would have a lot of influence in terms of how we’re 
dealing with this particular problem. They’re certainly putting 
as much of the resources into this challenge as possible. 
 
What I will say though, as I mentioned before, that we can’t 
confirm nor deny whether elk have been transported that far. 
We don’t have that information with us. But it would not be 
unusual. 
 
As you mentioned, we usually look at normally utilizing the 
regional sites. But as I mentioned time and time again, this is an 
ongoing operation. CFIA is involved. They have assured us that 
they’re minimizing some of the impacts, some of the animals 
being transported that have been part of a diseased herd. And 
they’re working very closely with us. 
 
So your question why transported that distance? CFIA certainly 
has prepared for us the logic as to why they’re doing this. And 
they’re trying to minimize the number of sites, and minimizing 
the number of sites, and making sure it has good clay bottom. 
And it’s only to the infected sites that we’re forwarding some of 
the animals that have been part of the source herd. 
 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2137 

 

These are all things that we’re collaborating with CFIA on and 
we’re certainly doing our part to make sure that we minimize 
the potential of infection to areas that don’t have chronic 
wasting. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. The 
animals that are slaughtered off the game farms that go to these 
sites, are any of the animals tested before they go into the sites 
or are they just slaughtered and sent to the disposal sites? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — What I’ll point out to you, Mr. Chair, is 
that if an animal is showing any symptoms or displaying any 
signs of chronic wasting disease on a particular farm, it is put 
down on that farm and it is then wrapped in plastic and 
transported to a burial site. 
 
The other animals in the herd, if they’re not showing any signs, 
they are transported live to the burial site. Once they arrive at 
the burial site, that is where they’re euthanized and of course, 
after they’re euthanized, they do testing on the heads. And as I 
mentioned, the majority of the animals that have transported 
live that are euthanized at the burial site, the majority of those 
tests have proven negative. So again this is CFIA’s effort to try 
and minimize the potential of spread of chronic wasting. 
 
And again I elaborate that these sites we’re transporting to are 
infected sites already. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Can 
you tell me, in the last two months — and I’m going to use the 
time frame of two months — has there been any game farms 
where elk have been where they’ve been determined that they 
have the disease and want to be slaughtered? 
 
I know sometime, I believe it was the middle of the fall last 
year, it was down to a point where there was virtually no game 
farms that tested positive or had looked at being tested positive. 
 
Has any farms in the last two months been stated that they had 
tested positive, where their herds will have to be destroyed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Again, in the past few months . . . the question you asked, was 
there any new elk farms that have been identified with chronic 
wasting disease? I can report that there have been two major 
farms that have been identified with at least 2,000 animals that 
we’re dealing with here. And at this stage of the game, CFIA is 
doing follow-up on trace-outs, and once those trace-outs are 
confirmed, then CFIA will be making the appropriate public 
information calls. So I think quite frankly that the two major 
farms over the past two months with at least 2,000 animals 
doesn’t make the news any more better. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
No, the news you gave is not good news. And I guess it brings 
me to a question, and I don’t really know how to put it, but in 
the northwest area of the province where there’s a lot of animals 
and a lot of animals that are testing positive for CWD, there are 
cattle producers in and around the area. There’s also cattle 
producers in Alberta next to the border are starting to get really, 
really concerned regarding the elk problem we have in 
Saskatchewan, concerned to a point that a number of weeks ago 
we went up to Lloydminster to a meeting regarding the 

producers, cattle producers. And the main focus of that meeting 
was regarding mad cow disease in the cattle herd, but I’d say 
probably 50 per cent of the people there were more concerned 
about CWD in Saskatchewan and the spread of it, no matter 
how it is. 
 
They were also acting on the fact that there could be some 
possibilities that the Government of Saskatchewan may be 
looking at that northwest corner as a serious problem and 
maybe it’s time to act. Is there any truth to rumours floating in 
and around that area that maybe it’s time to look at the 
northwest area and eradicate all the elk on the game farms at 
this time to get a hold of this problem without waiting to get to 
the bottom of it through the process that the department is going 
through? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well, as I’d mentioned, Mr. Chairman, 
CFIA is a lead agency. Right now, as I pointed out, that they are 
doing a follow-up on some of the trace-outs and that hasn’t 
been a recommendation that they have made for Saskatchewan. 
So it’s not an option that Saskatchewan is considering at this 
time. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. In 
regarding the trace-outs of the animals they’re basically 
stemming from the northwest area around the Maidstone area. 
At a rate of 2,000 animals, which has just been stated in regards 
to the last two months that have been found, how many animals 
have been slaughtered in roughly the northwest area to date 
since the CWD has been identified? And another question, how 
many animals do we have in the northwest area to date still 
alive? 
 
(21:30) 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Harper: — To ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you, to all the members of the 
legislature, three special guests sitting up in the Speaker’s 
gallery. Ms. Pamela Boisvert from Gaspé, Quebec who is 
visiting Saskatchewan and is visiting Regina right now. And 
she’s accompanied here today by Kevin Sturgeon from 
Saskatoon; and Karen Leask from Regina. 
 
So I ask all the members to offer them a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 



2138 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess the 
question in terms of how many elk have you slaughtered in the 
northwest to date, very ballpark figure if I can use that phrase, 
roughly a couple of thousand animals in the northwest. 
Saskatchewan wide, we have eliminated 20 per cent of the herd 
which roughly accounts to 55 animals . . . or sorry, 5,500 
animals. So we’ve eliminated 20 per cent of the herd throughout 
the province of Saskatchewan. And these are approximate 
figures. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister and Mr. Chair. So 
that means that there’s approximately 5,500 animals . . . there 
was approximately 5,500 animals, approximately, and that 
2,000 of those animals have been taken with the trace-out factor 
that you’ve used to get to the bottom of CWD. 
 
One quick question: are not all the animals that belong on the 
elk farms tagged? And if they are, then the department should 
have a pretty good number as to how many animals are out 
there. And is that the numbers that you’ve given me, that 
you’ve approximated, the 2,000 and 5,500 animals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Yes, what I’ll point out in terms of the 
question, are all the animals on game farms tagged; this is 
managed through Sask Ag and Food. And of course, as I 
mentioned, these are estimated. And of course these numbers 
change every day because you do have calves, you do have 
movement, you have animals that are being put down by CFIA. 
So that number varies. But clearly the information more 
specific, certainly the tag process is being managed through Ag 
and Food. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, one 
last question regarding the CWD with the elk problems. And I 
guess I just want to reiterate regarding what producers, both 
cattle producers and elk producers in the northwest area, are 
contending with and they’re concerned with WCB — or WCD, 
pardon me — if taking all the animals from the northwest area 
is not an option to the department, have you got any other 
options that you are presently pursuing that you may implement 
in the next months, maybe year, regarding the elk problem? 
 
And the reason I stated that is the fact that the numbers of elk 
produced are growing a little bit, but the number of elk taken 
out of the system through the CWD is rising fairly quickly. And 
how many more years is it going to take before all the animals 
will be gone? And the trace-out factor that you’re using to 
eliminate these animals is spreading rapid every time we turn 
around, so what are some of the options you may be looking at 
at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — There is no other question that this is a 
very serious matter. Chronic wasting is something that has hit 
the province very hard. And CFIA has the lead and SERM is 
certainly collaborating with CFIA. And CFIA is certainly 
operating as quickly as possible. And CFIA and certainly 
SERM — but more so CFIA — their intention is to eliminate 
chronic wasting disease in game farm elk. That is their 
intention. 
 
And I believe the standard that they use if there is no new cases 
of chronic wasting disease over a three-year period then they 
can breath a sign of relief. But they fully intend, and we concur, 

that if they want to proceed with the elimination of chronic 
wasting disease then they’re going to continue harvesting or 
destroying some of the herd that have positive cases in those 
herds and they will not stop until all the infected animals have 
certainly been destroyed. 
 
The other thing that’s quite serious in terms of a threat is once 
all the animals that are infected — whether they come from 
trace-out herds or they show signs of the chronic wasting 
disease — once they’re all eliminated then the question remains 
that does the disease stay in the soil. 
 
So these are of course further questions the CFIA have to 
determine and certainly consult with SERM on. And as always 
we’ll continue working with them. And as pointed out time and 
time again in the media this is a very serious matter and CFIA 
will continue destroying animals, putting animals down until 
their absolutely sure over a period of a three-year testing phase 
that no more chronic wasting disease is around. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, just 
one more quick question or comment regarding the elk and that 
is you mentioned that it was a three-year period that the animals 
would have to . . . or the industry would have to wait to get a 
clear slate in regarding CWD. 
 
I’m just wondering regarding to the elk farms that are in 
quarantine now — and there’s a number of them — and that’s 
probably done through the trace-out factor that you’ve utilized. 
Is there animals on those farms to date that are quarantined 
being tested now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Just to point out that the question that 
are quarantined animals being tested? The animals that have 
moved between farms are tested on the quarantined farms. So 
for example if you have a trace-out where an elk was 
transported from an infected farm A to farm B, they will then 
test that animal that was transferred to farm B. And of course if 
the test is positive then the entire herd would be put down. 
 
So again I go back to CFIA’s rule that they will continue 
putting animals down until they’re absolutely sure when this 
particular problem is gone for three years. And I’ll also point 
out that this process does take some time. It’s very time 
consuming, but CFIA is certainly putting a lot of resources and 
time and SERM is collaborating with them as well. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, that’s 
all the questions I have regarding CWD. Just a comment though 
in regards to CWD and the department. As we speak, the cattle 
producers both in Saskatchewan and also in Alberta are getting 
somewhat . . . I shouldn’t say frustrated, but they’re starting to 
look for some answers in regarding Saskatchewan’s problem 
with CWD. 
 
I think the longer we take in waiting to rectify this problem, and 
I know it’s a problem, but when you start seeing an industry 
like the cattle producers, both Saskatchewan and Alberta, and 
the losses they may or may not occur they’re going to start 
pushing the buttons and it’s going to come to the Department of 
SERM in Saskatchewan. So in regards to that, I know that your 
department is working hard to rectify this problem with CWD 
and that’s all the questions I have in that regard. 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2139 

 

Just a couple questions. One happens to be in my constituency, 
has to do with forestry and that’s in regards to the mill — the 
saw mill — the proposed saw mill that’s going up just north of 
Spiritwood in the Penn-Chitek Lake area. There was an 
announcement a while back that agreements had been signed in 
regards to that. Is there any further progress in regards to the 
proposed mill at the Penn-Chitek Lake area and what is the 
status of it so far? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I just want to confirm that this would 
be with the agency chiefs; that’s the correct area. I want to point 
out that in terms of the saw mill, the status of the mill is that . . . 
I understand that they’re still looking for a corporate partner 
and I hear they’re having discussions with a corporate partner, 
and following those discussions . . . and of course they’re also 
looking at some ag lands for some of the supply of wood and 
these consultations of course are always underway. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In regards to the 
forest fire that happened at the Tobin Lake area, it was the 
hugest forest fire in this area this year and there was quite a 
number of hectares that were burned in that regard. A lot of 
those acres that were burned had quite a sustainable, large trees 
on it. What is happening with the burned forest area and what is 
the department’s recommendations in regard to it at this time? 
 
(21:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
What happens in the normal course of a fire going through a 
forest, first of all because of our preparedness model, we 
respond very quickly to it and eliminate the continual burning 
of some very good wood. Following that, we’d do an 
assessment of the site and then we’d put out a request for a 
proposal in terms of the use of that particular area. 
 
And we like to have the time frame of the actual harvest of the 
. . . or salvage of the wood within a two-year time frame 
because after two years, of course, the bugs would get at the 
wood and that would create further waste and that’s not 
something that we would like to see happen. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. As you 
just reiterated, that it is a two-year time period regarding the 
forest after a fire goes through, when it’s burnt, because of the 
bugs and stuff get in there. 
 
I’ve had a few phone calls from that area regarding small 
logging operations that are very, very interested in obtaining 
some logging permits in that area. And as you know, with the 
forestry problems, with the embargo with the United States and 
Canada, the forestry industry has slowed down a little bit in 
regards to this. But I think it’d be an excellent opportunity for 
some of the small logging companies in and around that area to 
get in there and take that timber. But it’s got to be done in a fair 
and effective measure and it’s got to be done very quickly. 
 
That ends my questioning, Mr. Minister. I want to thank you 
and your officials tonight for the answers you’ve given me on 
all my questions. And I’d like to turn it over now to my 
colleague from Carrot River. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 

over the course of the last month or so, we’ve been hearing a lot 
about the Saskatchewan Scrap Tire Corporation and some 
disenchantment within the tire recycling industry in this 
province. 
 
And I am aware of a letter that you received not too long ago 
from Mr. Shane Olson, the chief executive officer of Shercom 
Industries. In his letter, Mr. Olson talks about the Saskatchewan 
Scrap Tire Corporation and the fact that they were established 
to help enforce regulations that limit the disposal of tires. 
Furthermore, that they would license approved recycling depots 
to ensure proper disposal. 
 
A little further on in his letter he speaks to a number of issues 
that the industry now has with respect to tire recycling in this 
province. And he talks about the private sector having agreed to 
certain terms for the sake of the environment. And he goes on to 
say, and I quote: 
 

The private sector moved in and invested hundreds of 
thousands of dollars to obtain the necessary equipment to 
meet the new disposal standards. The Saskatchewan Scrap 
Tire Corporation was entrusted to properly manage these 
funds and administer the collection and tipping fees for 
tires on behalf of the consumers. 
 
It is the investment that the industry has made that has 
allowed Saskatchewan Scrap Tire Corporation to begin 
doing their job. The risk associated with the investment 
remained on the shoulders of individual investors. 
 

Mr. Olson in his letter to detail a number of concerns, and I’m 
sure that you have considered his letter as well. 
 
The question, Mr. Minister, is what is the department doing in 
terms of attempting to reconcile some of the differences that are 
apparent amongst some of the stakeholders in the tire recycling 
industry in the provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I just want to point out that in terms of what is the amount that 
goes as an incentive to all the recyclers out there, I can point out 
that the amount has been recently lowered by the Saskatchewan 
Scrap Tire Corporation. And the reason that it’s happened is the 
Saskatchewan approach is the same across Western Canada. It 
is in line with the other provinces. 
 
And equally more important is the Scrap Tire Corporation 
would not be able to survive if they did not lower these 
particular incentive payments to the recyclers. 
 
And I guess I would point out that the concept of the 
Saskatchewan Scrap Tire Corporation is all those people that 
buy tires, they pay an environmental charge on each of the new 
tires that they buy and that money goes to recycle old tire 
products. And the Saskatchewan Scrap Tire Corporation has 
been doing a tremendous job and of course the recyclers have 
also been doing a good job as well. But clearly the move was 
made to ensure that the Scrap Tire Corporation survives but it 
also brings us in line with the other provinces in Western 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I 



2140 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

certainly understand the point of view that you are expressing 
here. But I think the difficulty here is that these people in this 
industry were originally led to believe that they would be 
operating at a certain level of collection and tipping fees. 
 
Now what they have perceived this last round of cuts as is a 
breach of trust between two sectors that should obviously be 
working together in the best interests of the province. As a 
matter of fact, Mr. Olson uses some pretty strong language here, 
and I quote: 
 

This is not a dictatorship where the Saskatchewan Scrap 
Tire Corporation can arbitrarily set the industry’s collection 
and tipping fee and implement it in 90 days without first 
considering the impact it will have on their only partner. If 
the Saskatchewan Scrap Tire Corporation does not take the 
steps to reassure the industry and remove this wedge by 
managing the environmental levy and protecting the 
industry’s investment, the industry will move in the 
direction of the great economic invisible hand. 

 
Now I think what we have here is a situation, Mr. Minister, 
where we’ve seen a private investor come into the province and 
they obviously were willing to invest in the best interests of the 
province. And after having been led to believe that there would 
be a certain set of rules that they would be expected to play by, 
but those rules have now been changed. 
 
I mean we’re looking at the entire tire recycling industry 
possibly being compromised if we don’t somehow reconcile the 
differences between these two groups. And the question, Mr. 
Minister, because the department does have the ultimate 
legislative responsibility here and legislates environmental 
handling fees, those kinds of things, is what is the department 
going to be doing in order to try and facilitate a reconciliation 
so that we can get on with the business of recycling in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 
point out that the Saskatchewan Scrap Tire Corporation has 
made the decision to proceed in this manner. A consultant’s 
report was done, and I also want to add that the SSTC 
(Saskatchewan Scrap Tire Corporation) is an industry-run 
association. It’s a non-profit corporation. And I think that the 
incentives were lowered to be in line with the western Canadian 
levels. And I think over all, I think some of these moves was 
necessary to help SSTC stay financially viable. 
 
So those are some of the points I wish to make in reference to 
the SSTC. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:02. 
 
 


