















































Hansard: June 04, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1511 
 June 4, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to present 
petitions from people in my constituency who are concerned 
about the Fyke report: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena health centre 
be maintained at its current level of service at minimum, 
with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral services 
available, as well as laboratory, public health, home care, 
and long-term care services for users in our district and 
beyond. 
 

The people that have signed these petitions are all from 
Wadena. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
citizens from Swift Current and across the southwest corner of 
our province who have signed a petition expressing concern 
about the state of our current hospital. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by residents of the city 
of Swift Current, and also of the communities of Climax, 
Bracken, Shaunavon, and Consul, as well as Central Butte. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of constituents who are concerned about maintaining 
adequate health care in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take the necessary steps to 
ensure that services are maintained at least at their current 
level at Weyburn General Hospital, Bengough Health 
Centre, Radville Marian Health Centre, and Pangman 
Health Centre, in order that accessible health care services 
are available to residents of the Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency and beyond. 
 

And this petition is signed by residents of Minton and 
Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who are expressing support for the 
Government of Saskatchewan decision to increase the 
foundation operating grants to school divisions. And the prayer 
goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to ask the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue with its foresight and its vision 
of increasing the foundation operating grant to school 
divisions by $40.8 million for the fiscal year 2001-2002, 
the largest increase in 15 years. 

 
And this petition is signed by the good folks from Preeceville, 
Kamsack, Canora, Theodore, and Buchanan. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about high energy 
crisis. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide more 
substantial power and energy relief to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the citizens of North Battleford, Battleford, and Delmas. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition about why . . . individuals concerned about the human 
and financial cost and in support of comprehensive tobacco 
control legislation, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places and workplaces, and to control youth access 
to tobacco products. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by people of Weyburn and Griffin, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today to do with the lack of funding to non-profit personal care 
homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 
 

The signators, Mr. Speaker, are all from the community of 
Kamsack. 



1512 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
of citizens outraged about the huge increases SaskEnergy are 
proposed: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Bladworth, Davidson, Craik, 
Saskatoon, and Glaslyn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding 
concerned citizens of Saskatchewan in regards to cellular 
telephone coverage. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Spiritwood, Medstead, Glaslyn, Leoville, Chitek Lake, Big 
River, Canwood, Debden, Shellbrook, Parkside, Shell 
Lake, Duck Lake, and Macdowall. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood, Mayfair, and Pebble Baye. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by folks that are concerned about the cost of energy. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to the Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Neilburg, 
Marsden, Unity, Battleford, and Baldwinton. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with a petition from concerned citizens concerned 
about the lack of cellular telephone coverage in rural 
Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone services to all 
communities throughout the Wood River constituency. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Ponteix. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Petitions requesting the government to implement the 911 
emergency telephone system province wide; and 
 
Petitions requesting the government to provide subsidies to 
non-profit personal care homes. 
 

And eight other petitions that are addendums to previously 
tabled petitions. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 54 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Sask Water: how much has your 
department spent on the upper Assiniboine River basin 
study to date and what actions have resulted from this study 
so far? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, 63 grade 8 students from White City School. 
They’re seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve had a few opportunities to be at White City School. A few 
years ago there was a career day that I attended and answered 
questions of the assembly. The minister of Education at the time 
and I launched the new math curriculum information from 
White City School. And sometimes I’ve been there for the 
White City Optimists’ bicycle safety days. I’ve always been 
warmly welcomed. 
 
I’m going to meet these students on the steps for a picture, and 
then a visit after that, and some refreshments. So I would ask all 
members to join with me in greeting these students, grade 8 
students from White City School, and their teachers Joyce 
Dudley and Jared Bildfell. Please join with me in a greeting to 
the White City School grade 8s. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
happy to introduce to you and through you to the rest of this 
Assembly, 27 grade 5 students from MacNeill School in Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. And they’re accompanied by their teacher, 
Mrs. Kivela; and the parents who are along as chaperones, Mrs. 
Gackle and Mrs. Malcolm. And I’m looking forward to meeting 
with this group later on. 
 
So join me in welcoming them please to the Assembly. 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1513 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the House, 
in your gallery, some very good friends of mine and relatives of 
hers from Topeka, Kansas: Alan Cann, and Jennifer Marlor, and 
David and Lois Waldo who are from Topeka, Kansas. And I’m 
sure all hon. members will want to welcome them here. 
 
And I’d just like to remind David and Lois that while there’s no 
place like home, there’s no place like home, you’re not in 
Kansas any more. So welcome to Saskatchewan. 
 
And would all hon. members please provide a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Wind Power and Green Power Product Announcement 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as all members of the Assembly know, we’re blessed 
with bountiful wind resources in this province. 
 
This afternoon I’m pleased to rise in the House as we mark 
Environment Week to inform members and the public the 
second new wind power project is in the works for this province 
thanks to a financial commitment by our government. 
 
This morning our Premier and our Crown Investments 
Corporation minister announced a 10-year, $5 million 
agreement under which the province will buy wind power from 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation for provincial government 
facilities. SaskPower will harness the wind to generate clean, 
renewable electricity by constructing its own 5.3 megawatt 
wind power project in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
SaskPower will also invest an additional $2.6 million over 10 
years to supply wind power for the corporation’s head office. 
 
And starting next year, Mr. Speaker, residential, farm, and 
business customers will have the opportunity to buy a set 
amount of green power in addition to their normal electricity, 
billing in $5 increments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new wind power initiative, together with the 
SunBridge wind power project that our government announced 
last month, will give us the third largest wind power capacity in 
all of Canada when these projects are completed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Expansion of Maple Creek Recycling Depot 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, recently 
the Maple Creek and District Opportunities Incorporated was a 
site of the grand opening of a new eco-environment centre and 
an expanded paper recycling depot. 
 
Now this past year, recycling services were separated, which 

allowed renovations to be made at the SARCAN container 
recycling depot to allow more efficient operation. Increasing 
volumes necessitated the expansion and upgrading of 
SARCAN’s facilities. SARCAN now has a new conveyor, can 
crusher, and a larger storage area to accommodate the large 
number of recycled containers. 
 
Over the past 13 years, Mr. Speaker, 13,000 tonnes, 
representing 22 million containers, have been recycled through 
the Maple Creek depot. The new enviro-eco centre will accept 
quantities of 500 litres of oil at a time, and also collect filters 
and oil containers of up to 30 litres. The paper recycling centre 
has moved to larger premises. Last year they recycled 250 
tonnes of paper, newsprint, magazines, and cardboard. 
 
A testament to the success of these programs is evident by the 
amount of material that is recycled through Opportunities Inc. 
These programs demonstrate a win-win situation for the 
community of Maple Creek. Persons will disabilities are 
provided with work opportunities, and reduced waste extends 
the lifetime of Maple Creek’s landfill site. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Maple Creek and 
District Opportunities on the grand opening of their new and 
expanded venture. The residents of Maple Creek are leaders in 
the field of recycling and should be proud of their efforts in 
being a part of these worthwhile programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Launch of the Work and Family Web Site 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Changes in recent 
years to our world and workforce have put increased stress on 
working people and their families — stress that can lead to 
illness, lost productivity, and diminishing quality of life. 
 
A recent study by Watson Wyatt Canada found that the average 
direct cost of absenteeism is now $3,550 per employee per year 
in our country. The study showed that measures such as 
employee assistance and work/life balance programs were 
factors in keeping disability costs down. 
 
It is obviously to everyone’s benefit to have productive and not 
distracted employees who can contribute to a healthy economy. 
The work and family unit of Saskatchewan Labour can help 
families, organizations, and communities find ways to balance 
their work and family lives. 
 
(13:45) 
 
The unit’s new Web site — www.workandfamilybalance.com, 
that’s workandfamilybalance.com — will help bring people and 
possible solutions together. It offers information on recent 
research and publications, examples of successful strategies 
from our province and elsewhere, as well as links to additional 
resources. Most importantly, the site provides a way to share 
experiences so we can build on the successes of others in our 
community. 
 
I invite all hon. members and all Saskatchewan people to visit 
the Work and Family Web site at 
www.workandfamilybalance.com. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



1514 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Environment Week 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
June 3 to 9 is Canadian Environment Week across the country. 
It is held the first week of June to coincide with World 
Environment Day which occurs on June 5 every year. 
 
This year, 2001, marks the 30th anniversary of Canadian 
Environment Week. The theme for this year’s Canadian 
Environment Week is “Acting Today for Tomorrow.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan where a lot of attention has 
been focused on some of our more serious environmental 
issues, it becomes clear that so much more must be done today 
to protect our tomorrows. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the quality of water in more than 100 of our 
province’s communities is substandard. The province’s 
greenhouse gas emissions are above normal levels. And 
contaminated land sites from years ago are posing health risks 
in many areas. 
 
We can all make choices, we can all take action, we can all do 
something, Mr. Speaker, to protect the environment. The 
environment is everyone’s concern. It is up to all of us to 
practice the three Rs: reduce, reuse, and recycle. 
 
A healthy environment means healthy people. More 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, it means healthy children. We must 
remember we did not inherit the earth from our forefathers but 
we are borrowing it from our children. 
 
I ask all members of the House to recognize Canadian 
Environment Week. And I urge all members to become actively 
involved in addressing environmental concerns, not only in 
their communities but across the province. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

NorSask Lumber Mill 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the 
major players in the economy of northwest Saskatchewan is the 
Meadow Lake Tribal Council. And one of the council’s major 
operations is the NorSask lumber mill. 
 
The tribal council bought partial ownership from the provincial 
government in 1988 and assumed sole ownership in 1998. 
Using new high tech equipment, NorSask has boosted weekly 
production figures by 75 per cent in the last 10 years. It’s a 
class operation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you don’t have to take my word for it. Just recently the 
NorSask lumber mill was named, amongst, and I quote, “the 
most productive lumber operations in North America” by the 
firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers. A survey by Price Waterhouse 
shows NorSask is leading the industry in the percentage return 
on assets, return on equity, and return on capital employed. 
 
NorSask is also working on ways to achieve forest management 

certification, an audited process to guarantee customers that all 
its lumber comes from forests that are managed in an 
environmentally sustainable manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to have the NorSask mill and the 
Meadow Lake Tribal Council in my constituency. They are 
leaders in Saskatchewan’s economic development and in how 
that development can be sustainable well into the future — a 
model for others to follow. 
 
I congratulate them for this significant recognition of their 
achievement. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kenny Rogers Look-alike 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
recent days we’ve been spending a lot of time on the Internet 
researching SaskTel’s latest stupid acquisitions. One of the 
greatest things about the Internet is, every once in a while you 
stumble across a Web site that is so ridiculous you just have to 
tell other people about it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we found one such site the other day and it 
was called — and I’m not making this up — 
menwholooklikekennyrogers.com. Mr. Speaker, this site is a 
collection of photographs of men who bear a striking 
resemblance to Kenny Rogers. For some inexplicable reason, 
this bizarre site has been generating a lot of media attention and 
has a loyal following of fans, including Kenny Rogers himself. 
 
Of course no Web site called menwholooklikekennyrogers 
would be complete without a photograph of our member from 
Rosthern seated just in front of me here. So unbeknownst to 
him, we submitted this picture and it is now being posted on 
this prestigious Web site alongside two men identified, bottles 
up . . . Bottoms Up Kenny and Giant Collar/Kenny. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Web site also contains helpful tips on where 
one might find men who look like Kenny Rogers. Two 
suggestions are at gun shows and at car lots. Bang on, Mr. 
Speaker; right on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is pleased to honour our 
colleague, the member from Rosthern, for this high recognition. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, this Web site makes really absolutely 
no sense. It has no real purpose. And it generates no real 
revenue. We think it’d be a perfect candidate for SaskTel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Habitat for Humanity 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. The amount of $38,611 was given to the Prince Albert 
Habitat for Humanity by the government, making available 
funds to acquire two building lots in Prince Albert for the 
construction of two houses for families in need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the founding of the Prince Albert Habitat for 
Humanities project, three houses are well on the way and 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1515 

 

funding is already underway for the fourth. As the donations of 
money, materials, and volunteer builders allow, this 
organization and other affiliates like it across Canada are 
gradually moving along towards the goal of eliminating poverty 
housing, one house at a time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this donation it becomes very evident that 
this government is committed to giving all people of this fine 
province a chance to connect to their homes and to their futures. 
Connecting to the future is not only about providing housing for 
families that would not be able to afford such a luxury, but it’s 
about innovative school-based programs keeping kids in school. 
It’s about creating a Web-based virtual campus to provide 
education and training to Saskatchewan people no matter where 
in the province they live. 
 
Investments such as this will only further our long-term plan to 
provide the people and communities of Saskatchewan with the 
tools that they need to connect to the future. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Impact of Proposed SaskEnergy Rate Increase 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Well, Mr. Speaker, on Friday the Saskatchewan 
Rate Review Panel recommended what would amount to the 
biggest single utility rate hike in Saskatchewan history. If 
approved, this huge rate hike will have devastating impact on 
Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan’s economy — 
homeowners, businesses, farms, and public institutions like 
hospitals, schools, and skating rinks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be hammered . . . will we be hammered by 
this massive rate hike? To the Premier, what is he going to do to 
protect Saskatchewan people from the crippling blow this rate 
hike will have on Saskatchewan homeowners, farmers, and 
businesses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting to 
listen to members of the opposition because on May 17 the 
member from Canora-Pelly, who sits beside the Leader of the 
Opposition, got up and said that this government was 
underestimating the cost of natural gas. Now when the rate 
review panel has reported — a rate review panel that was called 
for by the opposition — they say we’re overestimating the cost 
of natural gas. 
 
Well I think what we should do, Mr. Speaker, is look at the 
facts. And the facts are these: in their beloved province of 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker, natural gas prices are twice as high as 
what we pay in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Twice as high 
because of deregulation and privatization. 
 
And the people of the province need to remember that what 
these people are about, Mr. Speaker, is selling off SaskEnergy 
so that we can pay their rich friends for higher natural gas costs. 
And we’re not going there, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, of 
course the fact that the minister has two sets of books is a whole 
set of questions in itself. 
 
But I’m talking about Saskatchewan’s economy under the NDP 
(New Democratic Party). 
 
We’ve lost over 12,000 jobs in the last year. We’ve lost over 
8,400 people through out-migration in the past year. And now 
Saskatchewan families and farms and businesses are about to be 
walloped by the biggest tax . . . by the biggest rate hike in our 
history. 
 
The numbers are staggering, Mr. Speaker: $360 more for the 
average homeowner; $444 more for the average farm; and 
thousands of dollars more for businesses and large users like 
schools and hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP knew this was coming — it was no 
secret — and they knew it was going to be bad. Now the 
question is: what are they going to do about it? What plans do 
the NDP have to offset this massive rate hike? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I find it curious that the 
Leader of the Opposition doesn’t get up and say what the facts 
are, which are these, Mr. Speaker: SaskEnergy, which is owned 
by the people of this province, is charging 4.52, $4.52, Mr. 
Speaker, for the same amount of gas that in Alberta costs 
between $9 and $10. 
 
That’s what would result if we listened to the logic of the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker, because that member, the 
Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, when asked by the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix how he was going to pay for tax cuts for 
his rich friends, said this, Mr. Speaker, he said by selling off 
some or part of the Crown corporations. 
 
And no one should mistake what they have in mind, Mr. 
Speaker, which is to do what they tried to do before, which is to 
sell off the corporation just as they sold off our natural gas 
reserves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if someone in this Assembly 
should check his facts, I suggest it would be the Minister of 
Finance. Today, EPCOR, an Alberta-based energy company is 
selling natural gas for $6.69 a gigajoule and that’s cheaper than 
the rate will be when this government approves the panel’s 
recommendation made last Friday. That’s the fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister responsible for 
SaskEnergy. People all over Saskatchewan are questioning why 
SaskEnergy rates are going up. Why is SaskEnergy and this 
government even considering gouging Saskatchewan people in 
light of a couple of facts: in light of the fact that the price right 
now is $5 a gigajoule, it’s being forecast to stay there; and in 
light of the fact that SaskEnergy made this request based on a 
$7.28 a gigajoule forecast. 



1516 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is simple. Why is 
SaskEnergy and the government considering putting up rates at 
this level when industry experts — and even the Minister of 
Finance — are predicting a much lower price? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, they talk about a Web site of 
people that look like Kenny Rogers, there’s also a Web site of 
people that sound like Grant Devine. And that member is on 
that Web site, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Look at how ridiculous this is, Mr. 
Speaker. The member from Swift Current gets up and says that 
somebody says they’re going to charge 6.69 for natural gas. 
And he says that’s a good deal. 
 
Well the price in Saskatchewan is 4.52, Mr. Speaker. Because 
SaskEnergy has the lowest price for the consumer in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker. And why can’t that member get up and admit that 
SaskEnergy, owned by the people of this province, has been 
doing a good job for the consumer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe if we’re lucky, maybe 
if both of us are lucky there’s a Web site called angry men who 
aren’t interested in the facts. Because that’s what we’re 
presenting here today and the Minister of Finance doesn’t seem 
to be very interested. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Friday — and he just said it again now — on 
Friday, the Minister of Finance stood in his place and promised 
to keep natural gas prices in Saskatchewan the lowest in 
Canada. That’s what he said Friday as well. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if he plans to keep that promise that means 
he can’t approve the rate review panel’s recommendation made 
last Friday. The recommended SaskEnergy rate works out to 
$7.28 a gigajoule. EPCOR in Alberta today is currently selling 
natural gas at $6.69 a gigajoule and they’ll lock you in for about 
that over the next five years. And that’s before the $1,600 
rebate the Government of Alberta’s providing homeowners in 
Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Friday the NDP promised the lowest gas rates 
in North America. If they want to keep that promise they have 
to reject the panel’s recommendation. So the question to the 
minister is this: Mr. Speaker, will the NDP reject the panel’s 
recommendation and send it back for further consideration? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, we have already said, in this 
House and outside this House on many occasions, that cabinet 
will consider the recommendation of the rate review panel that 
the opposition called for. We will then make a decision, which 
is in the best interests of the consumer and the provider of the 
energy, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we will do. 
 
(14:00) 

What we will not do, Mr. Speaker, is to privatize SaskEnergy 
and go where they have gone in Alberta. And I want to tell the 
member, the price of natural gas currently in Edmonton has 
been 8.77 per gigajoule; Saskatchewan, 4.52; Calgary, 9.81; 
Saskatchewan, 4.52. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the best prices of any major utility in 
Canada, and I think North America, but it’s not good enough 
for those people because their job is simply to complain, 
complain, complain until enough people buy their snake oil so 
that they can possibly take power and start selling off the assets 
of the people of the province. 
 
That is their ultimate objective, Mr. Speaker, and that is what 
we will try to prevent from happening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In that same vein, 
my question is for the minister responsible for Economic 
Development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, across this province if you ask the businesses what 
was the biggest impact on their business over the last year, they 
would answer energy prices. The increase last winter had a 
huge effect on operating costs of businesses — both large and 
small. And that increase, combined with the rate hike they’re 
now about to face, is causing many small business owners to 
re-evaluate their operations. 
 
The bottom line is that the increased energy costs that 
businesses pay will have to be passed on to the consumer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the cabinet meets to discuss the rate review 
panel’s recommendations for energy rate hikes, does the 
minister plan to tell them about the effect higher energy costs 
will have on the economic development of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I want to say to the member from 
Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker, where by the way they don’t have 
natural gas provided by SaskEnergy. And I believe the price is 
much, much higher, the member could confirm that, than it is in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Because in Saskatchewan, SaskEnergy has been doing what it 
can to protect the consumer, and including the small business 
sector. And, Mr. Speaker, certainly that is what SaskEnergy will 
continue to try to do. And what this government will try to do 
as we have been doing, is to take the recommendation of the 
independent review panel, consider it, consider the economic 
impacts, consider the questions of fairness, and 
competitiveness, and the health of the corporation, trying to 
avoid deficits and debt that those members want to put the 
province into. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, certainly we’ll be taking all of those factors 
into account and trying to come up with the fairest decision that 
we can come up with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1517 

 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
agriculture industry is already struggling to cope with the rising 
input costs, and energy costs are one of those. Whether they’re 
manufacturing implements, own a welding shop, operate a 
hatchery, a greenhouse, or a seed-cleaning plant, higher energy 
costs is having a huge effect on their bottom line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many farm families simply cannot afford a 38 per 
cent increase in their energy bill, and they certainly don’t expect 
to see their income increase to any significant level that will 
make these costs easier for them to absorb. This obviously will 
not do anything to help ease the farm income crisis and in fact it 
delivers yet another critical blow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does this NDP government think that 
Saskatchewan farm families can possibly cope with such a huge 
energy increase? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member from Watrous that this government is concerned about 
farm input costs and that is why in the last budget, Mr. Speaker 
— which that member voted against and those members all 
voted against — we removed the cap on gas tax for farmers. 
There’s now no tax payable for farm fuel, Mr. Speaker, no tax 
payable for farm fuel in Saskatchewan. 
 
And what I’d like to know is if that member and those members 
were really concerned about farmers and input costs, why did 
they vote against budgetary measures to remove the tax on farm 
fuel, Mr. Speaker? And the reason is, of course, Mr. Speaker, 
that they will oppose anything that this government does 
whether it’s positive for farmers or not because their only 
objective, Mr. Speaker, is to complain and talk about doom and 
gloom and that’s what they do so well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister of Rural Revitalization. Many small 
businesses in rural Saskatchewan are not only struggling with a 
sluggish economy, they’re also dealing with higher property 
taxes as a result of berserk reassessment. 
 
But overwhelmingly those people are saying energy rates are 
having the biggest impact right now on their businesses. Small 
hotels, grocery stores, hardware stores, and other small 
businesses across the province are saying high gas prices are 
driving them out of business and in some cases they’ve already 
laid off staff to cut their operating costs. Others say they now 
have had to put their businesses up for sale. Many say another 
increase will make their businesses non-viable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister of Rural Revitalization stress to 
the cabinet that this latest energy rate hike will have a serious 
negative impact on rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, why is it that day after day 
and week after week, we hear those members getting up in the 
legislature and throughout the province comparing 

Saskatchewan to Alberta and saying small business is suffering 
because they say taxes are lower in the province of Alberta. 
People are leaving because they say taxes are lower in the 
province of Alberta. 
 
But here we have a situation they’re complaining about the cost 
of natural gas when we know that the cost of natural gas is 
twice as much in Alberta as Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — 
twice as high in Alberta than Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we don’t hear — we don’t hear the same comparisons 
coming from the opposition about their beloved province of 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker. Because Alberta has done what those 
members advocate, which is to privatize their utilities and make 
the consumer pay their rich friends. But you know what, Mr. 
Speaker? People are catching on to that and seeing what their 
plan really means. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 
 
The NDP’s massive SaskEnergy rate increase is also going to 
be devastating for Saskatchewan communities and 
Saskatchewan’s already struggling property taxpayers. 
Municipal buildings and community-owned facilities such as 
skating rinks, curling rinks, and swimming pools will all require 
funding increases to cope with the rising energy cost. And for 
the most, that funding is going to have to come from the 
municipality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, municipalities don’t have the money. So that 
choice in hundreds of communities is a grim one, Mr. Speaker 
— raise the property taxes again or start closing rinks and 
community halls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Liberal minister commit to advising the 
NDP cabinet that the proposed 35 per cent increase in natural 
gas rates is either going to drive the property taxes up in 
communities across Saskatchewan or force the closures of rinks 
and community centres? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter how 
many times I get up and tell the opposition that we have the best 
prices for natural gas. They’re not going to admit that. They’re 
not going to deal with the facts. 
 
So I’ll just say this instead, Mr. Speaker, they may not like the 
price of natural gas at $7 per gigajoule or whatever it’s going to 
be. But I’ll say this, Mr. Speaker, that is a bargain compared to 
what a gigajoule of the snake oil from that side of the House 
would cost. Because if the people of this province ever buy that 
snake oil, Mr. Speaker, they’ll be paying through the nose for 
natural gas and we’re not going to let that happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 



1518 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

Saskatchewan health districts are significant consumers of 
natural gas. That means the NDP’s plan for a massive 
SaskEnergy rate increase is going to drive up operating costs 
for every health district in Saskatchewan. And yet we already 
have many health districts struggling with deficit budgets and 
others who are considering closing facilities and staff layoffs, 
service reductions, in order to balance their books. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit to advise his NDP 
cabinet colleagues that a massive SaskEnergy rate increase is 
going to lead to even more bed closures and staffing reductions 
while hospital waiting lists get longer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve already explained 
to the opposition that we have the best natural gas prices in 
Canada. Perhaps the opposition doesn’t believe it, I don’t know, 
but that’s what we’ve done. And I’ve explained, Mr. Speaker, 
that our plan is to consider the recommendation of the rate 
review panel, Mr. Speaker, and we will do what we can to make 
sure that our rates are among the best in Canada if not the best 
in Canada, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’ll do. 
 
We will use the publicly owned corporation, SaskEnergy, to 
keep our rates competitive as we have been doing. So that’s the 
answer to that question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But while I’m on my feet, I’ll say this: that I know the 
opposition health critic will have been very pleased this 
morning to read in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix the story that 
said that the health care delivered in Saskatoon is among the 
best in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Education. School divisions across 
Saskatchewan were all too familiar with the massive budget 
cuts that were inflicted by this NDP government over the past 
10 years. But during the last election, Mr. Speaker, we heard the 
Liberal leader go on and on about how the NDP had to stop 
downloading onto municipalities and school divisions. But now 
that the Liberal leader’s a member of the NDP, downloading, it 
just isn’t so bad any more. 
 
The NDP’s plan for a massive SaskEnergy rate increase is 
going to drive operating costs for school divisions right up 
again. And yet the best advice the Liberal leader can give 
school divisions is to simply raise property taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Education commit to advise 
his NDP cabinet colleagues that a massive SaskEnergy rate 
increase is going to drive education taxes up right across 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, this is how ridiculous this 
opposition really is. That member, the Education critic gets up 
and says — note this — that we’re cutting funding to the school 
boards. Well, well, Mr. Speaker, in the last two years, funding 
to K to 12 education in Saskatchewan has gone up by 16 per 
cent — 16 per cent. 
 

And this is how phony-baloney the argument of the opposition 
really is, Mr. Speaker, because in this budget where we have the 
largest Education budget in Saskatchewan history and an 
increase in K to 12 education that was welcomed — and we got 
an A from the school boards — we put money into education. 
What did they do? They complained about it and voted against 
it, and it’s on the record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, higher 
increased energy costs are going to be very, very difficult . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, higher 
increased energy costs are going to be very, very difficult to 
deal with for low-income families. Senior citizens and 
low-income earners are going to be especially hard hit. 
 
The resources in the community that seniors and low-income 
families rely on for recreation, for child care — many of which 
are non-profit — are also going to have to pay more for energy 
and will have to pass those costs on to the people who use their 
services. It is essentially a double blow for consumers, felt the 
hardest by people of low incomes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister of Social Services, 
how is he going to approach his cabinet colleagues on this 
issue, and will he be supporting this increase in energy rates? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, here we go again, Mr. Speaker. 
Because in the budget that was presented in this legislature on 
March 29, there were measures for community schools, for an 
Indian and Métis strategy, for an increase in the child benefit — 
to do what, Mr. Speaker? To fight poverty in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to say to the member from Estevan that 
Saskatchewan is the only province in the last few years that has 
decreased the rate of child poverty. We have not done enough, 
Mr. Speaker, and there’s much more to be done. 
 
But this government is taking steps to deal with poverty that 
were opposed by that member who voted against it, Mr. 
Speaker, and were opposed by that party. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, the simple fact of the matter is that party has never 
been interested in measures to help the poor, Mr. Speaker, and 
that party will never be interested in measures to help the poor, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
hear the Minister of Finance bluster over there, unaware of the 
damage that he and his government is doing to Saskatchewan 
— the damage that he is doing to homeowners and farmers and 
businesses, to low-income people. Mr. Speaker, all of 
Saskatchewan is questioning why SaskEnergy rates are going 
up when natural gas prices are going down. 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1519 

 

The Saskatchewan Party has asked the Speaker to allow an 
emergency debate on this matter this afternoon. Our motion 
calls on the cabinet to protect the people of Saskatchewan from 
this massive rate hike increase and to consider rejecting the 
proposed rate hike in light of recent forecasts of declining gas 
prices. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker: will the Premier follow our 
recommendation? Will the Premier take immediate action to 
protect Saskatchewan residents from this massive rate hike? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition gets up for the ninth act of an one-act play. Because 
everybody in the province knows, Mr. Speaker, that this party 
over there is a one-trick pony that believes in one thing, and that 
is tax cuts for their rich friends, Mr. Speaker, at any expense — 
even if they have to sell off the assets of the people to pay for it. 
 
That is what that party did in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, and if 
given the chance, let’s face it, that is what that party will do 
again. And that member and all the other members can get up 
and complain and they can cry all the crocodile tears they want 
for this group and that group and the other group, Mr. Speaker, 
but the fact of the matter is, any time this government takes a 
positive step to deal with it, what do they do, Mr. Speaker? 
They vote against it. That’s what they do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister didn’t answer my question. The minister didn’t answer 
any of my colleagues’ questions. I don’t know if the minister in 
charge of SaskEnergy has even let the Minister of Finance 
know that the rate review panel has asked for a 35 to 40 per cent 
increase in natural gas rates in Saskatchewan. He seems to be 
ignorant of the fact, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’re asking the 
Premier. 
 
Will the Premier agree to take this serious matter to cabinet and 
will he insist that this matter be reviewed before the rate hikes 
are imposed on every person in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, this is how 
incredible this opposition really is. For years, for years they 
called for an independent rate review panel to set rates on 
utilities. That’s what they called for. 
 
And notwithstanding the fact that our bundle of rates is the best 
in Canada, we set up an independent rate review panel, Mr. 
Speaker, so that it wouldn’t be the decision just of the cabinet 
what the rate should be. So we take their advice, set up the 
independent rate review panel, get the advice of the rate review 
panel, then what do they say? They say send it back to the rate 
review panel. We don’t like it, that’s what they say. 
 
And I say, and we on this side of the House say, Mr. Speaker, 
this is not a credible opposition. This is a group of individuals 
who will try to take political advantage and complain about 
whatever is going on in the province, Mr. Speaker, because they 

have one objective and one objective only, and that is to attain 
power at all costs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Land Surveyors and Professional 
Surveyors Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 49, The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors 
Amendment Act, 2001 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Mineral Resources 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 50, 
The Mineral Resources Amendment Act, 2001 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 51, The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2001, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 52, The Railway Amendment Act, 2001, be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Impact of SaskEnergy Proposed Rate Increases 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day, I want to 
make a statement. Today at 11:20 a.m. I received a request from 
the member for Swift Current, a written request pursuant to rule 
19, to move priority of debate motion. 
 
In examining whether or not the matter is proper to be 
discussed, I find that the member for Swift Current has made 
sufficient case. The issue at hand concerns the administrative 
responsibilities of government, and could come within the 
scope of ministerial action. 
 



1520 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

In considering whether this matter could be brought before the 
House by other means within a reasonable time, I note that 
there does not appear to be any obvious alternative way for this 
issue to be debated within the next few days. 
 
Therefore I call upon the member to move his priority of debate 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate your ruling in that regard. We on this side of the 
House, and we hope that members on the government side of 
the House, believe this to be a very urgent matter that this 
legislature would be dealing with. 
 
If this rate hike is approved, it will be the largest utility rate 
hike in the history of our province. And as we tried to outline in 
question period, Mr. Speaker, it will affect every facet of life in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’ll affect people in rural Saskatchewan, be they in business or 
be they in the service of providing health care and education. 
It’ll most definitely affect agriculture, Mr. Speaker. It’ll affect 
specifically health care in both rural and urban areas. 
 
As the member for Kelvington-Wadena has pointed out, it will 
drastically impact on schools in our province, and on the 
budgets that school boards have already passed, I would point 
out, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the fiscal year that’s underway 
now. And, Mr. Speaker, it will impact on manufacturing and it 
will impact on small business. 
 
Now we on this side of the House understand as well as any, 
that the world price for commodities such as natural gas will 
and must have an impact on our economy here in the province 
of Saskatchewan. We understand that completely. 
 
We believe in liberalized trade, Mr. Speaker. We understand 
that whether we like it or not all the time, this is truly a global 
economy and because of that, not only will we benefit from 
international markets, but sometimes we will be price takers 
from international markets. 
 
But in the case of natural gas, Mr. Speaker, that isn’t even 
necessarily the case that we are only price takers. Because that 
would imply that we don’t benefit at all when the price of gas or 
the price of oil goes to the roof, as we have seen it do over the 
last period of months. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, we are one of only two provinces in the 
Dominion that are benefactors to any significant degree from 
high energy prices. Alberta and Saskatchewan, as major oil and 
gas producers, clearly are benefactors when the price of natural 
gas goes to the roof or the price of West Texas crude, Mr. 
Speaker, because the province generates royalty revenue off of 
that. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, this government’s sitting on $400 million 
in windfall oil and gas royalty that they’ve generated from this 
sector. So the same situation that does cause consumers some 
difficulty — i.e., the high cost of their monthly gas bill; i.e., the 
price of gas at the pumps — also affords Saskatchewan people a 

benefit in that they are owners of the resource and therefore are 
paid a royalty by the private sector who developed those 
resources. And that royalty accrues to the government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no benefit, no benefit for 
Saskatchewan people if the government that collects that 
revenue has its priorities wrong in terms of either the 
expenditure of those royalty revenues, or perhaps the saving, as 
the case may be. 
 
And that seems to be the problem with this government, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s why we have stood on countless occasions in 
this Assembly to exhort the government to treat that royalty, 
that windfall oil and gas royalty, like it is the people’s money 
and not like it is their own. Because it’s surely the former, Mr. 
Speaker, make no doubt about that. 
 
More recently though, Mr. Speaker, last week, in fact the very 
day that . . . And the member for Saskatoon Nutana was here on 
Friday. She will know, if she bothered to check the Internet . . . 
and I’m not sure they do, because they proved today they aren’t 
aware of the current price for natural gas in either this province 
or Alberta. 
 
But she would know if she was here on Friday, that the price for 
natural gas that day was $5 a gigajoule. Well actually it was a 
little less than $5; it was $5 per thousand cubic metre. And 
actually a thousand cubic metres is about 95 per cent a 
gigajoule. So the price was more around $4.75, Mr. Speaker, 
the day that we rose in this Assembly to question the 
government on SaskEnergy’s request for a rate increase which 
is based on $7 a gigajoule, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there was some confusion over on the 
government side, and that remains today in terms of what the 
actual price for gas is. And we just encourage them to check out 
the Internet because the prices are all there. AECO, that’s the 
price the Minister of Finance has ballyhooed that the 
government uses — Alberta Energy Corporation prices. 
 
Today if he would have gone to the Internet and checked it out, 
he would have seen, Mr. Speaker, he would have seen what the 
actual price for gas forecasts in Alberta are. Mr. Speaker, they 
range from $4.98 to 5.32 at the high end. That’s what was on 
the Internet today. 
 
If he had bothered to look, if his staff maybe had clicked a few 
Web sites on the Internet, he wouldn’t have looked quite so 
foolish as he did in question period today when he was talking 
about what the price in Alberta was. In fact, I think he stood up 
on his feet this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and said the price of 
natural gas in Alberta today was 8 . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . My colleagues say 8 to 9 to $10 a gigajoule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even after we pointed out to him that the price 
EPCOR is charging, that’s Edmonton Light . . . that’s the 
former Edmonton Light & Power, by the way, which is right 
now a municipally owned Crown corporation, if you will, of the 
city of Edmonton, of the city council of Edmonton. You know 
what they’re charging today, Mr. Speaker? About 6.69, and 
that’s if you lock in to three to five years, that’s if you lock in, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s if . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the 
Minister of Labour is chirping from the back seat. He doesn’t 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1521 

 

even fully comprehend that that’s a lock-in price over the long 
term. 
 
These people have demonstrated Friday and today, in spades, 
that they don’t have a clue about this industry, and if 
Saskatchewan people are worried that they’ll make the final 
decision on the panel’s recommendation, I don’t blame them for 
being worried. I’m worried too, I’m worried too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The minister doesn’t know what the price of gas 
is. He’s their designated hit man today in question period. 
These questions clearly should have been answered by his 
colleague, the minister for SaskEnergy who’s been having more 
than his share of trouble this session. And he doesn’t like to 
micromanage. 
 
So the Minister of Finance fields all these questions on the 
SaskEnergy rate increase. Surely he knew we were going to ask 
them today, and he didn’t even bother to do a research to find 
out what the price was; to find out the most important point of 
all, Mr. Speaker, which is this: if the panel recommendations 
are approved, even at 7 per cent less than was SaskEnergy was 
asking for, our prices in Saskatchewan will no longer be the 
lowest in Canada or North America. And that’s significant, Mr. 
Speaker, because it would represent another broken promise of 
this NDP government. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Last Friday and today, the Minister of Finance promised and 
committed to the people of Saskatchewan that after the smoke 
clears on this rate increase request, that we would have the 
lowest prices in all of the Dominion and then he went on to say 
North America as well. 
 
Well the minister was unaware apparently that if he approves 
the panel recommendations — even in their watered-down state 
as the panel has reduced the amount provided to SaskEnergy — 
we indeed, Mr. Speaker, will not have the lowest rates. We 
could tell you today they won’t be lower than EPCOR’s. The 
evil empire next door, as the government would characterize 
them as regards energy, are going to be lower if you do that, 
Mr. Speaker, if the government approves the panel 
recommendations as they are. 
 
And so these are the questions that we’re asking. And we’ve 
asked them in the media since then. And I was involved in an 
interview this morning on a Regina radio station and tried to be 
non-political, frankly, Mr. Speaker, because the issue is very 
important . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it’s true. In fact I 
defended the process that the government has put in place. 
 
And then we simply said what we’re asking the government to 
do, all we’re asking them to do is to clarify why the price on 
which they’re going to base their decision — $7 a gigajoule — 
why the price they’re going to base their decision on is 40 per 
cent higher than the price today, 40 per cent higher than the 
price forecast through to October, 2002. 
 
I think the member for Regina Victoria just bellowed out — 
maybe he wasn’t here a few minutes ago — I think he just 

bellowed out about the lowest prices in North America. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Greystone on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce two guests in the gallery this 
afternoon, in the west gallery; two people who’ve made a major 
contribution to life in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I see that Mr. Ormond McKaque is here, who’s a distinguished 
educator, made a big contribution to the University of 
Saskatchewan and to K to 12 education in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And I also see that Mr. Sam Sambisiam is here, who’s 
made a major contribution to the trade union movement in this 
province and to the work of the food bank in Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I hope all members of the Assembly will take a moment to 
welcome these two gentlemen. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Impact of SaskEnergy Proposed Rate Increases 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well just before the 
introduction of guests, the member for Regina Victoria was 
bellowing out again about the lowest prices in North America. 
And that is the promise and the commitment of the government. 
You made it on . . . I beg your pardon, Mr. Speaker, his 
colleague, the Minister of Finance, committed, committed the 
government to the lowest prices in North America. 
 
And we will hold the government to that because if it adopts the 
recommendations of the rate review panel, we’ll be at $7.28 a 
gigajoule. That’s the fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker. It’s not our 
side versus their side. That’s the fact of the matter. 
 
And the other fact of that matter then, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
will not be the lowest in North America, and another promise 
will have been broken by this government. Just like the health 
care promises that they made in the last election were broken, 
Mr. Speaker. Just like their solemn promise to their membership 
that they would never privatize, that they opposed deregulation. 
Let’s take a look at the record of the members opposite on that 
front, Mr. Speaker, to find out if they’re trustworthy as regards 
this motion today. 
 
What did they do with the shares in the Husky Upgrader? They 
privatized them. What did they do with their shares in Cameco? 
They privatized them. What did they do with their remaining 
shares in SaskComp, with their remaining shares in SaskComp, 
now ISM (Information Systems Management Corporation)? 
They privatized them. What did the president — the NDP 



1522 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

hand-picked president — of SaskTel confirm for us not more 
than two weeks ago? That he was considering the privatization 
of 20 to 30 per cent of SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. That’s their 
record. 
 
So on one hand they say we’re unequivocally opposed to 
privatization. We want to have nothing to do with it. And in the 
backrooms, in the backrooms, they’re cutting deals. They’re 
selling the assets of the people of Saskatchewan because their 
commitment does not go beyond their word. 
 
What about deregulation? What about deregulation? Let’s take 
a look at that issue, Mr. Speaker. And they better get used to 
hearing about it because we’re going to be talking about this ad 
nauseam for the next number of months. On the count of 
deregulation, this government has deregulated well, one major 
industry for sure — the telephone industry, right? Some say it’s 
been a good thing. Some of the review . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would like the member to bring the topic of 
the debate around to the motion that he is about to propose. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for that. I raise these 
issues because when we talk about SaskEnergy, when we talk 
about this rate increase as the panel has recommended to the 
government, and when we ask the government questions about 
this issue, they always bring up these issues. 
 
And it’s frankly a little disingenuine because they are the 
government that has the agenda in terms of privatization. 
They’ve deregulated the telephone industry. They’ve introduced 
a Bill this session, the minister of SaskPower has, to deregulate 
the electrical industry. That’s what it would do. And we’ll have 
questions about that in committee. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that is very significant as it relates to this 
issue. Because when residents, when consumers in the province 
of Saskatchewan hear about anything to do with gas prices — 
when they hear about gas prices going up 34 percent, when they 
hear that our prices will soon be higher than in Alberta which is 
everybody’s whipping boy in terms of the price of energy — 
they get concerned. They think that this is the product of bad 
policy making in our province just as the high prices in Alberta 
may be the product of bad policy making in that province. 
 
I think we’ve all agreed that the approach the Alberta 
government took in the gas industry has been wrong. I think 
they’ve made a number of mistakes. Everybody, I think 
everybody would agree with the process they’ve used. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker? When they hear that this 
government is willing to consider a 40 per cent increase in face 
of the fact that natural gas prices have dropped 40 per cent, they 
also think that that is bad public policy, Mr. Speaker. It’s as bad 
as any provincial government has enacted anywhere, and that’s 
why we want to have this debate. 
 
The debate is about a motion that is very constructive, Mr. 
Speaker. It doesn’t get into the details of what’s needed and 
what isn’t. It doesn’t require the government to turn down 
SaskEnergy’s request for help with the gas cost variance 
account, because clearly it’s going to be . . . it’s in arrears and 
it’ll get worse before it gets better. Our motion doesn’t provide 

a blanket opposition to any kind of increase at all. 
 
But it does call on this government to leave no stone unturned 
in terms of any measure it can possibly invoke to ease the shock 
of this increase, to relieve people a little bit from this increase. 
 
And further, Mr. Speaker, because of the concern and question 
that exists regarding the price of natural gas today and the price 
SaskEnergy has used to make their forecast, because of that 40 
per cent discrepancy — more now than the requested rate 
increase — we’re asking the government to consider as one of 
those measures to simply send it back to the panel and say we 
appreciate the good work the panel has done, we know that the 
panel has hired industry experts but the gas commodity industry 
is obviously a volatile thing. It has been . . . that’s been the 
record of it over the last number of months. 
 
And so it is completely neat and right for this government to 
say: in light of the fact that the day you had your press 
conference, the headlines all over the country were concerning 
the slump in the price of natural gas, and in light of the fact that 
the price that day was $4.75 a gigajoule and the request 
SaskEnergy made is based on $7 a gigajoule, and if agreed to 
. . . if we agree with your recommendations panel, the rate will 
be $7.28 a gigajoule — in light of all of that, we think it’s 
completely reasonable and fair for the panel to reconsider those 
factors. 
 
This is too important an issue, Mr. Speaker. There is too much 
at stake. There is too much at stake in our schools. There is too 
much at stake in our hospitals. There’s too much at stake in our 
small businesses and in our municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s too much at stake in our homes, in the homes of our 
constituents. 
 
And I find it very unfortunate that the Minister of Finance, in 
one of his rants in response to the questions on this side, would 
question the motives of any of us. I think the term he used was 
crocodile tears. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Moose Jaw North 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, with thanks to the hon. 
member for Swift Current, I would like to draw the attention of 
the Assembly to visitors who are with us from South Korea this 
afternoon and who are seated, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery. 
 
In the gallery, Mr. Speaker, is the vice-president of Sung Kyul 
Christian University and professor of law, Dr. Kwang Sun Kim. 
He is accompanied by Mrs. Kim, who is an elementary teacher, 
and also accompanied by a missionary, Ms. Yang Imchoi. 
 
Hon. members, I would ask all of us to please extend a warm 
Western Canadian, Saskatchewan welcome to our visitors from 
South Korea. 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1523 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Impact of SaskEnergy Proposed Rate Increases 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was very 
disappointing in question period I think to hear the Minister of 
Finance question the motives behind our questions. I think the 
term he used was crocodile tears. That’s what he called, I guess, 
our questions or the tone of our questions as if we don’t have a 
concern about our constituents — whether they have a low 
income, a medium income, or a high income. 
 
Well and the member for Regina South apparently agrees with 
the Minister of Finance that they are the only ones that care 
about people that may be on low income; that they might be the 
only group of people that care about those that might be able to 
effect energy bills. Yes, he says that’s about right. 
 
It’s that ignorance, Mr. Speaker, it’s that level of ignorance that 
has this government destined for the same place that its 
predecessor headed, Mr. Speaker. It is so out of touch and it is 
so arrogant, and now it’s questioning anybody that criticizes it. 
The motives — whether it’s the opposition politicians or not — 
motives are impugned, motives are questioned, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s unacceptable today. 
 
It’s why the people of Saskatchewan are fed up with that 
government and it’s why they can’t wait to turf them out of 
office, Mr. Speaker. Because I haven’t been a . . . I’ve only 
been an MLA since September of 1999 but, you know, I had the 
pleasure to get to know a lot of these people quite well I think 
over that period of time. 
 
I think members on that side of the House would agree that in 
this job you get to know, well you get to know all the members 
of this Assembly a little bit, and you also get to certainly know 
your caucus members even a little better than that. And I’m not 
offended for me, but I’m offended for them because I’ve had 
the privilege of working with them. I’ve seen their attitude in 
terms of their work for their constituents. I’ve seen how they 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well and they’re still chirping 
from their seat and laughing, Mr. Speaker, because this 
apparently isn’t serious — to impugn the motives of the 
members across the way about why we would raise questions. 
 
It’s just absolutely sad, Mr. Speaker, because I happen to know 
these men and women and I happen to know about their 
motives. I’ve happened to see them in action in terms of trying 
to help their constituents. They’ve come to me and said there’s 
this community rink that’s threatening to close down, that it’s 
going to have to close down simply because they can’t afford to 
keep the lights on and the ice plant working. They’ve come to 
me with those, they’ve raised those concerns directly with the 
minister, they’ve called SaskEnergy. Well, Mr. Speaker, that 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just think it’s an indictment 
of the government. I think it’s an indictment of that member for 

Regina South, that he would choose to play that sort of politics, 
to assume that anybody who raises concerns on behalf of 
low-income people is doing so for anything other than the best 
of reasons, Mr. Speaker. It’s very unfortunate. 
 
It’s not totally unexpected from a government that’s morally 
bankrupt, from a government that fires people that try to report 
wrongdoing, from a government that breaks its health care 
promises, from a government that says it’s against privatization 
and in the backrooms is planning the sale of Crowns, from a 
government whose leader makes energy decisions apparently by 
the toss of a coin and eight hours after he’s made one 
pronouncement he flip-flops, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s the kind of government we have, so maybe we shouldn’t 
be surprised of the attitude that we get over there. But I can tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, my constituents maybe aren’t surprised by it 
but they are sick of it; and constituents of members represented 
over here, and I dare say the constituents of those members, are 
sick of it. And they are waiting for the day when they can give 
this group the boot in a big way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Our motion also outlines several specific ways 
. . . or considers the government . . . requests that the 
government consider specific ways that they might be able to 
provide some relief. Make no mistake, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
saying that based on the international forecast for gas that 
we’ve seen, and based on the level of costs that have been 
suggested by SaskEnergy, we believe that this entire increase 
may not be needed. Make no mistake about that. 
 
But to the extent that some level of increase may be needed, we 
would also urge the government in this motion to consider 
every measure possible to provide some relief for Saskatchewan 
businesses and for non-profits and for families. 
 
(14:45) 
 
You know the Minister of Finance actually made the suggestion 
not long ago — one idea, that’s pretty good — he talked about 
the government using its windfall oil and gas revenue, about 
$400 million, to help pay down all or part of SaskEnergy’s gas 
cost variance account. That is the account that was set up at the 
direction of the rate review panel last fall when the first 22 per 
cent increase was approved. And that account, at the risk of 
oversimplifying it, Mr. Speaker, simply measures the difference 
between the price SaskEnergy’s getting and the price they have 
to pay. 
 
And the panel told SaskEnergy clearly and rightly so, when it 
gets into the ditch in a big way, when it gets to a certain 
number, that should automatically trigger a request for another 
increase. That’s what they said. 
 
And so when word got out — and we were the first to break the 
story — that SaskEnergy was considering a 30 to 40 per cent 
rate increase, the Minister of Finance, to his credit, to his credit, 
started thinking about ways that he could help the people of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I see several debates taking 



1524 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

place here. The floor properly belongs to the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When we raise these 
concerns about the spectre of this increase, the government 
initially said there would be no relief other than that $25 pizza 
rebate, Mr. Speaker. Other than an extra large cheese pizza, the 
government was going to provide no relief. The minister was 
even asked in the rotunda — and it’s a matter of public record, 
the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) — they said, well if SaskEnergy comes with this 
huge rate increase, will there be any more help and the minister 
said no. Twenty-five bucks; that’s it. 
 
A couple of days later, the Minister of Finance wandered out to 
the rotunda and publicly began to muse about paying down the 
gas cost variance account as a way to alleviate SaskEnergy’s 
need for an increase. The media asked us what we thought 
about that. We said well that’s one option that sounds pretty 
good. It’s certainly a lot better than the Minister of 
SaskEnergy’s pizza rebate — certainly much better than that. 
And we encouraged the government to consider that. So that’s 
one measure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other measure the government could consider as a result of 
our motion is a more general rebate to Saskatchewan families. 
There’s good and bad of course with that. Rebate programs 
seem to always have inherent administration problems. There’s 
always lines that seem to have to be drawn with this and people 
on either side of the line may or may not qualify. But it’s an 
option that they have and I’m sure their officials are looking at 
that option. 
 
And the other option, and one that we would urge the 
government to consider today, and we would urge them to 
provide some relief. If they’ve committed to that, then even 
better, I think, than the gas cost variance account might be some 
consideration for the government to assist with the distribution 
charge that the TransGas portion of SaskEnergy must charge. 
Even though that part’s not being increased by the way in this 
rate request, and we readily admit that, the transmission fee 
isn’t going up. But, Mr. Speaker, in our province there are other 
companies other than SaskEnergy that are selling natural gas. 
CEG is one and they employ a number of people in our 
province. And they sell gas on SaskEnergy’s transmission lines. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as it turns out many of the customers of 
CEG are schools and hospitals, and large institutional 
organizations. And there are . . . of course in our province 
there’s room for other providers. 
 
We hear a rumour, in fact, that there is a natural gas company in 
Alberta considering also coming to Saskatchewan to do . . . to 
operate. So we heard that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what . . . they may not be interested . . . they may not be 
interested in coming, Mr. Speaker, if we as a government pay 
down that gas cost variance account and effectively subsidize 
one of their competitors. But, if we were to help people in terms 
of the distribution charge, that of course would alleviate that 
problem. 
 
So through you today, Mr. Speaker, that’s a suggestion — 

hopefully viewed as a constructive suggestion — that we would 
make to the government and to the cabinet as they consider this 
rate review request. 
 
We ask them to do two things. One, we ask them to look very 
carefully at the fact that the price SaskEnergy’s based their 
request on is 40 per cent higher than the price being forecast to 
run through to October, 2002. That’s the first thing. Excuse me, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the second thing is that we ask them to look at every 
measure of relief should some increase be approved. And the 
last one I want to reiterate again, because it’s very important. 
 
There are other gas suppliers operating in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Now there’s not very many. Right now there’s 
really only one major company and it’s CEG. And they have 
many institutional customers and a good solid 
Saskatchewan-based company. 
 
But there are others apparently at least having a look at our 
market, having a look at investing in the province. And if we 
could do something on the distribution side in terms of relief, if 
that’s the direction we went, it would not be a disincentive for 
those considering investment in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Certainly that doesn’t preclude some of the other initiatives as 
suggested by the Minister of Finance, but that is one that we 
would like to make. 
 
But the heart of our motion . . . the heart of the motion today, 
Mr. Speaker . . . the heart of the motion today is that there is 
this huge discrepancy between the price that SaskEnergy has 
based its increase request on, and arguably the price that the 
panel has also based their recommendation on, and the price 
today, about 4.75 to 4.90, and the long-term price as forecast 
now by the New York Mercantile Exchange — if you want to 
check that on the Internet — by AECO in Alberta, by CIBC 
(Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce), and others. 
 
That’s the price being forecast today, about $5, and a high of 
about 5.30. 
 
There is one other prognosticator involved in this debate, Mr. 
Speaker. There is one other economist who has waded into the 
debate about the price of natural gas, and that is none other than 
the Minister of Finance. The Minister of Finance waded in on 
what the future price of gas would be. 
 
And all you’ve got to do is check out page 44 of his budget, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve heard from the banks, we’ve heard from the 
economists, and now I am going to refresh the memory of my 
colleagues, the prognostications of . . . the Minister of Finance 
— what does he say? 
 
What does he say? Natural gas, Canadian dollars per gigajoule, 
2002, Mr. Speaker — and by the way, this rate increase will 
take us to October, 2002, so it’s very germane; 2002 is exactly 
the time period that we’re talking about — and the price is 
$3.39 a gigajoule. That’s about half — half — of the $7.28 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I notice that the . . . on the Votes and 
Proceedings that the motion for Tuesday involves, specifically, 
exactly what the member is talking about now. I think perhaps 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1525 

 

we should be sticking with the motion here because we’ll have 
an opportunity to debate that tomorrow. 
 
There is such a rule called anticipation of debate which we very, 
very rarely talk about, but this being that specific, I’d prefer if 
the member would omit that part. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, other members will touch on 
this. It is germane; it’s the forecast for the price of gas made by 
the government — the same cabinet that will be considering the 
request of the rate review panel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion is, this motion is a constructive one. It 
urges the provincial cabinet to consider every possible measure 
it can to blunt the effects of this very serious increase. And also 
to consider sending this back to the rate review panel, pending 
the clarification of what the future price of natural gas will be. 
What is the price? Who do believe? The Minister of Finance, 
the economists, the bankers, the rate review panel, or Ron 
Clark. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the 
member for Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly urge cabinet to implement measures to 
reduce the severe negative impact on homeowners, 
businesses, farms, and public institutions of the 
Saskatchewan Rate Review Panel’s recommended 
SaskEnergy rate increase; and that, in light of recent 
forecasts projecting a dramatic decline in natural gas prices, 
this Assembly urge cabinet to reconsider rejecting the 
current recommendations and referring the matter back to 
the Saskatchewan Rate Review Panel for further 
consideration. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
glad to have the opportunity to take part in such an important 
debate today because, Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Swift 
Current talked numbers and talked a number of areas where we 
don’t feel that there’s an actual need for the dramatic increase 
that’s being asked for by the utility rate panel, and the worry we 
have that the government, as usual, will just rubber-stamp it and 
let it go through. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my part today, I would like to touch on and try 
and convince the cabinet not to pass on this rate hike to the 
people of Saskatchewan. I’d like to touch on a number of areas 
in the province that I feel will be affected if this increase goes 
through, the dramatic increase, Mr. Speaker, that’s being asked 
for by SaskEnergy. 
 
The first area I would like to touch on, Mr. Speaker, are our 
seniors in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our seniors are the most vulnerable people in this 
province when it comes to our utility rate increases. We’ve seen 
in the past, SaskPower, SaskTel, SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance), and SaskEnergy in the past have all 
had increases for the last number of years, Mr. Speaker, passed 
on to the seniors of this province. 
 

Where in many cases our seniors have nowhere to pass this on, 
Mr. Speaker. They’re on fixed incomes. And even the people 
that aren’t on fixed incomes, Mr. Speaker, many people out 
there that have put a little money away for their retirement, it’s 
being gobbled up now by such things as utility rates in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and when they get to the point they 
have no more money stuck away, they are actually on fixed 
incomes and in the same boat as many other seniors out there. 
 
We must also consider, Mr. Speaker, that there’s many seniors 
out there that are living by themselves. Might be a widow, 
might be the woman or the man in either situation that have 
nowhere to look for the increase they need to pay their utility 
rates. And, Mr. Speaker, I think, Mr. Speaker, one of my 
concerns is we’re doing exactly the opposite of what I feel and I 
think many in this province feel we should doing is trying to 
promote seniors to be able to stay in their homes as long as they 
possibly can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is going to happen here is when they get to 
the point that they cannot afford to stay in their own homes, 
they have very few alternatives. They either have to find a low 
rental apartment, Mr. Speaker, which will also be affected by 
these utility rate increases or, if they’re in the condition where 
they may have to find some type of a home, and then the 
government or the province or the taxpayers will have to try and 
help these people survive. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we should be trying to assist our seniors 
to stay in their own homes, what we’re actually doing here is 
driving them out of their own homes. And completely the 
reverse psychology of what we should be looking at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk of seniors out there right now, their 
costs go up and the increase to their pensions, well for all 
intents and purposes, stay the same. I know my parents, Mr. 
Speaker, would actually . . . probably a 50-cent-a-month 
increase is about the biggest increase that they get out there. 
Now if you’re going to jack our energy prices up by $400 a 
year, a 50-cent-a-month increase for our seniors out there — 
and that’s a couple, Mr. Speaker — is not going to go very far. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move on now and talk about an area 
that I’m quite familiar with, and what it will do to 
municipalities of all kinds, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s towns, 
cities, villages, or RMs (rural municipality). It’s going to affect 
every one of them, Mr. Speaker, because they all look after such 
things as skating rinks, curling rinks, swimming pools. Most, 
most municipalities have big sheds to store machinery in. All of 
these things cost many dollars at the present time to heat and 
provide power for. If an increase like this goes through, they 
have nowhere but to pass those costs on to the local taxpayer. 
 
Now keeping that in mind, Mr. Speaker, we remember that in 
the 2001 budget, the revenue-sharing grants were raised . . . 
what? They weren’t. They were actually froze at the level they 
were before. So where do the municipalities pass this increase 
on to? The local taxpayer. 
 
So really, in essence, Mr. Speaker, in essence what we are 
seeing here is a tax increase. Because on one hand, the 
government of the day comes along at the end of the year and 
raids the utilities, takes money out of the utilities and dumps in 



1526 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

general revenue. But when it comes back to returning some of 
that money to things like the municipalities, they forgot to 
return any of that windfall to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area I’d like to talk about is farmers. The 
farming community, as we know, Mr. Speaker, and I believe 
you know as well as I do that agriculture is having a very, very 
hard time right now, Mr. Speaker. And the last thing that 
farmers need, that agriculture, any agriculture business of any 
kind out there needs right now is an increase to any utility rate. 
 
SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about drying grain or a 
number of processing plants . . . 
 
(15:00) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when agriculture, and it doesn’t matter which area of agriculture 
you talk about now — that it could be for grain drying, it could 
be for processing plants, dehyd plants — SaskEnergy costs for 
any part of the farming operation right now is the last thing that 
these people need out there to increase their costs, that we’ve 
had just fertilizer costs skyrocket, our fuel costs have 
skyrocketed. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, when our grain prices and the 
product that the farmers are selling has actually been dropping 
for the last number of years, they’re caught in a squeeze where, 
along with all the others — the seniors I’ve talked about, 
municipalities — they’re in no position to be able to pick up the 
tab for an increase in utility rates, especially when we don’t 
feel, Mr. Speaker, that it’s justified at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to talk about businesses in this 
province, and I think this is key. This is key to the economy of 
this province, Mr. Speaker, because with our high tax rates, the 
highest in the country from what we understand, businesses are 
up against it already, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If we pass on these high utility rates, many of these businesses 
are probably going to either go under or sell out and move 
somewhere else, and there goes our tax base, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it just, it’s just an impossibility for businesses in 
this province, after paying the tax structure that we have set up, 
to be able to afford utility rate increases of any kind, Mr. 
Speaker, but in this case SaskEnergy, they just can’t afford it 
and will probably in many cases go under or shut their doors — 
something we definitely cannot afford, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was talking about rinks a minute ago and I’d like 
to read a letter that the member for Thunder Creek received 
today, an e-mail, and I’d like to quote, Mr. Speaker. It says: 
 

Dear Mr. Stewart: 
 
My husband and I are on the volunteer board of the 
Mortlach Centennial Centre Rink. The rink is all volunteer 
run without a single paid employee other than the two 
students who teach skating. We have over 50 kids taking 
skating lessons, three kids’ hockey teams and a pre-hockey 

program, adult and student curling league, as well as 
around 80 children participating in the school curling 
program. The playschool and horse club and 4-H also use 
the facility. 
 
Our number one expense is utilities. 

 
I repeat that, Mr. Speaker, this taxpayer letter to the member for 
Thunder Creek: 
 

Our number one expense is utilities. It has of course 
become more difficult every single year to keep up with the 
fundraising involved to pay those bills; add to that the 
increased demand charges, delivery fees, taxes, base fees of 
those bills and we’re barely hanging on. If this suggested 
increase is approved, I cannot see how we will be able to 
keep this facility open much longer. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that lady sums my point up dead-on. What she’s 
saying is if this increase goes through as it’s being asked for, 
there is one rink and one example that will probably have to 
close their doors and not be able to provide the . . . what they’ve 
been providing for the people of their community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today in question period the Minister of Finance 
kept talking about the lowest energy prices in Canada. He said 
that on a number of occasions. But I think the minister is caught 
in the past, Mr. Speaker. What he’s talking about is yesterday. 
Because tomorrow, if that cabinet approves the increase that’s 
being asked for, we will once again be probably the highest 
energy rates in the country, in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re already known to have the highest taxes in 
the country. Well I probably should reword that, Mr. Speaker, 
probably second only to Newfoundland. Mr. Speaker, if that’s a 
sympathetic ear for the minister to hear, we’re second worst in 
the country, behind the province of Newfoundland. 
 
We’re already known for probably the longest waiting lists in 
health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we’re going to be talking about one of the highest energy 
rates in the country. And the minister, Mr. Speaker, likes to talk 
about don’t compare Alberta because they’ve deregulated and 
their price is away up here. What he forgets to mention is, Mr. 
Speaker, is that . . . I believe in the province here we rebated 
$25. The member for Swift Current likes to talk about a pizza in 
comparison for the $25. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, can you imagine how many pizzas, how 
many pizzas in Alberta you could buy for $1,600 a year? Most 
people in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, could probably eat for three 
months of the twelve months, just on the rebate that the Alberta 
government rebated back to the people of Alberta. 
 
So sometimes it’s not convenient for the Finance minister . . . 
and I know he doesn’t want to talk about Mr. Klein and Alberta, 
but that’s a fair comparison because that’s fact — $1,600 rebate 
in Alberta; $25 in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also talk about our school divisions 
because I know as the Minister of Education likes to blow the 
horn of the government over there, that he’s moved so 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1527 

 

comfortably in with, that he talks about the increased funding 
for education. I believe if I remember the numbers right — and 
I’d hate to be wrong, Mr. Speaker — I believe he talked about a 
$32 million increase. 
 
But it’s funny at the same time that this increase was passed on 
to school divisions, we’re receiving responses from school 
divisions all over this province that are having to raise their 
taxes. Not always raising their mill rates because in some cases 
they’ve lowered their mill rates, but the assessment, Mr. Deputy 
or Mr. Speaker, has climbed so that actually the dollars they’re 
taking in have increased. 
 
Now if this $32 million was such a windfall for school 
divisions, Mr. Speaker, why are school divisions still having to 
raise their taxes? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if we add to school divisions this enormous 
cost, this enormous increase to SaskEnergy prices, can you 
imagine, Mr. Speaker, what it costs to heat a school? The size 
of a building, the size of most schools out there in the province 
of Saskatchewan, can you imagine what that’s going to add to 
the school divisions’ costs and who do they have to pass it on 
to? Well, Mr. Speaker, once again the local taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister in his budget of this year 
predicted under $4 a gigajoule was his long-term prediction for 
gas prices. Now today, SaskEnergy is saying they’re going to 
be locked in around $7, their prediction is $7. And the minister 
today in question period backed that up and kept saying, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s probably what it’s going to be. 
 
Well most companies that predict what gas prices are heading, 
where they’re heading, Mr. Speaker, are talking $5 — a 
tremendous difference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the utility rate review panel had of known — 
and I wonder if they did, Mr. Speaker — would they have 
known when they did this rate review that they weren’t going to 
be $7, that they may be going to be 5, would that rate review 
panel have been suggesting such a large increase? If they would 
do that rate review today, I would think, Mr. Speaker, they 
would probably come in with different recommendations. 
 
Maybe, Mr. Speaker, what we should be doing is going back to 
the rate review panel and saying maybe we should take a 
second look. Because the gas prices per gigajoule are not 
exactly where we thought they were going to be. Now that’s 
contrary to what the Minister of Finance is saying, but it’s not 
out of context for the Minister of Finance to change his mind 
like he did from — what? — 3.50 a gigajoule up to 7 at this 
present time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area that I believe it’s going to hit very 
hard and it possibly has already, but if it hasn’t I’m sure it will 
shortly, and that’s the plight of renters out there, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, many apartment block owners, somewhat like the 
schools out there, are going to see a dramatic increase in their 
energy costs. Possibly not so much through the summer months, 
but as we get into fall, if this huge increase is passed on, we’re 
going to see rent increases all over this province. Just another 
way to punish people in the province of Saskatchewan. And, 
Mr. Speaker, many low-income people are renters. Many 

low-income people can’t afford to own their own home. 
 
Once again, we’re going to be hurting the people that can least 
afford to pay these extra costs, Mr. Speaker. And in a way what 
we’re doing is passing, as I said before — we’re doing more 
than passing on a hidden tax. We come along at the end of the 
year, we raid the utilities, we dump it into general revenue, and 
now all of a sudden we’re asking for a tremendous increase to 
the energy costs. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, when this government brags 
about their slush fund — their $700 million slush fund. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I sometimes wonder what we’re saving that for. Is 
that going to be the next election campaign slush fund for the 
NDP, whenever they get the intestinal fortitude to call an 
election? And, you know, Mr. Speaker, I honestly don’t believe 
$700 million will do it. I honestly don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, 
$700 million will do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk just for a minute about how these 
increases will affect the people in the Saltcoats constituency — 
my own home constituency. Well actually, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
think there’s any difference all over this province. The Saltcoats 
constituency and 50 other constituents . . . 57 other 
constituencies in this province, Mr. Speaker, are going to be 
affected the very same. The seniors, low-income people, 
hospitals, schools, municipalities, businesses — there’s no end, 
Mr. Speaker, to where this cost is going to hurt the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would take great pride in seconding the 
motion the member for Swift Current put forward and would 
hope that the cabinet of the day would have the foresight to turn 
down that request, or at least to review the rate review panel’s 
decision. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the conclusion 
of my remarks, I’ll be making a motion to amend the motion of 
the opposition to change the word “implement” in the first line 
to the word “consider”; and to delete everything after the word 
“increases” in the third line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was interesting to listen to the member from 
Swift Current talk about natural gas prices and how supposedly 
he and the opposition don’t like people to have to pay natural 
gas price increases. Because of course, the question that comes 
to mind is why, when the member from Swift Current was 
working with the Devine administration in the 1980s, and 
others over there were part of that administration, they sold off 
and privatized the natural gas reserves of the province. That’s 
what they did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We owned the natural gas reserves, the people owned them; 
they sold them at fire sale prices. And they said that the people 
of the province should go to the market and buy their natural 
gas at world prices. And of course, that’s what has happened. 
 
Now they say well, how did this happen, that the prices go up? 
Well the reason, Mr. Speaker, is largely because they did that in 
the 1980s. They also tried in the 1980s — and they don’t like us 
to talk about the Devine administration that they were a part of 



1528 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

— but what they also did, Mr. Speaker, is they tried to sell off 
SaskEnergy to some of their rich friends. 
 
That’s what they wanted to do then. And we have to remember 
and remind the people, that’s what they want to do now. The 
Leader of the Opposition has said publicly that they want to sell 
off some Crown corporations so that they can pay for their tax 
cut plan for the rich. That’s what they would do. And then 
supposedly somebody would come along after they were in 
power to pick up the pieces once again, and then they would do 
what they do best, which is to complain about it. 
 
Now the member from Swift Current makes much of the fact 
that this government, he says, is in favour of privatization as 
they are, because we sold our shares in Cameco and we sold our 
shares in the upgrader. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, so that there’s no doubt and so 
that it’s on the record, we do not share their view that the 
utilities of the province, including SaskEnergy, should be sold 
off to their rich friends and privatized. That is not our view. 
 
I want to say that one has to be very cautious, Mr. Speaker, 
listening to those members when they start talking about 
numbers. And we must remember what they advised the 
government to do in the past. The member from Swift Current 
raised the question of the upgrader. Well, let’s look at that. 
 
The upgrader, Mr. Speaker, was an investment made by the 
Devine government in approximately 1988. And up until 
approximately 1993 the people of the province had invested 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of $220 million in the 
upgrader. The Government of Canada and the Government of 
Alberta had also made investments. And they, in 1994, sold off 
their share of the upgrader, Mr. Speaker, and they sold their 
shares for 7 cents on the dollar — 7 cents on the dollar. 
 
And that opposition wanted us to do the same. And when the 
premier of the day, Mr. Romanow, and the cabinet of the day 
said no, we’re not going to sell our share, the people’s share for 
7 cents on the dollar, we were ridiculed — and I remember it, 
Mr. Speaker — by the members opposite. They said, you don’t 
know how to run business, you should privatize, you should sell 
for 7 cents on the dollar and pick up $20 million they said, for a 
$220 million investment. That was their advice. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we did not take their 
advice and privatize at that point. We did sell that interest later. 
And you know what we were paid, Mr. Speaker? We were paid 
100 cents on the dollar, not 7 cents, because we did not take the 
advice of the members opposite. And we made money. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And I want to say that the person who is the Leader of the 
Opposition now, the member from Rosetown-Biggar, was not 
in the House then, so somebody might say, well he wasn’t with 
the rest of them telling you to privatize. 
 
Well that’s not correct. He was in the House of Commons with 
the Reform Party, now led by Stockwell Day under a different 
name, the Canadian Alliance, as this group of individuals is 
under a different name, the so-called Saskatchewan Party 

instead of the Conservative Party. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar who then was in the House of Commons was 
talking about what the Government of Saskatchewan was doing 
with the upgrader and not selling it for 7 cents on the dollar. 
And you know what he said — this is in Hansard — he said: 
 

Oh yes, the Government of Saskatchewan is hanging onto 
that white elephant. 

 
Because his advice was we should sell it off for 7 cents on the 
dollar. 
 
Now what the Leader of the Opposition wants, and his 
colleagues, is that we will sell off SaskEnergy for a pittance to a 
bunch of their rich friends. And we have said repeatedly, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re not going to do it. 
 
But I want to say also the member from Swift Current then gets 
into the fact that we sold some Cameco shares. And this is a 
very interesting story too. And I was here in the Legislative 
Assembly when the Cameco shares were selling for less than 
$20 a share, Mr. Speaker. Those people were screaming at the 
government over here to sell those shares. They were screaming 
at the government, and I remember it, Mr. Speaker, to sell those 
shares at less than $20. 
 
We didn’t take their advice. And it’s true we did sell some 
shares. We sold them at $73, Mr. Speaker, and we obtained 
$700 million net for the people of the province, which we used 
to pay off debt. 
 
I won’t go into the fact of where the debt came from because I 
think most people in the province are aware that the debt of the 
province came from those members when they occupied the 
government benches. People know that now. 
 
So now these members come in and they want to criticize 
SaskEnergy, the Crown corporation, for the price . . . charges 
consumers for natural gas. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, if 
there is any fairness, any fairness on the side of the opposition 
to give some credit where credit is due. 
 
I’m going to read out the price of natural gas in Saskatchewan 
compared to other parts of the country. Vancouver, 8.82, $8.82, 
Mr. Speaker, for a gigajoule of natural gas; Regina and 
throughout Saskatchewan, 4.52 — not 8.82 as charged by the 
private sector, but 4.52; Edmonton, 8.77; Calgary, 9.81; 
Winnipeg, 8.42; Toronto, 9.54. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, 
4.52 — Saskatchewan, one-half the cost of anywhere else. 
 
And the member from Saltcoats gets up and he says — and get 
this, Mr. Speaker — he says the government should pay the 
people rebates for their natural gas like they do in Alberta. But 
why did they do that, Mr. Speaker? They do it because they first 
forced the consumer to pay twice as much or more for natural 
gas as we do in Saskatchewan, then they say, we’ll give you 
some of your own money back. 
 
In other words, the government bribes people with their own 
money, but the private sector that owns the natural gas, they get 
the $9 — they get the $9. And then the government, after the 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1529 

 

person has paid that, gives people back some money. And the 
member from Saltcoats thinks that makes sense and says we 
should pay rebates like in Alberta. No. 
 
What we should do, Mr. Speaker, is keep the price as low and 
reasonable as possible. We buy it on the world market, we have 
to pay whatever the price is, but we are charging less than 
anyone else because we have a public utility that is owned by 
the people. And it’s true, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition will 
always . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I just wanted to mention one thing to the 
member. It’s a matter of use of language. We do not expect 
anybody in this House to accuse the government of bribing 
people with their own money, and I think we should pay the 
same respect to any other government across the country. So I 
just ask the member to be careful with his language. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want to say 
that when we’re listening to the opposition we have to 
remember, Mr. Speaker, that we must be very, very careful 
listening to the advice of the opposition and listening to them 
when it comes to talking about numbers. Because as most 
people in the province know, Mr. Speaker, most of the time, if 
not all of the time, when the members opposite start talking 
about numbers, they have it wrong. 
 
And that’s why when they were in office, they ran up a huge 
debt. But I want to say, when the opposition talks about the 
price of natural gas, the fact of the matter is that our price is the 
best price in Canada, Mr. Speaker. There’s no question about 
that. 
 
And the opposition wants to quote The Globe and Mail and 
others that are saying the price will go down. But what they 
don’t tell people is this. And I’m quoting from the same article 
in The Globe and Mail where it says that a certain Ms. Holder, 
who is industry analyst says: “Current consumer rates are $9 for 
1,000 cubic feet.” 

 
The current rate is about $9 for 1,000 cubic feet. More than 
twice what the current rate in Saskatchewan is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the opposition says, well why will the rate go down 
elsewhere. Well it’s very simple — because they’re charging so 
much more than they do in Saskatchewan. 
 
And why would the rate go up here in Saskatchewan. It’s very 
simple, because the rate has never gone up to that $9 range, Mr. 
Speaker, that they have in Alberta. It’s never gone up to that. 
 
And these people in the opposition want to tell the public that it 
would make sense to have that rate go up to $9 under 
privatization, have the consumer pay it, and the government 
could then rebate money back to them, Mr. Speaker. That is not 
a sensible plan. It’s not what we’re going to do. It’s not what we 
propose. 
 
What we propose, Mr. Speaker, is that we will keep SaskEnergy 
in public hands; we will not sell it off. And we will do the best 
we can to make sure that SaskEnergy offers the best price that it 
can in fairness to the consumers, without leading either 
SaskEnergy or the government into deficit and debt. That’s 

what we’re going to try to do. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, just in response to something 
that the member from Saltcoats said. He’s trying to say that our 
taxes in Saskatchewan are the highest in the country, and then 
he said the second highest; and he says we have the highest 
utility rates. 
 
Well I want to say to the members opposite and, in fairness, to 
all the people in the province, on utility rates we have 
historically had the lowest bundle of utility rates in the country, 
or certainly the second lowest throughout the ’90s, Mr. Speaker. 
Eight provinces are higher than Saskatchewan, and some of 
them are much higher. And that . . . the record will show that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I also want to say to the member from Saltcoats who’s 
complaining about taxes . . . I’m not sure, by the way, how he’s 
going to have lower taxes and pay out the rebates that he wants 
to pay to people after they privatize SaskEnergy. But that’s 
another story for another day. 
 
By magic, one of the members says — probably voodoo 
economics. It’s the sort of proposal that Stockwell Day would 
make I think, Mr. Speaker. Because it shouldn’t be forgotten 
that it was actually under Stockwell Day’s leadership, I think, 
as provincial treasurer in Alberta, that a lot of this privatization 
probably occurred. And then those members were instrumental 
in installing Stockwell Day as Leader of the Opposition in 
Ottawa. 
 
And so I think there is a parallel between what they’ve done in 
Alberta with the privatization and what those members want to 
do. But all you really have to do is look at their own statements 
to see what they want to do. 
 
But I want to say a word to the member from Saltcoats and the 
public, Mr. Speaker, about taxes, because in fact the member is 
wrong. If you look at the personal taxes that people pay in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and nobody ever likes to pay taxes 
no matter what the rate is, we have the second lowest bundle of 
personal taxes in the country . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m 
sorry, the fourth lowest — not the second highest but the fourth 
lowest. Mr. Speaker, there are six provinces that have higher 
personal taxes than we do. 
 
And I want to remind the member from Saltcoats . . . this is 
from the president, outgoing president, Pat Pitka, of the 
Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce. These are not my words, 
Mr. Speaker; they’re from the Saskatoon Chamber of 
Commerce. And Mr. Pitka reports: 
 

The year 2000 started with Saskatchewan Finance minister 
introducing the largest personal tax reduction program in 
the history of the province. 

 
And we did do that, Mr. Speaker. And then he goes on to say: 
 

This was and is a great initiative and should help business 
and the province grow. 

 
And then he adds: 
 



1530 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

The recent provincial budget reduces the corporate tax rate 
by 25 per cent for small businesses starting this July, and 
this will also help our businesses grow and hopefully stay 
in the province. 

 
And the point that needs to be made, after we listen to a speech 
like the one given by the member from Saltcoats which was full 
of inaccurate information, Mr. Speaker, is that we have about 
the lowest bundle of utility charges, certainly the lowest natural 
gas costs, whether the members over there like it or not, and we 
have the fourth lowest personal taxes in the country. 
 
And in fact I could go on and tell the member from Saltcoats 
that we have the second lowest marginal income tax rate in the 
country, Mr. Speaker. We used to have one of the highest, I 
think second highest; now we have the second lowest. 
 
And very importantly, one of the members reminds me, as part 
of the . . . well actually on January 1 this year, we abolished the 
Saskatchewan flat tax which was the most regressive part of the 
income tax system, as most reasonable people know — a tax 
brought in by the members opposite when they were in power 
in the 1980s, and increased four times. 
 
Well so what I would say is this, Mr. Speaker. In conclusion, I 
want to say this — that there are two competing visions in this 
House. There is the vision of the opposition which says that we 
will sell off SaskEnergy and our utilities and let the people pay 
their private friends in the private sector whatever the market 
will bear. 
 
And I might add, if we didn’t have SaskEnergy, which they 
wanted to sell in the 1980s, we wouldn’t be having this 
discussion, because we’d be the same as Alberta. It would all be 
privatized and we’d be paying whatever the private companies 
forced us to pay. The reason that those members opposite can 
get up and tell us what we should be doing in terms of charging 
the rate, Mr. Speaker, is because we have SaskEnergy and 
because it is sensitive to the needs and views of the public, 
unlike what they would do. 
 
So their vision, Mr. Speaker, and their hidden agenda, not so 
well hidden, is to sell off the utility, privatize it, and let the 
consumer bear the cost. That’s what they want to do. Our vision 
is to keep it but to do the very best job we can, keeping the rates 
the lowest, if we can, in the country. And that’s what we’re 
going to try to do. 
 
So I’m very happy to move, seconded by the member from 
Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That the word “implement” be deleted and substituted with 
the word “consider,” and that all the words after the word 
“increase” be deleted. 

 
And I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
certainly gives me pleasure to enter into this debate, and I will 
be of course seconding the amendment as made by the member 
from Saskatoon Mount Royal. 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the public of 
Saskatchewan and to the members opposite if they’re not yet 
aware — we’ve said this a number of times in the House, Mr. 
Speaker — but SaskEnergy has provided the lowest rates, Mr. 
Speaker, in fact in all of North America. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, and in the last 20 months, because of the very 
good investments that SaskEnergy has made, they have saved 
the people of Saskatchewan some $175 million, Mr. Speaker. I 
repeat, $175 million. They’ve been selling natural gas at about 
$4.52 per unit or per gigajoule, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in addition to that . . . they’ve had these rates 
very low, but in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, many of our 
Crowns have provided very low rates including Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance amongst the lowest in the country. 
SaskPower, they’ve had their rates frozen for five years, had a 
modest overall increase of 2 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Our utilities, 
I would argue, have served the public of Saskatchewan very 
well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the gas variance account, as established most 
recently by SaskEnergy but that has to be created for every gas 
utility, including private utilities, Mr. Speaker, currently sits 
with a deficit of approximately $80 million, I’m told. 
 
The independent rate review panel has reviewed that and 
determined that they should in fact have the right to recover that 
amount of money. Because of the rising increase and because of 
what they’ve been charging, 4.52, should have that right to 
recover it. 
 
They have, Mr. Speaker, the right to recover that deficit over a 
two-year period. In the event — and I say this for the public of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — in the event that there is an 
overcharge, that there is an overcharge, they also will have to 
refund back to the people of Saskatchewan any surplus that 
would be generated in that account over a two-year period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know the member opposite from Swift 
Current asked, as did the members opposite, asked, for an 
independent rate review panel. And in the 1980s, the panel 
existed and the Devine government of the day, members 
opposite were included then, decided to get rid of it because 
they didn’t like what the panel said. 
 
But now again when they’re back here in opposition, they ask 
our government, Mr. Speaker, to create an independent rate 
review panel, Mr. Speaker. We’ve done that. We’ve done that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if I could, I’d like to quote from the Regina 
Leader-Post of July 27 of last year. And I quote, Mr. Speaker, 
the member from Swift Current: 
 

Wall said that if this is going to be an independent rate 
review committee, let’s trust the process (Mr. Deputy 
Speaker). 

 
He says, let’s trust the process. 
 
Well isn’t that interesting. Here we have an application by 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1531 

 

SaskEnergy to the independent rate review panel. The rate 
review panel makes a recommendation. And now, listen to the 
members opposite now, Mr. Speaker. Listen to the opposition 
members now. Now they don’t want to trust the process any 
more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I refer again, just to show how contradictory the members 
can be, the same member, from Hansard, Mr. Speaker, on May 
4 of this year says, why are you putting the people of 
Saskatchewan through this process? 
 
Why doesn’t the minister just make the announcement? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, isn’t that incredulous. On one hand, in the 
1980s they have an independent panel, they get rid of it. In the 
1990s and in the year 2000 and 2001 they say, create an 
independent panel. Now they say get rid of it, don’t listen to it 
any more, Mr. Speaker. You can’t continue to have it both 
ways, Mr. Speaker. You can’t continue to have it both ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, I think with one exception, with one 
exception, there is probably one location in North America that 
I have found that probably does have overall lower gas prices, 
Mr. Speaker, natural gas prices. That is the city of Medicine 
Hat. 
 
And do you know what’s unique about the city of Medicine 
Hat, Mr. Speaker? The city of Medicine Hat owns its own gas 
reserves. They didn’t sell them; they own them, Mr. Speaker. 
You know what happened to us in the 1980s? Those members 
opposite, Premier Devine at that time, they sold our gas 
reserves, Mr. Speaker — they sold them. 
 
So the only place, the only place that I think — I’m not sure of 
this, but I think — has lower gas prices, natural gas prices, than 
us here in Saskatchewan, is the city of Medicine Hat that owns 
their own gas reserves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite also have asked for us to 
provide rebates. Well, Mr. Speaker, we think that the best way 
is to provide on an ongoing basis the lowest rates possible, 
instead of charging people an exorbitant amount and then 
paying back to them with their own money in some sort of a 
rebate. 
 
They’ve talked about, and I’ve listened to the members opposite 
from Swift Current and Saltcoats, saying that in Alberta they’ve 
received a large rebate of some $1,600. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
public may not know this — I know the members opposite 
know this, but the public may not know this — but in Alberta 
they have been charging consistently, for a number of years 
already, some 15 to 20 per cent more than SaskEnergy has 
charged here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think the big thing to remember is that here 
in Saskatchewan SaskEnergy — this is more than about pricing 
as well — SaskEnergy provides service to 92 per cent of the 
population of Saskatchewan, servicing many of the ridings that 
those members represent over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know something really interesting, as 
the Minister of Energy and Mines and as the Minister of Crown 
Investments Corporations, I quite often get lobbied from 

members who represent constituents along the Alberta border. 
And along the Alberta border, in some circumstances those 
residents of Saskatchewan are served by Alberta utilities, where 
they buy gas from Alberta companies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know what those members are lobbying for? They’ve been 
lobbying our government to try to get those members to be 
serviced by SaskEnergy — SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker. So while 
they complain over there that SaskEnergy has high rates, they 
lobby, Mr. Speaker, for service by SaskEnergy. It’s incredulous 
— absolutely incredulous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to refer, if I could, to an interview that was 
done on CJME Radio by Mr. John Gormley, who interviewed 
Peter Linder, an energy analyst from Research Capital 
Corporation in Calgary. Here’s what he said in that interview. 
He said: 
 

I want to congratulate SaskEnergy first for their astute 
hedging program in using the storage facilities to offset 
these high gas prices. I would suggest the people of 
Saskatchewan are extremely lucky to be paying $4.52 a 
gigajoule when the price here in Alberta is a lot higher. It is 
basically twice as much.  
 
. . . here in Alberta (I repeat) . . . It is basically twice as 
much.  

 
An industry analyst and expert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize that there are higher gas prices and 
that there will likely be an increase in the price of natural gas, 
Mr. Speaker. In fact, across Canada nearly 4 million people — 
energy consumers, gas consumers — will be paying higher 
prices. And in the United States nearly 60 million people will 
be paying higher prices largely, Mr. Speaker, as a result of 
feeling the effects of pipeline expansion to the US (United 
States) by private producers, as well as the growing American 
economy. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, you know what’s really interesting, is there is 
no guaranteed supply. The complaint down there is of course 
that they’re paying higher prices for natural gas but their bigger 
complaint is that they have no guaranteed supply. And I 
guarantee you that will not happen here in Saskatchewan. We 
have a guaranteed supply at a very reasonable rate, Mr. Speaker 
— a very reasonable rate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy in the past, as you will be 
aware, I’ve referred to it, has been selling for the last 
considerable period of time at 4.50 a gigajoule and have been 
buying now most recently on the open market. And of course 
they are price takers, they’re not price makers so they are 
simply passing through the price of natural gas with no 
additional revenue to them at all. As a matter of fact on the 
price of gas, there’s absolutely no revenue for SaskEnergy. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would congratulate SaskEnergy for having 
done an outstanding job to this point in time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, the panel has made its recommendations 
and not, I think . . . the member said if . . . The members 
opposite have said in some of the questions earlier today and in 
some of the speeches that we’ve just heard, that if they’d had 



1532 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

more up-to-date information. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the independent rate review panel, in fact, 
doesn’t just make these decisions and recommendations all on 
their own. They do public consultations and they also bring in 
with them experts in the area, Mr. Speaker. And in fact they 
have received the advice of experts, consulting experts, from 
out of the province of British Columbia, who in fact agreed 
with the application by SaskEnergy, with some very, very 
modest recommended changes. 
 
But these are experts, Mr. Speaker. And somehow the member 
from Swift Current and the member from Saltcoats and the 
members opposite in the opposition in the House today, during 
question period, they know a lot more than the experts do, Mr. 
Speaker. Somehow they know a lot more than the experts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the reasons why we turn this over to 
an independent rate review panel, and we listened to the 
recommendations that they made about creating an independent 
rate review panel. And now the members say don’t pay any 
attention to the independent rate review panel and the experts; 
we know better now, Mr. Speaker, we know better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to also point out, as did our Minister of 
Finance, that here is some of the most recent rates, Mr. Speaker, 
as being paid by people across Canada. In Vancouver they pay 
roughly $8.82 a gigajoule. In Edmonton, Alberta, they pay 
$8.77 a gigajoule. In Calgary, it’s $9.81 a gigajoule. Here in 
Saskatchewan yet it’s not changed, it’s still 4.52 a gigajoule — 
nearly half the price — in fact, less than half the price. And in 
fact in Winnipeg, it’s 8.42. And in Toronto, it’s 9.54 per unit of 
gas or gigajoule. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if the recommended increase is approved — 
if it is approved — it would still have the lowest price of all of 
those jurisdictions, still the lowest price, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in fact they talk about the most current information. Well I 
just happened to just pull off the Web site just a few minutes 
ago . . . This from BBC News Online with respect to business, 
Mr. Speaker. And do you know what the headline is? It says 
that, “Oil nears $30 a barrel on Iraqi cuts,” Mr. Speaker. 
 

The price of oil has risen to a four-month high after Iraq cut 
exports ahead of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting 
Countries (Opec) meeting on Tuesday. 
 
Oil prices surged as Opec secretary general Ali Rodriguez 
raised doubts that the cartel’s 11 members would raise the 
protection to fill the supply gap left by Iraq, which accounts 
for 5% of the world’s crude supply. 

 
Now I know, Mr. Speaker, that’s oil prices; Mr. Speaker, it’s 
not natural gas. I acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker. But, but, Mr. 
Speaker, I only use this to illustrate that prices are extremely 
volatile, not only in natural gas but in the oil, in the oil sector, 
Mr. Speaker, and in the gas, in the gas sector. And in fact 
natural gas was at $17 a gigajoule. And I want to refer to this 
article of . . . from The Leader-Post of Saturday, June 2nd, in 
which it is said that . . . the headline, I should say, says that 
“Views differ on price.” 
 

Many other analysts say the commodity price this year will 
average about $7 a gigajoule — the price SaskEnergy 
wants to raise its rates to from the current price of $4.52. 
 

And I quote now. It’s the . . . the following quote is: 
 

“We’re using $7 as an average gas price for this year. But 
that’s not out of line with the average market forecast,” 
Wilf Gobert, an analyst with Calgary-based Peter’s & Co., 
told the Leader-Post. 

 
Gobert also noted that the price was at $17 a gigajoule and 
acknowledges that the price is very volatile. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my point in this quote is that — what I want to 
make — is that in the 1980s when many of those members were 
in opposition there was absolutely no planning. They ran up 
huge operating annual deficits on the balance sheet, and in 
addition, ran up huge debt in our Crown corporations. 
 
My point is that there was no planning for the future, Mr. 
Speaker, absolutely no planning. Today, Mr. Speaker, with 
industry experts and analysts, with SaskEnergy having done a, I 
would argue, a marvellous job of hedging on the price, we 
acknowledge that this has been hard on consumers, Mr. 
Speaker. But they have done an excellent job of hedging on 
price. 
 
My point is, Mr. Speaker, that this government, our Crowns, 
and, Mr. Speaker, in collaboration with the independent rate 
review panel, will plan for the future. We will ensure that we 
will not create additional deficits, Mr. Speaker. That’s my point 
in reading this quote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . I’m near a close on this, and I want 
to close with this. While we acknowledge there are high energy 
prices, we also are looking to alternate forms of energy and 
that’s why, just this very day, Mr. Speaker, our province made 
an announcement of wind . . . of creating wind generation . . . 
electricity through wind generation. Our province is honouring 
its commitment in the budget that it would purchase and/or 
spend $500,000 a year to purchase electricity through wind 
generation from SaskPower. 
 
(15:45) 
 
And also in addition to that, SaskPower made an additional 
commitment of $2.66 million that it would supply electricity to 
its head office through wind generation beginning next year, 
Mr. Speaker. It would spend $266,000 a year to create 
electricity through wind generation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And just a few weeks ago, again I’m going to quote an expert 
who knows much more about the industry than I do, and in fact 
for sure much more than the members opposite do. This is from 
The StarPhoenix of May 24, in which we announce the Cory 
power plant from which . . . that received much criticism from 
those members opposite. We announced the cogeneration 
project up at Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Atco company co-chair and president Ron Southern said 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1533 

 

(that) the Cory project exhibited the excellence (that) he 
expects in all Atco investments . . . 

 
And here’s the quote, Mr. Speaker. He says: 
 

Your government’s policies have created the conditions 
where this excellence can (exceed and can) succeed (Mr. 
Speaker). 

 
I repeat: 
 

Your government’s policies have created the conditions 
where this excellence can succeed. 
 

Mr. Speaker, a private sector individual who recognizes what 
our province is doing in terms of excellence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bottom line clearly, as our Minister of Finance 
has said so eloquently and so accurately in the last several days, 
the bottom line is that those members opposite clearly have one 
objective. That objective, Mr. Speaker, is to situate and position 
our Crowns so that they can sell our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s their only objective. So that they can’t provide service in 
rural Saskatchewan at the same rates that people here in the 
cities of Regina and Saskatoon get. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, when I listen to their arguments it 
really makes no sense to me. They represent rural ridings, rural 
ridings in which . . . By the way I say parenthetically, they stand 
up day after day with petitions for cellular service. They want 
cellular service, in fact — and I draw the parallel with 
SaskEnergy as well — but they want cellular service in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can guarantee the public of Saskatchewan and I 
can guarantee the members opposite that if this were left to 
private sector, there would not be cellular service in rural 
Saskatchewan. In fact I would say why don’t the members 
opposite lobby the private sector for service, cellular service, in 
rural Saskatchewan? The rules exist; the rules exist — they 
wanted deregulation. The rules exist; they clearly could provide 
cellular service in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
You know why they don’t have cellular service in rural 
Saskatchewan from the private sector? It’s because, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s no profit there. There’s absolutely no profit. 
And I’m not critical of the private sector for not providing 
cellular service in rural Saskatchewan. It only makes sense that 
they wouldn’t do it because they can’t make money. 
 
And that’s why our Crowns were created, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s why companies like SaskTel and SaskEnergy need to 
remain in existence so they can continue to provide services in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Party 
has one objective, and that is to sell our Crown corporations. 
 
And in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out in 
closing what our Crown corporations do here in Saskatchewan, 
besides maintaining their head offices here in Saskatchewan. 
 
They employ over 9,000 people here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. They purchase over $1.2 billion — I repeat, billion 
dollars — of goods and services here in Saskatchewan from 
Saskatchewan suppliers; over 5,000 Saskatchewan businesses 
they purchase goods and services from here in Saskatchewan. 
And they spend over $400 million every year to improve and 
expand their services, creating thousands of construction jobs 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to second 
the amendment as made by the member for Saskatoon Mount 
Royal, the Minister of Finance. And I now will take my seat 
with those brief comments. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I sat and listened to as much of the speech as I 
could, by the member from Meadow Lake, and I was really 
quite interested when we started this debate talking about 
SaskEnergy and our motion to send the request for increase 
back to the rate review committee to have another look at it. 
Because in light of some of the information that we’ve been 
given recently, that there is definitely justification to be sending 
it back. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I got hearing about cell phone 
service in Wood River, and I got hearing about electrical power 
in wherever — they haven’t yet stated where they’re looking at 
putting the wind power — when I look the wind power that is 
done in Alberta, when I look at all the issues that the minister 
from Meadow Lake got talking about, I really wondered how 
did that . . . what did that have to do with the SaskEnergy rate 
increase? Because he never, ever did bring it back to the 
SaskEnergy rate increase. 
 
And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what that concerns me about 
more than anything else is that perhaps he didn’t have enough 
that he could defend the fact that they wouldn’t put it back to 
the rate review committee. Perhaps he had more . . . wanted to 
score more political points by accusing the opposition of some 
sort of sinister plan that we haven’t ever put into place or have 
even talked about. 
 
He’s gone way off on a tangent, trying to talk about some sort 
of conspiracy theory that had absolutely nothing to do with the 
rate increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now I could go on at length, if I need be, on issues that really 
don’t relate to the SaskEnergy rate increase — don’t relate at all 
to the motion and don’t relate at all to the amendment that was 
put forth by the Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker. And I think 
it’s only fair that if we’re going to debate the issue on 
SaskEnergy and the rate increase — a 32 per cent increase that 
the rate review panel has come up with — I think it’s only fair 
that we stick to that issue and not go into the argument of 
whether cellular service should be in Wood River and who 
could deliver that cellular service better. It just doesn’t seem to 
fit the debate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at this whole issue and the 
framing of this issue around what is the price per gigajoule — 
because that’s what it really boils down to, what is the actual 
price per gigajoule for natural gas — and we’ve got a couple of 



1534 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

numbers thrown around. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve had lots of question in my 
constituency, not just with this last talk of increase, of the 32 
per cent, but the increases prior on how much it’s gone up. And 
the government’s defended the fact that we have some of the 
cheapest SaskEnergy rates in the country. And that may just be 
so, but we’re seeing it going up. 
 
And certainly some of the rate . . . or being able to hold the line 
on some of the rates was definitely due to some forward 
purchasing by SaskEnergy, which we’ll applaud them on, 
which is a very, very good idea because it did hold rates down. 
And we’ve heard the Minister of Finance talk about that and 
how we’ve got the lowest rate in Canada. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll see in a month or two months, 
once — or even in a couple of days — if cabinet approves this 
42 . . . or 32 per cent increase, what the rate will be compared to 
the rest of the cost of natural gas in Canada. I don’t think he’ll 
be standing in his place touting the fact that we have the lowest 
natural gas rate in Canada because we certainly won’t. 
 
I think one of the most difficult things to discuss and argue with 
. . . nor discuss with constituents of mine, is the fact is what is 
the actual price per gigajoule of natural gas. 
 
Because on one hand we had the Minister of Finance talking in 
his budget address about what his estimate of natural gas prices 
would be. And I believe it was around 3.39 in the budget 
document, and that’s how much he predicted the price of 
natural gas to be. But sitting in the Crown Corp Committee and 
talking to the chairman of SaskEnergy, Ron Clark, he was 
predicting $7 a gigajoule for natural gas. 
 
So that’s a huge difference — from 3.39 to $7, that’s over a 
hundred per cent increase you know. And so that would be the 
tough part to explain, is where you’ve got the Minister of 
Finance quoting one number per gigajoule of what their 
estimation for natural gas is, and you’ve got SaskEnergy on the 
other hand saying this is what we need to keep operating. We 
need this increase because this is how much it’s going to cost 
us. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the difference is just . . . I mean it’s 
not just like it’s 10 cents or 20 cents or 30 cents or it can 
fluctuate according, you know, quickly on prices, but when 
you’re looking at a hundred per cent increase from what the 
minister says — of Finance — to what SaskEnergy is talking 
about. 
 
And just to quote Mr. Ron Clark, he says: 
 

Mr. Chairman, we’d love some of that 3.59 gas that they’ve 
got. We don’t think it’s going to be that low. 
 

And who would know better. Whether it’s Ron Clark and 
Kenneth From, the purchaser of natural gas, or whether it’s the 
Minister of Finance. And I would be betting on Ron Clark. And 
it goes on to say: 
 

If you’ve got $4 gas, I’d love to buy some of it. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and so you get the chairman and the 
president of SaskEnergy saying he’d love to buy some of the 
natural gas that our minister set the budget out on. 
 
Now I would certainly, could stomach it I guess, if the Minister 
of Finance would stand in his place and say, okay I made a 
mistake. I made a mistake, our whole plans of the budget, we 
can’t project 3.39, we’re going to have to project 7 or 8 or $9. 
In question period today he quoted 9 to $10 is what the natural 
gas price was per gigajoule in Alberta. 
 
Now that is as out to lunch as his prediction was of 3.59 or 3.39. 
You know, I guess you really kind of wonder, he can go from 
being incorrect on 3.39 in his budget to being just as incorrect 
and predicting $10 in Alberta today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, you know, it’s just a very little bit of checking on the 
Internet you’ll see that the price per gigajoule is not 8 . . . 9 to 
$10 today. You can lock in for —what did I hear? About 6 to $7 
per gigajoule is what you can lock in for right now . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 6.69 per gigajoule. 
 
So the whole issue of what SaskEnergy was asking for, the 
whole grasp on the issue of what the Minister of Finance, you 
know, his whole grasp on this issue, you know, fluctuating from 
3.39 or .59 in the budget to $10 which he’s talking about 
Alberta today, he just doesn’t have a clue of what the actual 
price is. 
 
And that’s where some of the worry and the concern comes 
from when we hear from constituents and we certainly do hear 
from a pile of constituents. Because I don’t know how many 
people . . . I would hazard a guess it would be a very small 
percentage of people in Saskatchewan today will not be affected 
by this very price increase. In fact, I can’t think of anybody that 
wouldn’t be affected by the increase of 32 per cent to our 
natural gas rates put forward by the rate review panel. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if that rate review panel quoted those 
prices, if it’s saying yes, SaskEnergy needs a 32 per cent 
increase based on the numbers that the Minister of Finance just 
used in question period, then the 32 per cent increase is out of 
whack, completely out of whack. 
 
So you have to look at the actual numbers of what the price of 
natural gas is today. And that’s why we recommended in our 
motion — which unfortunately there has been an amendment 
put on the floor — but our motion talks about the very issue of 
taking this rate increase and putting it back into the rate review 
committee, putting it back to the rate review committee and 
saying have another look at it in light of the reduction in natural 
gas prices. Just have another look at it. 
 
And, you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m surprised that the 
government really hasn’t picked up on that idea and said yes, 
that’s not a bad idea. With their passion for trying to delay the 
decisions that they need to make — whether it’s on the Fyke 
committee, whether it’s on whatever issue it is — they like to 
delay, delay, delay, and so they don’t have to deal with it. 
 
And I thought this would be a perfect example, is send it back 
to the rate review panel and they could go through another set 
of hearings and then they wouldn’t have to delay their decision 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1535 

 

on it. Because really, you know, if the rate of natural gas has 
decreased as much as what The Globe and Mail has said it has, 
what a number of the gas producers have said it has, then it only 
makes perfect sense that they would go through the process 
again and protect themselves against that 32 per cent increase. 
 
Now perhaps, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government doesn’t 
plan on raising it 32 per cent. I don’t know. But if we don’t 
raise the issue and keep pushing the issue, I’m sure they would 
let it . . . rubber-stamp it through cabinet and the people of 
Saskatchewan would be the people that bear the brunt of it. 
 
So I think it’s only incumbent upon us as opposition to talk 
about the effect that this rate increase is going to have on 
citizens of the province. You know, and as I said, started to say, 
that I can’t think of a person in the province that it won’t affect. 
 
And I’ll start talking about rural Saskatchewan — it doesn’t 
matter rural, urban — but I’m going to start dealing with the 
issue in rural Saskatchewan and the area where I was born and 
raised and farm in. A number of years ago when the program 
came out for natural gas lines and everybody in our — the RUD 
(rural underground distribution) program came out, rural 
underlying gas program — everybody in our area I believe, or 
most people in our area went through the process of buying a 
new furnace because they were going to have natural gas. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And it was an excellent program, a very good program, and it 
sure helped a lot of the residents. I know in our area, where you 
didn’t have to watch down the road as your furnace was almost 
running out of fuel to see if the Esso truck or the Co-op truck 
was going to be there in time to deliver fuel to — not Co-op — 
to deliver fuel in time to get the furnace going. 
 
But the underground program was a good idea, a great idea. But 
what has happened now is so many farm sites have not only 
gone from that, but they’ve piggybacked off of that and they’ve 
changed all their heating in their whole farm site to natural gas. 
Their shops are heated with natural gas. I know a lot of people 
whose whole dryer system is run off of natural gas. And 
depending on the year, you can run through a lot of natural gas 
depending on how wet the harvest is. 
 
And so people in rural Saskatchewan are looking at this 32 per 
cent increase to natural gas. The only way that they heat all 
their shop, all their buildings, whether it’s their home shop or 
do any of their grain drying, and say that is going to be just a 
huge, huge hit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And when I looked at the rates, you know, again, I’m just going 
to briefly go back to this: the discrepancy and the prices of what 
is predicted by the Minister of Finance and what is predicted by 
SaskEnergy. 
 
You know as a farmer if I’m getting $3.39 per bushel, which is 
what the Minister of Finance was predicting, but I went to my 
banker and I said no, no, I think I’m going to get $7 a bushel 
and try and run a budget on that, it would never fly. There 
wouldn’t be a banker in the world that would look at that and 
say that makes sense. Because when you’re actually getting 
3.39 and you’re predicting 7 . . . and it’s the exact same logic 

and math that our Minister of Finance has run off with, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So it really, really draws some questions, and again who gets 
affected is just about every person in Saskatchewan, whether 
it’s on the farm, whether it’s in the city. 
 
We’ve talked . . . and the member from Saltcoats talked a little 
bit about seniors, some of the different seniors in our province 
who are on fixed incomes. I had the opportunity, and I’ve 
mentioned it different times before, in January and February of 
attending a number of town hall meetings, coffee parties, in 
every community in my constituency, and I was amazed of 
course a lot of the rural communities are made up largely of 
seniors that are on fixed income. 
 
And at that time, there was certainly talk of the energy increase, 
the natural gas increase. And that was a topic that was 
mentioned to me many, many times from community to 
community. And the issue being that, you know, it’s easy for — 
and I realize that most of it’s been driven off of world prices — 
but it’s easy for the government to say yes, okay, we’ll 
rubber-stamp this increase, we’ll rubber-stamp that increase — 
like this next 32 per cent increase, you know. 
 
And who gets affected? It’s seniors who are on fixed income. 
They look at all their expenses going up. They’re looking at 
their property taxes going up. 
 
I think of the community of Indian Head right now who is 
dealing with some property tax increases through some 
improvements that they’re doing in town. Now the natural gas 
increase . . . and they’re on a fixed income, and they just can’t 
cope; they’re looking at selling homes and many different 
things. But even by selling your home, you get away from 
maybe the property tax; but moving into an apartment or any 
sort of accommodation, you’re still going to be faced with 
increases to compensate. 
 
So all we’re simply saying, on this side of the House, is have 
another look at it. Does it need to be increased? It’s as simple as 
that. Put it back to the rate review panel and say, in light of the 
new reductions in natural gas worldwide, does it make sense to 
be at 32 per cent still? And I don’t think that’s asking too much. 
 
I think of all the different communities, and right now they may 
not be voicing their concern with this because as we speak a lot 
of the rural communities are busy with whether it’s spraying or 
finishing up seeding, but those rural communities the guys that 
are out there spraying and finishing up seeding are usually the 
guys that are in working at the rink in the wintertime. And the 
rinks are going to see just an absolutely huge increase in their 
expenses. 
 
I can think of the one community in my constituency, 
Milestone, who have just gone through the process of putting in 
a natural gas Zamboni instead of having the propane . . . in fact 
when I played hockey it was a diesel tractor going around the 
rink, and at 40 below the diesel smell just didn’t leave all that 
quick; it was better known as the diesel dome than anything 
else. 
 
But they’ve made improvement, they’ve made improvements 



1536 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

and they’ve gone to natural gas, which is a huge improvement. 
But that’s just another area that they’re going to be looking at 
increases then. They’re going to be looking at a huge increase 
not only to run the Zamboni, but many, many community rinks 
have put in natural gas heaters because the product is there, it’s 
into the town, it’s into the community, and they’re going to be 
looking at huge, huge increases this winter. 
 
They don’t notice it perhaps as much now, but I will guarantee 
you come November, October/November, when they’re putting 
in the ice and when they’re starting their buildings going again 
and they’re looking at their expenses and projecting budgets 
and they’re looking at how much it’s going to cost for rink fees, 
you’re going to see all of those shoot up when you see the 
natural gas rate increased by 32 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And again, the whole point being: does it have to be? I think we 
would be really amiss as an opposition if we didn’t introduce 
this emergency debate and question the government on does it 
have to be and what can you do about it to prevent it? 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s really unfortunate that the 
government has chose to put an amendment into this, to our 
motion, which really takes the teeth away from it. If you look at 
the amendment that was put forward, it takes all of the teeth 
away. It doesn’t talk about referring it back to the rate review 
committee. It only talks about yes; maybe we’ll consider it. I 
mean it’s just kind of an airy-fairy thing out there that has 
absolutely no teeth or no substance. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of the other businesses that . . . 
you know, we talked about rinks, we’ve talked about seniors, 
we’ve talked just about every resident in Saskatchewan. I think 
of businesses and I think one way that we’re going to make this 
province a better place to live is to grow it; is to increase the 
amount of business, increase the amount of population. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I really question when businesses 
come in and, depending on what type of business they’re in, 
they’re looking at huge rate increases. And the Minister of 
Finance will stand in his place and he’ll say that, you know, 
we’ve got the lowest in Canada. And yes, maybe we do right 
now, but wait until after cabinet decision and see if he still 
stands in his place and says the same thing. Because businesses 
will look at something like that. 
 
You know, there’s a reason why our economy hasn’t flourished 
as much as it should have, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And one of the 
issues — and we’ve talked about it many, many times in this 
House — is taxes. 
 
But another issue is can this government hold down the costs? 
And we really question it. Do they look at all the options to 
hold down the cost? 
 
Finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at local 
governments, how it’s going to affect them, whether it’s 
municipalities or whatever, it’s going to affect all . . . you know, 
even though we may not purchase natural gas directly, it’s 
going to affect us in many, many different areas; whether a 
municipality runs its equipment off of natural gas, whether it 
heats its shop off of natural gas. You’re going to look at all their 
expenses going up and by an awful lot. So, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it is going to affect everybody. 
 
I’ve got one issue that came in just about two or three days ago 
regarding this, this whole issue of increase in natural gas. And 
it’s from a person that lives in Yellow Grass who is talking 
about their energy rates are at $214 a month in equalization and 
they’re looking at a 32 per cent increase. If that’s the case, then 
they’ve projected it out that they would be up to . . . through 
equalization according to SaskPower, that they’d have to pay 
more, about $400 for the month of July and then it would drop 
back down to 300. So from a bill of 214 up to a bill of $300 just 
in this one situation. And I mean, there’s many, many situations 
out there. 
 
But I would hazard a guess it’s an area that they’re saying can I 
afford another $90 a month for natural gas. Just for natural gas. 
That’s not talking about any of the increases that they’re facing 
with fuel prices or anything else. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the rate increase is going to affect 
everyone. The rate increase will be noticed by everyone and 
some, unfortunately, maybe not until the winter months where 
they are more dependent on natural gas. 
 
But more importantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think people in 
this province need to know what is the true cost per gigajoule. 
And I started out by saying that you’re getting two conflicting 
reports from the government on what SaskEnergy says and 
what the Minister of Finance says, and now you get a third 
option of what all the oil . . . or the natural gas companies are 
saying and that the fact that it’s dropping. 
 
And so I really question the fact that we need a 32 per cent 
increase. I would have no problem with supporting the whole 
notion that this rate increase goes back to the rate review 
committee to be re-examined, to be re-looked at in light of the 
new information, and perhaps save the province a whole lot of 
money. 
 
You know the member opposite says speculation. Maybe it is 
speculation. Maybe it is. It could be speculation. So what is the 
alternative? Let’s say, let’s charge 32 percent, and if that 
speculation was correct, too bad. 
 
You know, that’s what their . . . that’s the whole attitude, the 
whole arrogant attitude of the government opposite. Yeah, it 
might be speculation, but the price may drop down. And if it 
does drop down, where are you going to be? You’re going to 
say well, we already raised it 32 per cent, and the chances of 
them dropping it down are very, very slim. 
 
So that is exactly the point of why this needs to go to the rate 
review committee, because although it may be speculation, it 
may be true, and when you look at all the reports from all the 
different . . . SaskEnergy . . . or the natural gas producers, 
they’re agreeing with it and it makes perfect sense. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it needs to go back to the rate 
review committee, and I will be supporting the motion and not 
supporting the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to enter into this 
debate. Mr. Speaker, we hear the members opposite day after 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1537 

 

day after day want to lock the government into doing things that 
aren’t good for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They talk about all the things that they would like to do, but 
they don’t ever talk about how they’re going to pay for 
anything, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they go through rant after rant, day 
after day, talking about they want to cut taxes, they want to 
spend more here, they want to spend more there. But what did 
their platform say in the last election, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
Well it talked about a freeze in health care for five years, it 
talked about a freeze in education for five years, it talked 
nothing, nothing about poverty or dealing with the poor, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Nothing at all. 
 
Then they get up day after day in the Assembly and talk about 
how they’re going to do everything for everybody. They’re 
going to fix every problem in the world, they’re going to spend 
more money here, more money there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Did 
they talk about that during the election? No. Do they have any 
intention of doing that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? No. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to now turn to . . . a little 
more precisely . . . about the issue of natural gas rates. 
 
Now we’ve got the members opposite talking about the fact that 
natural gas rates are going down. Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
natural gas rates are going down at the moment. But what they 
don’t want to talk about is the volatility in the market. They 
don’t want to talk about the $63 million that the variance 
account is down at this very moment. Or more, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Now there is no doubt that today if you go to the Internet you’re 
going to see the natural gas prices are going down. But they 
don’t want to talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in 
Saskatchewan for the last 10 months people have paid 4.52 a 
gigajoule or less for natural gas, which is considerably less than 
the market has been and, Mr. Speaker, that the company, 
SaskEnergy, has basically been running the utility at a loss, 
building a deficit in the variance account, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And all of a sudden, now that rates are starting to climb, they’re 
saying oh, let’s just forget about that variance account, that $63 
million-plus, that in fact that utility has paid out, subsidizing us 
in our natural gas. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they talk about other provinces 
talking about lowering their natural gas rates. And I want to 
quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from a Ms. Holder — Janet Holder, 
vice-president of market development for the Ontario gas 
distributor: 
 

If these prices stay and stabilize here, we will see a 
reduction in prices next winter. Ms. Holder said current 
consumer rates of $9 per cubic feet could be cut 
significantly. 

 
Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they could be cut significantly. 
They’re now double what we are charging consumers in the 
province of Saskatchewan. So they’ve been gouging them for a 
long time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I would expect that they 

could cut them as natural gas rates go down. 
 
We’ve been charging 4.52 a gigajoule; they’ve been charging 
over $9, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I guess they can afford to cut 
their rates a little bit. They’ve gouged those consumers now for 
months, Mr. Deputy Speaker, put hundreds of millions of 
dollars in their private corporation pockets, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Now I believe they could cut them. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they don’t want to talk about the 
things they don’t find pleasant to talk about. They want to talk 
about how this government should do more and more and more. 
 
And no doubt, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to very closely 
analyze what we can do with natural gas rates. And time and 
time again the Minister of Finance has stood up and said that. 
The Premier has said it. The minister responsible for CIC has 
said it. This is not a decision that will be taken lightly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. It will be analyzed very carefully. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about what Peter 
Linder, an analyst at Research Capital Corp in Calgary says. 
And I should quote, Mr. Speaker . . . and a noted bull on natural 
gas prices — somebody that’s been around a long time. He said 
that the unreasonably mild weather across the United States 
could end abruptly, creating an upswing in natural gas prices 
instantly. We’re very much at the mercy of mother nature, he 
said. 
 
(16:15) 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, today the price might be 6.69 that you 
can buy it for, but tomorrow it could be back up over 7 or $8, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
it’s not about snow. The members opposite yell about snow, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we need to point out to them that a 
large portion of electricity is generated by natural gas generated 
turbines, Mr. Speaker. And in the United States, if it gets 
unreasonably hot, gets unreasonably hot, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
then air conditioners get turned on and get turned higher 
creating a demand for power. And then natural gas gets 
consumed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now that’s simple, but you have to tell the members opposite 
that because they difficulty with those basic facts, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, I’m trying to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He’s saying 
give them an education, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m trying. 
They’ve definitely, definitely need some education on this 
issue. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t know that . . . I don’t know if 
I have enough time to educate them all. I don’t know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they want to be taught, they want to be taught 
but I don’t know if I can go that slow. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of the things some of the 
people need to understand is SaskEnergy needs to secure its 
natural gas source prior to the beginning of the season, Mr. 
Speaker, to lock it in for the year. The price negotiated by 
SaskEnergy now for gas delivery next year is based upon the 
current market conditions. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, SaskEnergy 



1538 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

has to look for that opportune time to lock in the natural gas 
prices for the next year. 
 
Then they have to look at the price of natural gas for the next 
year, look at the amount of money that the utility has lost in the 
variance fund, and then, Mr. Speaker, they need to make 
enough money back to pay for what the utility costs. This is a 
flow-through utility, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where the consumer 
pays what the utility pays; no more. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to look at ways to mitigate the 
cost, but we also need to make sure that utility is viable 2 years 
from now, 3 years from now, and 5, 10, 15, and 20 years from 
now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We don’t want to go down the route 
of Alberta or Ontario where they were paying two or three 
times as much in some cases for energy rates at times over the 
last two years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I just want to reiterate some of the rates that some consumers 
have paid in other jurisdictions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 
Vancouver, when we were paying $4.52 a gigajoule, they were 
paying $8.82, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Edmonton was paying 
$8.77, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Calgary, in the land of opportunity, 
as they claim, was paying $9.81 — more than double. More 
than 100 per cent more than consumers in the province of 
Saskatchewan are paying, Mr. Deputy Speaker — more than 
100 per cent more than the taxpayers of Saskatchewan were 
paying, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s an incredible difference. 
 
So for months and months and months we paid 4.52 a gigajoule, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they paid more than $9.80 a gigajoule 
— more than a 100 per cent more than us, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
But do they want to talk about that? No, they don’t. 
 
Winnipeg was paying $8.42 a gigajoule, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— $8.42 a gigajoule. And Toronto was paying $9.54 a 
gigajoule. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not going to write off the fact in 
Alberta that the Alberta government gave energy rebates, 
significant energy rebates. But it should be noted that the 
province of Alberta had a bigger surplus than the Government 
of Canada had so they could give rebates. But the rest of the 
country couldn’t. In Toronto they paid $9.54 a gigajoule and 
had no rebates. Winnipeg paid 8.42 a gigajoule. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Saskatchewan here we chose to take a 
path in which we kept the utility rate low. We kept it low so that 
every consumer paid based on their usage. And we’ve heard the 
Minister of Finance, we’ve heard the Premier, and we’ve heard 
the Minister of the Crown Investments Corporation say that 
we’re going to continue to try and keep those rates the lowest in 
Canada, if possible, and the most at the lowest possible rate we 
can. 
 
They’ve heard a commitment from this government time and 
time again that we’re going to work those rates the lowest in the 
country. And we have a record, a record, over the last decade 
showing that they have been either the lowest or the second 
lowest in the country, our utility rates. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that’s a record that this government’s very proud of. 
 
Now I haven’t been here for the last decade setting those rates, 

as some of the members have. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’ve 
worked very hard to keep our utility rates competitive. They’ve 
worked very hard to make our Crowns the number one — the 
number one — provider for those utilities in the country. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people on this side are very, very 
proud of the record of these Crown corporations. They’ve 
worked very hard for the people of Saskatchewan and have 
delivered — delivered, Mr. Deputy Speaker — for the people of 
this province both fair and cheap utility rates based on 
comparisons across the country. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have some volatility in the 
market. When you’re buying natural gas in the open market, 
there’s going to be volatility based on many factors. It could be 
an increase in demand due to electrical activity . . . or increased 
need for supply for electrical generation over the summer, for 
air conditioning in the southern United States. It could be an 
unreasonably cold winter, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are many 
factors that are outside the control of any supplier of natural gas 
that affect the price. Because as demand goes up, so does the 
price, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, industry analysts expect that natural 
gas prices will moderate and fall back between the three and 
five dollar range per gigajoule within the next one to two years. 
So we expect that there will be over the long and . . . medium 
and long term, a reduction in the cost of natural gas as the 
utility will be able to buy it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But this is still higher than historical levels of between a dollar 
fifty to $3 a gigajoule that have been the marketplace for the 
last number of years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And those rates indicate very clearly if you’re going to pay 
more because those prices, as they are in Alberta, Ontario, 
Manitoba, British Columbia, are passed down to the consumer, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In the 2001-2002 provincial budget, the price of natural gas is 
projected to average 5.86 and 3.39 per gigajoule in 2001 and 
2002 respectively. The Alberta budget, in the land of 
opportunity as the members opposite would like to indicate, 
their projections were very similar, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with a 
average of $6.03 a gigajoule and 3.77 in 2001 and 2002 
respectively, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So the numbers projected by the Minister of Finance in 
Saskatchewan and the minister of finance in Alberta are very, 
very similar, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re not numbers picked 
out of the air, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They are numbers that are 
looked at very seriously by analysts within the industry and 
those projections are made with the very best information 
available to the departments of Finance as they put together 
budgets, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite keep wanting to 
talk about how we need to examine and look at this particular 
rate increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well we don’t disagree. We 
don’t disagree. The Minister of Finance has said that all along. 
The Minister of CIC has said that all along. The Premier is 
quoted as saying that all along, that we will very closely look at 
the needs for an increase and examine all the factors before 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1539 

 

approving it. 
 
Now I want to get on to, for a couple of minutes, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and talk about the independent rate review panel. The 
members opposite talked for a long time about wanting the 
independent rate review panel. So what does the government 
do? The government implements an independent rate review 
panel, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So we have an independent rate review panel, utility rates go 
up, natural gas goes up in the world market, we have to buy 
natural gas from the market, the price goes up, utility asks for a 
review of its rates to the independent rate review panel. And 
what do the members opposite say? The process is flawed; it’s 
no good. 
 
The member from Swift Current stood up and spoke about the 
need for an independent rate review panel and then said scrap 
the independent rate review panel and have the cabinet make 
the decision. All in the same, all in the same session of the 
legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now how can that make any sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker? How 
can the people of this province . . . On one hand they ask for it 
when they think it’s to their advantage, and as soon as they 
don’t think it’s to their advantage, they want to scrap it. 
 
So how can we believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they have the 
best interests of the public at heart? I don’t believe we can, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a rate review panel 
recommendation. They have analyzed very carefully the 
information provided. And the members opposite would have 
us believe that they wouldn’t take into consideration the fact 
that natural gas is dropping. 
 
These are people who are paid to look at each rate review very 
carefully. And when they’re looking at an issue like natural gas 
prices, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they bring in an industry analyst to 
help them. It’s not that they just go and pick numbers out of the 
air; they bring the industry analyst in. They’re part of providing 
information to the panel, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So an independent panel that’s there to decide what’s an 
appropriate rate increase studies the issue and brings back a 
recommendation; and they’re saying send it back to the panel, 
because they don’t like the result. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, maybe, maybe the results they’ve 
brought back aren’t what’s going to be implemented. But none 
of us know that at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We need to 
take the information away and the Minister of Finance and his 
cabinet colleagues are going to look at all the information very 
carefully. And when they do that, then they’ll come back and 
announce what the decision is going to be. 
 
But they’re not going to throw out the hard work of the 
independent panel. And they’re not going to send it back to 
have the panel reanalyze what they’ve already analyzed. 
They’ve done that. And they had analysts advising them. 
 
Now if it’s gone up . . . if it’s gone up or down in a day or two, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the analysts in the industry provide 
information to that panel. Now I’m not going to question what 
the analysts in the industry say, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m going 
to take the information they give them and look at it. 
 
And that’s what then the deputy minister . . . or pardon me, the 
Minister of Finance is going to do and the Minister of Crown 
Investments Corporation is going to do, the Premier, and the 
other members of the cabinet. They’re not going to send it back. 
Because you can send it back and have it reanalyzed and the 
day it comes back again, because of the volatility in the market, 
we could have a different rate again. 
 
And then they’re going to say well, send it back again, send it 
back again, because every day gas fluctuates. It fluctuates on 
the world market like many other stocks do, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s called the commodity markets. It’s a commodity. 
It’s a consumer product that people use and buy. It changes and 
fluctuates on the market. 
 
Now, that’s the capitalist system that our world operates in, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that where there’s a market, you buy at the 
price available. And as demand increases, the price goes up; and 
demand decreases, generally the price goes down. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we could send it back to the rate 
review panel tomorrow and it could come back another month 
down the road and the rate would have changed again and they 
would say send it back again. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the rate review panel has done its work. 
Now it’s passed on its recommendation and now it’s time to 
make a decision. Now the members opposite, the members 
opposite always say make a decision, don’t send it out for more 
consultation. How many times have I heard that? We’ve heard 
that on the Fyke report. We’ve heard it on many other things. 
No more consultant, hurry up, make a decision. 
 
Now they’re saying just the opposite. After we send it out and 
had an independent rate review committee that they wanted 
make a recommendation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now they’re 
saying send it back, take more time, don’t make a decision. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have to be consistent. They have to 
be consistent in their approach to decision making. It’s now the 
point where a decision needs to be made, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And that’s what the cabinet will do. They will go away and they 
will review all the information. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if something’s changed since the 
time the rate review panel made its decision, I am sure — I am 
sure beyond doubt — that the Minister of Finance is going to 
take that into consideration and the Minister of CIC’s going to 
take that into consideration and the Premier is going to take that 
into consideration, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because reasonable 
people would take that into consideration, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and they’re reasonable people. 
 
(16:30) 
 
The people have . . . the people on this side have the interests of 
the people of Saskatchewan at heart, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
they will take any new, any new information into consideration, 



1540 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as they consider, as they consider any rate 
review, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite, the members 
opposite, they want to send it back to the rate review 
committee. Well why do they want to do that? That’s the 
fundamental question. Why do they want to do that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? I’ll tell you why. Because what they want to do is they 
want to flip-flop on every decision. 
 
They flip-flop all the time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One day, one 
day they’re telling us hurry up, make a decision. Right? They’re 
saying that on health care. They’re saying that on taxation. 
They’re saying that on everything else. But when it comes to 
something after it’s gone to an independent rate review 
committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then they say, then they say, 
send it back. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite will have you 
believe or try to have you believe . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I am having difficulty 
hearing the speaker and the member for Regina Dewdney does 
have the floor. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite 
asked me a few minutes ago to teach them a few things and I 
think it was the member from Canora-Pelly. He said, look, we 
need to learn. So I’m trying to help him, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I need to point out that the member from Canora-Pelly is a 
long, a long-time educator himself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so he 
understands the value of good education. And the member from 
Canora-Pelly, being a long-time teacher understanding the 
value of education, asked to be educated, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and we’re trying hard. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, he says he’s going to reread Hansard 
twice. That’s his dedication to learning. That’s a compliment 
that he’s going to read it twice, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You know, 
I am so pleased. I am so pleased that the member from 
Canora-Pelly is going to read it twice. He’s going to read my 
speech twice because he wants to clearly hear a message. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite claim to have 
the high ground or the moral ground on doing what’s best for 
the people of Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 
have they ever shown that? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when have I ever seen in their platform 
concern about the poor and the downtrodden in our society? I 
see nothing. 
 
What did I see in their platform regarding additional money for 
education? They wanted a five-year freeze, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Health care. Did I see them concerned about the sick and those 
needing help in our society, Mr. Deputy Speaker? No. They 
wanted a five-year freeze, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This coming from the people that believe in workfare. 
Workfare, you know, concerns about the disabled, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — I see none of that in their speech, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing. Instantly they have concern for 
everything and for everybody. And they’ll spend any amount of 
money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they’ll cut taxes more. But 
how? Just how are they going to do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
Well I’ll tell you what they talk about doing, they talk about 
selling off the very utility, the very utility that has delivered the 
lowest natural gas prices in the country to the consumers of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so they’d sell off SaskEnergy. And 
then we’d be paying the rates that they pay in their dreamland 
of Alberta — 9.81 a gigajoule instead of 4.52, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Sounds like good economics to me. Not good 
economics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that sounds like voodoo 
economics, as my friend, the member from Regina South, refers 
to. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite are having a 
good time listening to this and actually they’re quite quiet right 
now. And the member from Canora-Pelly is learning 
something. And I’m extremely, extremely pleased. Now I wish 
he was taking notes. Now as the member from Canora-Pelly 
would understand being an educator, that he should take 
detailed notes. And I was hoping, I was hoping he’d be taking 
notes as he has without doubt taught his students over the years 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Would the member 
please tie his comments into the debate that is before the House 
today, either in the amendment or in the main motion? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’ll get back to the issue at hand which is the increase 
of . . . asked by SaskEnergy, or pardon me, by the independent 
rate review panel that’s now before the cabinet. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite talk about the 
moral high ground on the issue of defending the public and the 
poor and the downtrodden in natural gas rates, when their whole 
position and platform takes the exact opposite position, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — cut taxes and cut taxes for the wealthy, 
leaving no money left, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no money left to 
worry about things like utility rates. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they think that they have the moral high ground on this issue, 
yet their platform is exact opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now the members on this side are very concerned, very, very 
concerned about natural gas rates, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
am very, very, very confident that the cabinet and the caucus on 
this side of the Assembly will look into, very carefully, to 
minimize the impact on Saskatchewan people. They’re 
reasonable people here and they’re very concerned about those 
who are scraping by and having difficulty paying their bills, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we’re going to do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The members 
on this side will review very carefully all the information and 
they will make a decision with the very best information 
available to them. 
 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1541 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to bring up another dimension that 
the members opposite continue to bring up in regards to 
municipal funding. I think that we need to point out to the 
members opposite that municipalities get refunds based on 
natural gas usage in their communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now refunds may not be the correct word but it’s a surcharge 
that’s actually given to the municipalities by SaskEnergy in lieu 
of taxes. Now that surcharge, now that surcharge goes to the 
municipalities, and it’s part of the . . . (inaudible) . . . process to 
natural gas. There’s no doubt about it, the member opposite 
says that the consumer pays a surcharge. Yes the consumer pays 
for natural gas, with a surcharge paid by SaskEnergy to the 
municipalities; it is paid by the consumer. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that means a significant amount of 
money to municipalities in this province as well. So the 
members opposite are one day talking about municipalities need 
more money and the next day they’re saying don’t give them 
more money. So again, they have to be consistent in their 
argument. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this side of the Assembly we are 
going to do everything in our power to minimize the increase 
that the people of Saskatchewan are facing as a result of higher 
natural gas prices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we’re not in favour in sending back to rate 
review committee to again delay what is necessary. Because, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you send it back to rate review panel, 
then the variance account just gets larger and the amount of 
money that Saskatchewan consumers have to pay back gets 
larger, creating — creating — Mr. Speaker, an even greater 
increase requirement. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or, Mr. Speaker — pardon me — we 
need to very closely look today at how we can minimize natural 
gas increases. You don’t need to put it off for another three 
months, another four months, go back out and talk to the 
people. Every single member on this side knows that consumers 
are concerned about natural gas prices. And I believe every 
single member in the opposition knows that every consumer is 
concerned about natural gas prices. We’re concerned about 
what it does to small business. We’re concerned about what it 
does to the restaurant industry. We’re concerned about what it 
does to major businesses like IPSCO. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there has been an independent review done. 
And the independent review has come back with a 
recommendation; the panel’s come back with a 
recommendation; now it’s time for the government to review 
that recommendation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite want to talk about 
natural gas rates. Well I want to talk about natural gas rates and 
what the average family has paid in this country over the last 
year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Toronto the average consumer would 
have paid $1,565 for natural gas last year. In Vancouver, 
$1,560, Mr. Speaker. In Calgary, $1,510. In Hamilton, Ontario, 
it’d be $1,395. In Edmonton, Alberta, it’d be $1,370. In 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, it was $1,265. And in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — the lowest in the country — $1,020, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, they keep talking 
about a pizza rebate. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we in Saskatchewan 
kept our energy rates low, contrary to the province of Alberta. 
Yes, in the province of Alberta they’ve got large natural gas 
rebates, there’s no doubt about that. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
also pay more than 100 per cent more than what the consumers 
in the province of Saskatchewan paid for natural gas last year, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit now about what 
happened in the 1980s because it’s relevant to natural gas rates, 
Mr. Speaker. There’s . . . relevance is connected in this way. 
There was a time in this province when the government owned 
natural gas fields and consumers could count on the government 
to its Crown utilities subsidizing significantly natural gas rates. 
 
And then something happened, Mr. Speaker. In the 1980s we 
had a government that decided that they would sell off things, 
Mr. Speaker, to get money. For short-term gain they sold off the 
province’s future, Mr. Speaker. So they sold things off, Mr. 
Speaker, in order to, in a short term, subsidize many, many 
things including, I might add, improvements to homes, home 
improvement guarantees, low-interest loans so people could 
improve their homes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we sold off natural gas fields for just a mere pittance of their 
worth. And when we sold off the mere pittance . . . sold off our 
natural gas fields for a mere pittance of what they were worth, 
then of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then we’re faced with a 
significant problem. We’re faced with a problem of today not 
owning any natural gas fields, Mr. Speaker. So today we’re 
totally, totally at the mercy of the world market, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as natural gas goes up, Mr. Speaker, the consumer is going 
to have to pay more. We don’t have any of our own gas any 
more to subsidize the cost, Mr. Speaker. It’s a shame. 
 
And we saw the same type of thing going on with the potash 
corporation. We sold off the potash corporation for a mere 
pittance of what it was worth. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those types of sales in the 1980s put us in 
this situation today. And the members opposite wonder why, 
when the world market price goes up for natural gas, why we 
have to go to a utility increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or Mr. Speaker, pardon me, we 
have more than one industry analyst say yes, natural gas rates 
are dropping today but they could go up just as significantly as 
they dropped in a mere day, with a change in weather, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have analysts telling us that the price today may be 6.69, 
but it was $9 just a few short days ago. Some provinces of this 
country, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Ontario was paying $9 a 
gigajoule — $9. And what were we paying here — 4.52. And 
then they say they should be able to lower the prices a little bit, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well of course they should be able to lower the prices a little 



1542 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

bit. They’re paying twice in the province of Ontario to what we 
are — twice. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, now they’re saying we can lock in whatever 
until 2003. Yes, we possibly could lock into 2003 at a lower 
rate. But, Mr. Speaker, then tomorrow if the rate was lowered, 
they’d say that damn government made a mistake. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member to withdraw that 
statement and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Okay, I withdraw that statement and apologize 
to the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they would say tomorrow if the rate went down 
that we did something incorrect, that we were silly, we acted 
too quickly, we didn’t act properly or better yet, they would say 
we didn’t do our due diligence. So on one hand they’re saying 
lock it in for five years, and tomorrow we done that . . . had 
done that, Mr. Speaker, they’ll be telling us we hadn’t done due 
diligence. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, 
the members opposite, have said that they needed an education 
on the issue of natural gas rates. Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this 
side of the House, we are very, very concerned about natural 
gas rates. 
 
We’re concerned how it impacts low-income families. We’re 
concerned how it impacts families that are just barely paying 
their bills, Mr. Speaker. We are concerned how it affects 
marginal businesses that are struggling to pay their bills and pay 
their employees every month. We’re concerned how it impacts 
large businesses who have to pay dividends to their, to their 
shareholders, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what we’re not prepared to do is send a decision that’s not 
ready to be made back to a rate review committee to be 
re-examined. Because, Mr. Speaker, I am quite confident that 
my colleagues in government can take into consideration any 
fluctuations that have occurred since that decision was made. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the House have 
faith in their Minister of Finance. They have faith in the cabinet 
they will take into consideration those types of changes that 
may have occurred since the recommendation was made. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite . . . they wanted a 
debate today about natural gas rates hoping to influence a 
decision tomorrow or next week or the week after. And they 
wanted to create an environment in which they were passing 
information on to the public from their perspective, Mr. 
Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, their perspective may not always be 
all encompassing. They may not always have all the 
information in front of them. And they may make decisions 
then or recommendations then based on not having all the 
information. 
 
I want the decisions made by people with all the information in 
front of them, Mr. Speaker. Because there’s more to looking at 
the price of natural gas just than the price of the world market 

today. There is the cost of repaying the variance account, Mr. 
Speaker. There are things that need to be taken into 
consideration that the members opposite are not taking into 
consideration. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I am very pleased to stand 
and say that I am supporting the amendment put forward by the 
Minister of Finance and not supporting the motion as put 
forward by the members opposite. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to enter this 
debate on this particular motion brought forth by the member 
from Swift Current. I’d say that basically it affects everybody. 
It affects my constituents. It affects the constituents of the 
members opposite. 
 
I was just on the phone even just talking to a constituent now 
who runs a business. And it just happened that we were talking 
about another matter and he just happened to mention that. He 
just said, you know, what about this extra 32 per cent. He runs a 
welding shop in Davidson; he just says I don’t know if I can 
absorb that much that fast, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s just not in the rural, Mr. Speaker. I come up to the city 
and you stop at a service station this morning up here in the 
south end, I believe, in the member opposite from Regina 
South, his constituency. And usually you hear people talk and 
it’s usually about when they’re making small talk they’re 
waiting for one of the guys filling up the car, you’re waiting to 
pay the bill, sometimes you make some small talk. You’ll listen 
in and usually they talk about the weather. 
 
You know what they were talking about — energy, the price of 
gas, the price of natural gas, and how much of a hit it is up here 
even in the city. So I know it’s a concern to the members 
opposite too, just like it is here. I know that their offices are 
getting calls. 
 
And we talk . . . the few people I know up here, from living up 
here the last two, three months while session’s been on, you talk 
to them . . . over on Friday when we left and they’re concerned 
about that. Just like they are everywhere, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to read a couple of letters. And I’ve been getting quite a 
few about this since Friday. But I just want to read a couple into 
Hansard just to let the people know opposite of the concern out 
here. The first letter is from the mayor from the town of Craik. 
And he says: 
 

I’m writing to you with regard to the increase in the cost of 
natural gas. The town of Craik has paid $5,651 for natural 
gas for the town buildings in the year 2000. To date in 
2001, we have paid $5,320. A rink in town paid $8,798 for 
natural gas for the winter months and $14,030 for 
electricity. Of this $14,030, the demand charge was $2,647. 
 
SUMA and the municipalities have been lobbying the 
government for a number of years to have this charge 
dropped from municipal recreation buildings but have not 



June 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1543 

 

been successful. A 45 per cent increase in natural gas 
would cost the town an additional $6,500 for town 
buildings and the rink. 
 
Our rink committee spent 12 months of the year 
fundraising now just to pay the energy bill in the rink. A 45 
per cent increase will mean we will have no choice but to 
close the rink. There’ll be no minor hockey, figure skating, 
or other activities for our young people. The same people 
that will have to endure a rate hike of this magnitude in 
their private lives are also the same people that have to 
endure these rate hikes at the recreational facilities in town. 
Surely there has to be some relief for small towns. 
 
I urge this government to seriously consider the 
consequences to rural people of a hike of this nature. 
 

Another one from the mayor of the town of Imperial. 
 

I was watching the news at noon and heard that a 42 per 
cent increase in natural gas has been requested. This 
prompted me to write this letter to let these people know 
what is going on in the real world. 
 
We’re a community of 380 people and the proposed 42 per 
cent would increase the town’s heating bill by $2,528, 
which is equivalent to approximately one-half a mill. This 
does not include the rink or community centre. The 42 per 
cent increase to the rink would add another $3,150. 
 
Please do whatever you can to have these people come to 
their senses. 

 
From the mayor from Imperial. 
 
Village of Kenaston. They would like to express their concerns 
over the proposed 40 to 50 per cent increase in the cost of 
natural gas to residents and public utilities: 
 

We have just completed our 2001 fiscal budget, and due to 
elevator closures, reassessment, the increased energy costs 
have put a severe strain on our limited finances. We would 
like to go on record stating that this is a very bad time to 
increase energy costs and we urge the government to 
seriously consider other options to alleviate some of this 
financial burden to rural Saskatchewan communities. 

 
Another one. I’ll just read one more from the town of Outlook: 
 

I write to you today with deep concerns over 
ever-increasing costs that are facing communities such as 
ours. At the present, we are in the final stages of budget 
considerations, wrestling with shifts due to assessment, 
feeling overwhelmed with the stark reality of 
ever-increasing energy costs and the effect that these 
increases will have on our citizens. 
 
As we struggle with increased costs, it is difficult to feel 
any joy in the provincial government’s talking of balanced 
budgets. And now with windfall surpluses, municipalities 
look back over the past number of years and remember 
downloading from the provincial government, decreased 
revenue sharing, and a great deal of sacrifice endured by 

municipalities. 
 
Our part in helping with the provincial budget, it now 
seems our reward is a provincial government that boasts of 
surplus revenues, is further increased costs through 
runaway energy costs and increased policing costs with no 
signal from our government of any relief. 
 
While the provincial government delights over its increased 
wealth, municipal councils labour with budgets hoping to 
find a way to remain revenue-neutral but knowing full well 
that a mill rate increase is in the future. There is no delight 
in squeezing more revenue out of taxpayers who are 
already facing substantial increases within their own homes 
where the provincial government’s latest tax relief would 
do little more than offset a portion of the costs that citizens 
will endure. 
 
The challenge we put to the provincial government is to 
find some way to relieve some of the financial pressures the 
municipalities are experiencing. Look at increasing revenue 
sharing, subsidizing energy costs, taking appropriate 
percentage of the cost of education from property tax base 
— something positive that would offset the frustration that 
is currently building in rural Saskatchewan and all over 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In a recent speech, Premier Calvert talked on the positives 
we have in this province, how we have to change our 
attitudes. 

 
The mayor goes on: 
 

I agree with Premier that this is true. We have to change 
our attitudes. At the same time, we need a provincial 
government that can deliver some of these positives to the 
people of this province, that will help in the development of 
those positive attitudes we would all like to display. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those are a few of the letters. And many calls over 
the weekend, that was the main topic. No matter where you 
went, the people you talked to — whether it was at a sports day 
in the morning or in the afternoon talking to somebody in the 
coffee shop or just on the street going into a store for something 
— everybody would stop me and talk about the high energy 
costs, you know, that were being proposed out there. 
 
Just basically, they can’t afford them out there, whether it’s in 
the rural or in the city, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The motion, I believe, is a good motion. Because of the 
proposed increases, I think and listen . . . when I listen to the 
radio there I think, that day there, he had said that the last 
projections they had used was May 10. Well that’s when it was 
still at $7, which changed quite a bit, considerably. It’s starting 
to go down. 
 
And I think that’s why this cabinet should consider sending it 
back, to review the options that are out there. And I think that as 
a cabinet, as a government and this being an important issue, 
it’s something that they should look at, every chance they have 
and any way they can, to keep the costs from going up. Because 
I mean, just talking to the members opposite, everybody 



1544 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2001 

 

knowing how much this is going to affect everybody. 
 
I mean I can go on about the seniors on fixed income, the calls 
I’ve had saying that, you know, I don’t know if we can afford 
this. You know they’re just saying I don’t know what we’re 
going to do, you know. What’s the government doing to try and 
help this? 
 
You know there’s many options. You know and it’s been . . . 
another thing that has been brought up, that the opposite 
members haven’t talked about is, when the price of gas does go 
up, there’s also more money coming into the provincial coffers. 
You can talk about the April sale brings total bonus bid revenue 
to about $19 million compared with $11 million for the first two 
sales last year. 
 
So there is extra money coming in to the provincial coffers with 
this high energy . . . with the high natural gas costs. The 
province is making money on royalties and the members 
opposite don’t mention that. So there is extra money being in 
there and I believe that it should be passed back, as with the 
members here, any way it can be to brunt that cost. 
 
Another point I would like to make is the Minister for Rural 
Revitalization, her mandate . . . I remember her saying that she 
would be at the cabinet table when there was an issue that 
affected rural Saskatchewan. She would be trying to talk to the 
cabinet, trying to get it so that it would help rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I hope tomorrow, when she’s at the cabinet table, that 
she’s talking, representing her job as the minister of Rural 
Revitalization, trying to talk this cabinet into turning back the 
costs of the rates. Or at least sending this back to the rate review 
panel for them to have a look at it. Because I think we have to 
examine every option. We’re dealing with an issue this 
important; it affects every person out there. 
 
I mean when you go out there and you talk to the people, this is 
what they’re talking about today. This is what they were talking 
about on the weekend. That’s what they’re talking about today. 
This is what they’re going to be talking about tonight. 
 
So I think as a government they owe it to the people to go and 
examine every option to make sure that if they are passing the 
costs on, that there is nothing else that . . . they’re against the 
wall; they have to do this. 
 
And I think that they can . . . and I believe that there is, there is 
a movement, especially in the rate review panel, to re-examine 
this and come back with a lower rate increase in the price of 
gas, as we know the other members have talked about when it 
was projected. 
 
Another mention . . . I remember the Minister of Finance 
talking about $4.53. He says that we’re paying the lowest. Well 
we have been, and that’s good. 
 
Another question I would like to ask the minister for Crowns 
areas is what price do they have locked in now? Because I’m 
starting to wonder. And it’s been raised to me by a couple of 
my constituency. They wonder if they locked that price in at 7 
or $8 right now, when right now they could be buying it for 6 

and we’re picking up the extra costs, Mr. Speaker. And that’s a 
concern out there. 
 
You know, and it’s a . . . like I say it’s a huge concern to the 
constituents out there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I see we’re getting very close. I’m not going to go bring up a 
couple of more letters. They just hollered I got 20 seconds. So I 
got 20 more seconds to try to urge this government to take this 
back to the rate review panel tomorrow. To follow that motion. 
To go back there . . . my last couple of seconds . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It now being past the hour of 5 o’clock, this 
House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 
 
 


