















































Hansard: June 25, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2091 
 June 25, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petition today 
again is regarding the Fyke report: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Kelvington health 
care centre be maintained at its current level offering 
24-hour acute care, emergency and physician services and 
that laboratory, physiotherapy, public health, home care, 
and long-term care services be readily available to the users 
from Kelvington and district. 

 
The people who have signed these petitions are from 
Kelvington and Fosston. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the condition of 
Highway 339 and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Avonlea, Bengough, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
residents of southwest Saskatchewan who are concerned about 
the hospital situation in the city of Swift Current, the regional 
centre, and I bring today a petition bearing names from across 
the region and the prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today come from the city of Swift 
Current, as well as the communities of Simmie, Herbert, 
Pennant, Cabri, Tompkins, Abbey, Wymark, Mankota, as well 
as the Wheatland Hutterite Colony near Ponteix. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 
concerned about the proposals in the EMS (emergency medical 
services) report. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Radville, Ceylon, and 
Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My supply of 
petitions was getting down but the good people of the Southeast 
have replenished it. Mr. Speaker, my petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the good people of 
Storthoaks, Fairlight, Redvers, Wakaw, Carlyle, Manor, and 
Antler. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition for improved cellular telephone coverage. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of Rabbit 
Lake, Hafford, Blaine Lake, Leask, Radisson, Borden, 
Perdue, Maymont, Mistawasis, and Muskeg Lake. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Rabbit Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition from citizens that are concerned with the centralization 
of ambulance services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition come from the communities of 
Leslie, Wynyard, and Mozart. 
 



2092 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again I rise in the Assembly to bring forth a petition signed by 
the citizens of . . . (inaudible) . . . And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Spiritwood, Medstead, Glaslyn, Leoville, Chitek Lake, Big 
River, Canwood, Debden, Shellbrook, Parkside, Shell 
Lake, Duck Lake, and Macdowall. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, on the petition are from 
Spiritwood . . . (inaudible) . . . Lake, Medstead, Shellbrook and 
. . . 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 
from residents in the Southwest who are concerned that when it 
rains the ambulance refuses to use Highway 43. And the prayer 
of relief reads as follows: 

 
That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to call on the 
Saskatchewan government to repair Highway 43 from 
Vanguard to its junction with Highway 4 in order that area 
residents may have access to necessary services without 
endangering life and property. 
 

Your petitioners come from Vanguard, Pambrun, and 
McMahon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition in support of comprehensive tobacco control 
legislation in Saskatchewan, which comes from the cardiac 
rehabilitation program at the Moose Jaw-Thunder Creek Health 
District. Mr. Speaker, the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places and workplaces, and to control youth access 
to tobacco products. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are from the cities of Moose Jaw 
and Regina. 
 
And I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province requesting the 

Assembly to consider a number of matters that are addendums 
to previously tabled petitions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, Ms. Lisa Quiring; and I’ll have Lisa stand and be 
recognized. Lisa officially joined my office as a part-time staff 
today, and she is from the Carrot River area. Her and her 
husband, Lyle, farm and operate a leafcutter bee business. They 
have two children, Kade, six years of age; and Kennedy, five 
years of age. 
 
And while I can assure you that this is not the Lisa in that 
promotional video Lisa Visits the Legislature, I can tell you that 
this is Lisa’s first visit not only to the legislature but to Regina. 
So I would ask all members to warmly welcome her. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and to all members of the legislature, three guests who 
are sitting in the west gallery. The person on the far right is my 
sister-in-law, my brother’s wife, Dr. Suzanne Marcia Nilson. 
She’s a professor of biology at the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College here in Regina. 
 
And with her today are her parents who are visiting from 
Sandwich, Massachusetts. Sandwich is located on Cape Cod, 
not too far from Hyannis Port and some other places that we’ve 
heard about. Ed and Irene Marcia are visiting here from that 
area. They’re also, as some of my guests last week were 
celebrating, they are celebrating their 50th wedding anniversary 
this fall. And they’re here because their granddaughter is 
graduating from Campbell Collegiate later tomorrow. 
 
There’s one other piece of information that’s quite important 
about these people. All three of them have gone to visit the 
restaurant near Hartford, Connecticut, that the member from 
Cannington’s sister-in-law is the owner of and they are here to 
give very good reports about a very good restaurant in the West 
Hartford, Connecticut area. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, you may have 
noticed that we are having some technical audio problems so 
please bear with us as our technicians try to keep up with 
getting things going. But I do believe that all the remarks will 
still be recorded in Hansard. 
 
It’s my pleasure now, members, to introduce to you some 
people seated in the Speaker’s gallery. These are members of 
the Legislative Assembly staff who today received long service 
awards in this very room. These individuals are part of the 
legislative service that enables this House to run smoothly and 
assists MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) in 
performance of their work. 
 
I would ask the individuals to stand as I call their name. Three 
individuals are recognized for 15 years of service: Marilyn 
Kotylak from Journals; Greg Putz, who’s on the floor here daily 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2093 

 

— stand, Greg — and Pat Summers from Hansard, who’s not 
present. Also four individuals were recognized for 20 years of 
service: Ben Block, supervisor of sessional security is in the 
gallery today; Keith Foster from Hansard is in the gallery; Janis 
Patrick from financial services is in the gallery; and not present 
is Irene Sotropa from Hansard. 
 
Please join me in congratulating these members of the 
legislative staff on their achievement of receiving long service 
awards. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I also want to recognize Barb Lindenbach, 
who is seated in the gallery, who has completed 21 years of 
service. Barb has primarily worked as the Hansard indexer, 
although she has also worked in reference and collections of the 
Legislative Library. 
 
Barb’s work as an indexer has required her to read every word 
spoken in this Chamber and then to analyze and categorize 
these speeches for the Hansard index. It may be possible she 
has analyzed more MLA’s speeches than anyone else in this 
province. Her work is a tremendous aid to researchers and 
historians doing retrospective research. 
 
Barb is retiring at the end of the month. Please join me in 
thanking Barb for her 21 years of service to this institution and 
wishing her much happiness in her retirement. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Legislative Assembly Employees 
Long Service Award Ceremony 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s obvious from 
the remarks you just made that one of your personal joys is 
presiding over the annual Legislative Assembly Employees 
Long Service Award Ceremony as you did this morning with 
these employees. 
 
And we’re all pleased that apparently the clouds moved aside 
— at least partially — so everybody could enjoy their lunch in 
the park after the ceremony. 
 
We in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, do not publicly acknowledge 
it often enough, but we know that in this exercise in democracy 
in which we are involved, we could not begin to function if it 
were not for the excellent and deliberately inconspicuous 
Assembly employees who do so much for us — from 
preserving our words in Hansard; to guiding us through the 
maze of instructions to deal with our expenses, allowances, and 
remunerations; to guiding visitors through this wonderful, 
majestic old building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s legislative services I know are 
held in high regard across the nation. And of this morning’s 
ceremony, I join with you, Mr. Speaker, in paying tribute to 
employees who received long service awards. 
 
I too want to acknowledge 20 years services from Ben Block in 

Security; Keith Foster and Irene Sotropa and their magic fingers 
in Hansard; and Janis Patrick in Financial Services. 
 
Thanks as well for 15 years to Marilyn Kotylak in Journals; Pat 
Summers in Hansard; and our Clerk, Greg Putz, whose arrival I 
remember but it just doesn’t seem like 15 years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know all members will join in congratulating 
and thanking these seven, as well as Barb Lindenbach, retiring 
after 21 years of fabulous service at Hansard. 
 
We thank them all and — all members of the Assembly — for 
serving us so well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

NHL Legend Eddie Shore Honoured in Cupar 
 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Saturday 
evening over 250 people gathered in the Cupar town hall to 
honour NHL (National Hockey League) legend and Hall of 
Famer Eddie Shore. The occasion marked the reunion of senior 
hockey spanning a time period starting in 1906 to the present. 
 
Players, coaches, team officials, and fans were invited to attend 
the weekend reunion which included barbecues, a golf 
tournament, pancake breakfast, and of course a banquet. The 
highlight of the evening was the renaming of the Cupar sports 
grounds which will now be known as Shore Recreational Park. 
 
A number of Mr. Shore’s family were in attendance including 
Eddie Shore Jr. from Springfield, Massachusetts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Eddie Shore’s long hockey career began in Cupar 
and ended up as a Hall of Famer defenceman with the Boston 
Bruins. Eddie Shore’s father, T. J. Shore, financed the first 
hockey arena in the community so that his sons Eddie and 
Aubrey could start playing the game. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that events like this reunion are only 
made possible by the hard work of many volunteers in the 
community. And I would like to thank Kevin Bonish and his 
committee for making the senior hockey reunion a resounding 
success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Mill Development in Northern Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To paraphrase the old 
question, if a tree is harvested in the forest, does anybody 
notice? Well, Mr. Speaker, for years in northern Saskatchewan 
the answer has been yes, and as of a very significant 
announcement last Friday in northwestern Saskatchewan the 
answer is now a resounding you bet. An already healthy 
industry is going to grow even stronger through a $200 million 
development of a new mill and through enhanced 
community-based wood allocations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in the tried-and-true Saskatchewan tradition, 
this development is the result of a partnership between a private 



2094 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

sector firm, Tolko Industries, which will finance and own 75 
per cent of the project; the Meadow Lake Tribal Council and 
Northwest Communities Wood Products, who will each own 10 
per cent; and Crown Investments Corporation, which will own 
5 per cent. 
 
By the way, Mr. Speaker, that’s an investment in a 
Saskatchewan project by CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation), just for the record. 
 
Two more reasons why this is more good news for 
Saskatchewan: one, building the mill will create 200 jobs. 
Operating the mill when it is complete will employ 130 people, 
with an additional 130 jobs in related woodland activities. 
Those are jobs for northerners, Mr. Speaker — most of them 
First Nations and Métis people. 
 
Two, this project is environmentally sustainable with the best 
forest management science being applied. 
 
Two years ago we announced our plan to expand 
Saskatchewan’s forest industry for the benefit of all 
Saskatchewan people. This, Mr. Speaker, is one big step in 
fulfilling that plan. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kinistino Couple Celebrate 60th Wedding Anniversary 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker and 
members, it gives me great pleasure to extend warm 
congratulations to Mr. Keith Jackson and Mrs. Linda Jackson 
on their 60th wedding anniversary. 
 
Mr. and Mrs. Jackson were married in Kinistino where they 
were both born and raised. They soon started farming in the 
Kinistino area and Linda taught piano for over 40 years. They 
are now retired and live happily in Kinistino in their senior 
years. 
 
Linda and Keith remember the hard work it took to run a farm 
and to raise their three sons. They are also fondly remembering 
of the fun they had in the community, and the social life in 
Kinistino and area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with delight that I ask the Assembly to join 
me in congratulating this special couple on their 60th wedding 
anniversary. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ACTRA Honours Regina Constituents 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to bring to the 
attention of the Assembly recognition that was recently given to 
three long-standing and outstanding citizens of Regina. Two of 
these recipients are constituents of mine and the third is a 
constituent of Regina Centre. 
 
At the recent annual meeting of ACTRA Saskatchewan — 
that’s the Alliance of Canadian Cinema, Television, and Radio 

Artists — Jean Freeman, Steve Arsenych, and Lyn Goldman 
were honoured for their more than 30 years of service by being 
proclaimed life members. In fact, Mr. Speaker, Jean and Steve 
were the first members to join the Saskatchewan branch, and 
were instrumental in establishing it. They hold numbers 1 and 
2. Lyn, by comparison, is a relative newcomer with number 44. 
Membership today sits at 650. 
 
Long-time residents of Saskatchewan will recognize the voices 
of these three artists if not the names, because for years they 
were fixtures on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
radio. Jean and Steven were working on a radio show for kids 
called Mr. Pen when they joined ACTRA. Steve says: 
 

Prior to ACTRA working at the mother corp was a little 
loosey-goosey when it came to signing contracts and being 
paid. 
 

Imagine that, Mr. Speaker, unfairness at the CBC. All three 
members are known as well for their work with Regina Little 
Theatre as directors, spokespersons, and spear carriers. 
 
Congratulations to Lyn, Steve, and Jean, my friends and 
constituents, and especially Steve, who is my former law 
partner. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Soccer Windup in Swift Current 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Saturday, my family and I had the opportunity to attend the 
windup picnic and the windup games that mark the end of the 
youth soccer season in Swift Current. It was a great afternoon. 
There were over 500 young soccer players and their parents in 
attendance at the Southside park for the event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, soccer’s a very popular sport in my home 
community. This year there were approximately 950 players 
from ages 4 to 18 competing in a variety of leagues and 
tournaments. 
 
My wife coached one of the five-and-under teams, Mr. Speaker, 
and I can tell you, having made it to most of the games, that in 
addition to coaching these five-year-olds, there’s also a lot of 
herding that goes on, and it’s a lot of work for the parents and 
volunteers that get involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Swift Current produces some very talented soccer 
players such as the Under 12 Girls’ Soccer Team which won the 
Division 2 Provincial Indoor Championship earlier this spring. 
They’ve also won back-to-back silver medals in recent outdoor 
soccer tournaments. 
 
I’d like to congratulate the executive of the Swift Current 
Soccer Association for all their hard work: president, Dean 
Wilson; vice-president, Anita Evans; secretary, John Lashon; 
treasurer, Lavern Warner; and the directors, Dale Perry, Dave 
Fong, Dan Amsted, John Potter, Ron Elkington, Mike Cusin, 
Kate Adams, Brenda Muddel, and Robert Chapman. And a 
special recognition to Pat Perry, who won the first ever Ken 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2095 

 

Billows award given in memory of Mr. Billows who was 
himself involved in soccer to the person . . . to someone who 
has contributed much to Swift Current soccer in my home 
community. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Saskatchewan Advantage 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over this past 
decade our government has worked hard to reduce child poverty 
in Saskatchewan. We have committed to helping those children 
who are in most need because we believe that a strong and 
healthy society is one in which no child has to worry about 
shelter, clothing, or hunger. And according to the Canadian 
Council on Social Development, Saskatchewan has done a 
better job of supporting its poor and working poor than any 
other province in Canada. 
 
Now groups and individuals in other jurisdictions are starting to 
take note of Saskatchewan’s progress. One example of this is 
the June 18 editorial in the Western Catholic Reporter, a paper 
based in Edmonton. The title of this editorial is “The 
Saskatchewan Advantage” and it’s about the idea that a wealthy 
province like Alberta could take some lessons on the issue of 
child poverty from Saskatchewan. 
 
The editorial points out that in 1998-99, Saskatchewan spent 
$37 million on child benefit programs while Alberta spent $6 
million. The editorial goes on to state and I quote: 
 

. . . we [Albertans] likely still have a long way to go to 
match the record of a province with far fewer economic 
resources than Alberta. The Canadian Council on Social 
Development study provides further contrary evidence to 
the belief that a wealthy society will trickle some of that 
wealth down to the poor. What is more likely is that 
governments that put a priority on ending poverty achieve 
that end more readily than those that believe in the 
trickle-down myth. 
 

Our government has placed a priority on ending poverty and we 
call on others to follow our lead, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority 
Conflict of Interest Guidelines 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the liquor and gaming minister. Mr. Speaker, the minister seems 
to have quite a double standard when it comes to the employees 
and discipline. 
 
One Liquor and Gaming official is caught violating the law and 
yet no disciplinary action is taken. Meanwhile Joe Dosenberger 
was trying to uphold the law and he gets fired, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why the double standard? Why was Joe 

Dosenberger fired for upholding the law while now the minister 
is prepared to look the other way after a senior official is caught 
breaking the law, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I would urge the member 
opposite to quit playing cheap politics with this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — The member from Rosthern knows full 
well that a Justice Kyle determined what the instance was in 
one instance; that Justice Wakeling has now recommended to 
me another circumstance and other instances, outlined his 
reasons for that to occur, that the Justice department had a 
chance to look at that and certainly said that they support those 
recommendations. 
 
With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite knows 
that I would support a Justice Wakeling who’s looked at 
thoroughly all of the instances with these issues in mind. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that it’s a bad 
plan for that minister to try and hide behind Justice Wakeling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1995 the Liquor and Gaming Authority brought 
in conflict of interest guidelines that violated their own law. 
Justice Wakeling states these guidelines were therefore invalid. 
He states these invalid guidelines amounted to, and I quote, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

An attempt to amend the section in question, when the 
authority to amend rests solely with the legislature. 
 

That’s right here in this room, Mr. Speaker. In other words, 
Liquor and Gaming officials clearly overstepped their authority. 
They had no business contradicting their own Act, but they 
went ahead and did it anyway, and then used these invalid 
guidelines to justify breaking the law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who prepared the 1995 guidelines that encouraged 
Liquor and Gaming officials to break the law, and who 
approved them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite 
states, the Authority does have conflict of interest guidelines in 
place, which Justice Wakeling says reflect modern industry and 
community practices and are described as quite reasonable, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would ask the member opposite, is he agreeing with Justice 
Wakeling’s recommendations or is he not? We have a respected 
member looking at all of the ins and outs of this issue and 
recommending to us that just this, Mr. Speaker, is very 
acceptable to modern-day practices. An employee should never 
accept gifts, rewards, gratuities, or favours, which could be 
viewed as payment for services rendered or influencing a 
business decision. Tokens of appreciation exchanged as part of 



2096 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

protocol or the exchange of hospitality between persons doing 
business together are acceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Justice Wakeling then asked us to move to put 
amendments to this House to be discussed in this forum that 
would make that consistent with modern-day practices, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’d ask the member, is he going to support those or not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, two questions, no answers. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, who wrote those guidelines? Who 
approved them? And specifically, were they approved by the 
Minister of Liquor and Gaming at that time? Three questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, in discussions with all of 
the members of the authority and how they would conduct their 
business and trying to reflect in modern-day practices what the 
intent of section 133 was, Mr. Speaker, they would have crafted 
what I have just read to this Assembly to be the practices of the 
authority which Justice Wakeling says reflect modern industry 
and community practices and are quite reasonable, Mr. Speaker. 
With that in mind, they’ve been following those guidelines. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I was not there in 1995 and I have not 
looked into the specific question the member is asking and I 
could do just that. 
 
I think the important point here, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve had 
Justice Wakeling give us recommendations and we intend to 
take actions on those recommendations. We support Justice 
Wakeling’s review. 
 
What do you do, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — Just remind the member to address her 
questions through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you for the help, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is simply unacceptable. We can’t have the 
legislature here passing laws and then have civil servants 
running around drafting guidelines and break those laws. This 
speaks clearly to a government that has lost control of its civil 
servants. Not only is the NDP (New Democratic Party) now 
defending these illegal guidelines, they are using them as an 
excuse for government officials to break the law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the government expect other people to 
uphold the law when senior government officials are allowed to 
ignore and break the law? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, Justice Wakeling’s report 
is a thorough assessment of specific concerns and the larger 

issues that he has raised by the allegations with respect to 
authorities approached to dealing with conflict of interest. 
 
Justice Wakeling makes the following recommendations. No 
charges should be laid and no further investigation by police is 
required. No discipline should be initiated. Section 133 of The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act is much too restrictive in 
light of existing industry and community practices. The 
Authority should make the appropriate regulatory amendments 
to The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On one hand this member says that we should be following 
modern-day practices and we should be on top of things, Mr. 
Speaker. And now he’s saying we should be inconsistent with 
every other jurisdiction across the country and in fact 
inconsistent with the guidelines that he himself would be judged 
by, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will support Justice Wakeling’s findings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, there are lots of laws in this 
province that some people don’t agree with. They still have to 
follow those laws, whether you like them or not, whether 
they’re antiquated or not. I don’t particularly like paying all the 
taxes the NDP charges; I still have to pay them. 
 
I don’t get to write my own tax code and pay just as much as I 
wish. But that’s exactly what the NDP is allowing its Liquor 
and Gaming officials to do. If you don’t like the law, just write 
your own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nobody else in Saskatchewan gets to ignore the 
law. No one else gets to unilaterally change the laws they don’t 
like. Why do Liquor and Gaming officials get this unique 
privilege, Mr. Speaker? Why is the NDP allowing its officials 
to ignore the law? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, Justice Wakeling in this 
issue has recommended a balanced and a reasonable approach 
as has been taken by other government agencies in other 
jurisdictions consistent with industry and community practices. 
 
A long bow would have to be drawn before the example he 
used could be used in any way, shape, or form. And it’s the 
kind of practice he continues to play on issues like this, Mr. 
Speaker, who impact on people within the Authority. 
 
In light of Mr. Justice’s recommendations, the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority will tell their employees immediately, until 
we are able to make regulatory changes, no solicitations will be 
done. He does not condone them himself and we will not 
condone that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we say is we’ll make the propitiatory regulatory 
amendments to have our conflict of interest guidelines 
consistent. And in the meantime we’ll prepare amendments that 
that member will have an ample chance to discuss and to make 
consistent with his guidelines and those across the country, Mr. 
Speaker. 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2097 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Health District Bed Shortages 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Health. Several weeks ago the doctors in Swift Current 
publicly expressed concern about a shortage of acute care beds 
at the regional hospital. They said the situation was critical; 
they said it was compromising patient care and resulting in the 
cancellation of surgeries. 
 
The Health minister at the time said there was not a bed 
shortage. There had only been an outbreak of bronchitis and it 
was all just a temporary problem. But the local association of 
family physicians says the recent loss of 14 acute care beds has 
had a serious negative effect and the chief of family medicine at 
the hospital says there is a major crisis in the hospital that is 
getting worse on a daily basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us what he is hearing from the 
Swift Current Health District, and specifically, the regional 
hospital there about the bed shortage situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We continue to 
work with all of the health districts across the province as they 
make their bed plans for the summer because they often end up 
having reduced numbers over the summer to deal with the 
summer hours. 
 
But what we know in the Swift Current area is that they are 
continuing to discuss between the local medical staff and the 
health district administration around the kinds of bed numbers 
that they need in that particular community. And that process is 
ongoing. They also have some other issues that are included in 
the discussion, but we’ll continue to work with the district and 
also listen to the medical staff as they raise their issues but it’s a 
problem that will be sorted out in the Swift Current area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this situation started in January, 
it is not about summer closures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can tell the minister that the bed shortage in 
the Swift Current Regional Hospital is definitely affecting 
people. Scott and Michelle Taylor of Swift Current are very 
angry about their recent experience when their three-year-old 
son ended up in emergency with severe tonsillitis. They had to 
wait two and a half hours, as there was only one doctor 
available. While waiting his temperature went to 40 degrees and 
he had a small seizure. The doctor wanted to admit their son but 
couldn’t because the beds in the children’s ward were full of 
elderly patients. There were no beds available in the hospital for 
this very sick little boy and they had to take him home and 
administer care themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister. How is it that your government 
claims that there is no bed shortage . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member please restate the question 
through the Chair? 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister. How is it that this 
government claims that there is no bed shortage at the Swift 
Current Regional Hospital, yet very sick children cannot be 
admitted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I stated previously, the 
department has been working with the district at looking at the 
numbers on the beds as it relates to this particular area. As the 
member from Swift Current knows, that particular district has 
been talking about coming up with a new facility. So they’re 
also watching very carefully what are the requirements in that 
particular area. 
 
What we know is that when there are particular problems like 
the member raises, there are directors of quality care who will 
respond and deal with individual problems. And so I would 
suggest to the member that that particular family should raise 
the issue with the administration so that they can sit down and 
sort out what’s gone wrong in this particular case, if that’s what 
in fact has happened. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this is an ongoing problem which 
is compromising patient care. It is not something new in Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Scott and Michelle were forced to take their 
three-year-old son home that night. They had to administer all 
the medications the doctor prescribed for their son themselves. 
They had to take turns watching him, taking his temperature, 
and checking his throat in case his condition deteriorated. And 
all the while knowing he would have normally been admitted 
for professional health care but there was not a bed available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why people who are not 
health professionals and who feel they are not qualified to 
provide the care their children need, be forced to treat their own 
child at home because there are no beds available in hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would reiterate that this 
particular family should raise their concerns with the 
administration. 
 
Patients are not admitted or discharged from a hospital without 
the advice of medical staff. And so what we have to do as 
non-medical people, we have to rely on the professional advice 
that’s there. 
 
Now what we do know is that in each particular area the 
hospital administration working together with the district 
medical staff have appropriate ways where complaints can be 
raised. I would suggest that this particular issue should go there 
for further review. 
 
What we do know in that particular area is that the bed census, 
as far as the report has gone over the last number of years, is 
that they have sufficient beds in that community. 
 



2098 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this little boy was attended by a 
physician and he was sent home by the physician because there 
were not any beds available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Scott and Michelle are very angry with their 
experience. They do not believe the minister’s excuse that the 
bed situation in Swift Current is only temporary and that bed 
usage is not high. They write, and I quote: 
 

I don’t blame any one person for what happened — not the 
overworked doctor, not the overworked nurses — but the 
unavailability of children’s beds in a children’s ward, the 
lack of staff, and mostly the archaic health care system we 
are forced to live with in Saskatchewan. This has to change. 
 

Their son got through this serious infection, but is now on a 
waiting list for tonsillectomy in Saskatoon. Despite that, the 
couple cannot forget their experience. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the physicians in Swift Current are calling the bed 
shortage there a crisis, a crisis that is getting worse daily. Mr. 
Speaker, to the minister: will the minister immediately review 
the hospital bed situation in the Swift Current Health District? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in all of these communities 
the bed numbers are being reviewed regularly. They do have an 
annual report as to the number of beds available, and also the 
census in that particular situation. And so what we know is that 
we’re continuing to monitor that. 
 
What I would like to say to this House, Mr. Speaker, is that if 
we had followed the plan that those people had set forward in 
September 1999, we wouldn’t even be talking about the number 
of beds that are available, we’d be talking about a system that 
would not have money at all. They proposed zero dollars 
increase; we have increased the budgets by 11 per cent. What 
the people in this province want is a government that is sitting 
on this side, who has a plan for the future, who is going to work 
together with the local people to make sure that everybody has 
the health care that they need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Out-of-Scope Positions Transferred to the Saskatchewan 
Government and General Employees’ Union 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 
responsible for the Public Service Commission. On May 25, the 
Public Service Commission e-mailed 673 management staff at 
the Department of Economic Development. The NDP’s 
message was simple: you’ve got 30 days to join the SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union) 
and start paying union dues or you are fired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a large majority of these management level staff 
had no interest in joining the SGEU, but the NDP has 
threatened them with dismissal if they didn’t sign a union card 
by June 23. 
 

Will the minister update us on the NDP’s latest 
forced-unionization initiative. How many management 
employees at Economic Development has signed union cards to 
avoid being fired by the NDP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now this is a 
matter that the union representatives in the Public Service 
Commission have continued to discuss whether they needed to 
go for a ruling at the Labour Board or whether they could work 
out a mutually acceptable arrangement. 
 
In the instance of an organization that’s newly certified, all the 
employees that are there at the time of certification normally 
become part of that bargaining unit. Here we have a different 
situation because the employees have been here for a long time 
after that bargaining unit was established. 
 
That aside, Mr. Speaker, it is clear that they do have to pay 
union dues. They do not necessarily have to be a member of the 
union. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, apparently the minister isn’t 
briefed on the intimidation tactics the NDP is using to force 
almost 700 managers into government union. 
 
Maybe this e-mail sent by the Public Service Commission on 
May 25 to 673 out-of-scope management employees will jog 
the minister’s memory and I quote: 
 

Employees must initiate direct payment of dues to the 
SGEU no later than June 23, 2001. 

 
The e-mail goes on to say: 
 

Should they fail to pay union dues, the employer will have 
no choice but to terminate their employment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the deadline for being forced into the union was 
last Saturday. Did the NDP’s intimidation tactics scare all 673 
out-of-scope Economic Development managers into the union 
or did the NDP have to follow through on its threat and start 
firing people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, the member might be 
interested to know that these rules are no different than the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association who . . . Doctors do not 
have to be a member of the Medical Association but they do 
have to pay dues, and the reason there is the same as the reason 
in this instance. 
 
The reason is that you benefit from the collective bargaining 
done by the union on your behalf; therefore you should support 
some of the costs. And I think that’s fair and as it should be and 
the Medical Association agrees. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2099 

 

Strike Vote by Saskatchewan Government and General 
Employees’ Union 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the official opposition has been 
advised that SGEU has just completed a strike vote. Will the 
minister advise the legislature of what the result of that strike 
vote was? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, as you know, I am not in 
charge of the union. But what I can tell you is that the strike 
vote was conducted but the ballots have not yet been counted 
and I don’t believe they will be counted for a couple of days 
yet. 
 
I’m sure once they are counted, the union will make their own 
decision on whether or not to release those results. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the SGEU strike vote would 
have been the first opportunity for the 673 management staff of 
the Department of Economic Development to exercise their 
right to vote as members of the union since the NDP forced 
them into joining under threat or be fired. Except for one thing, 
Mr. Speaker, the SGEU failed to inform the newest members 
the vote was taking place. So the vast majority of the 
management staff who were forced into the union in the first 
place never got to cast a ballot in the SGEU’s strike vote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the NDP condone the SGEU holding a strike 
vote without informing all of its members and without 
providing all of its members with the opportunity to cast a 
ballot? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t tell the unions in 
this province how to conduct their business, nor do I tell the 
chamber of commerce how to conduct their business. I find it 
very amazing that the member opposite thinks he can go around 
telling independent organizations how to conduct their business. 
 
If the members of that organization have a concern with their 
organization, then, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s their job to raise 
those concerns with their organization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the Minister of Labour. In January the 
workmen’s compensation board fired four top managers within 
the organization and the Chair of the Worker’s Compensation 
Board resigned weeks later. The upheaval within the 
organization has both workers and business people wondering 
what is going on with the management of the organization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has learned that, on June 

11, the vice-president of client services, Mr. Jim Kempling, was 
fired. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: can the minister explain why 
another high-level manager at Workers’ Compensation Board 
has been fired? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I cannot comment 
directly on the instance of a specific manager and his 
employment or termination at the board, other than to confirm 
that the Workers’ Compensation Board operates the daily 
operations of the board and I can confirm in this instance that 
Mr. Kempling has left the employment of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board by mutual agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
the Minister of Labour: since the beginning of this year, five top 
officials with Workers’ Compensation Board have been fired 
and the Chairman of the board resigned. Mr. Kempling was 
brought in from British Columbia to fill the position of 
vice-president of client services just one year ago and now he 
has been fired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister would not reveal the severance 
packages paid out to the four management personnel fired in 
January and he would not explain the reasoning behind their 
firing, although the internal e-mail stated the decision to end 
their employment was done for the sake of the future of the 
entire organization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister is responsible for Workers’ 
Compensation Board, and the public deserves an answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Labour explain why five 
senior managers with the Workers’ Compensation Board have 
been fired so far this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, same old broken record 
from members opposite. Earlier in the year they were accusing 
the Workers’ Compensation Board of terminating four 
employees. And what was their reasoning then? They said it 
was because of the Dorsey report. 
 
Remember that report? The report that was supposed to be so 
damning of the government and of the board. That report that 
this government embraced all 13 recommendations, Mr. 
Speaker. All 13 recommendations of that Dorsey report we 
embraced. 
 
We said before and subsequent that those four managers had 
left for reasons completely unrelated to the Dorsey report. I can 
assure the legislature and the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have one Jim Kempling having left the 
employment of the Workers’ Compensation by mutual 
agreement. That means both parties have agreed, Mr. Speaker, 
also equally unrelated to the Dorsey report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



2100 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask for leave to 
introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 
you and to the Assembly, seated in your gallery, Rick Laliberte, 
the Liberal MP (Member of Parliament) from the federal riding 
of Churchill. And I believe this is the first time he’s had the 
opportunity to witness question period and be a guest here in 
our Assembly. And I know that he’s just finished some 
gruelling days in Ottawa in the House of Commons. 
 
And having had the opportunity to chat with Mr. Laliberte when 
we did the sod-turning for the new Pinehouse School, I know 
how committed he is to the issues of northern Saskatchewan, 
and I’d ask all members to welcome him here to the Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to introduce a guest as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 
the Minister of Education in also welcoming Rick to the 
Assembly today. 
 
I just want to point out that living in northern Saskatchewan and 
travelling all the way to the Assembly is quite a task, but also 
travelling to Ottawa is probably a greater task. And I must say 
that the constituency that he represents, the riding is all of 
northern Saskatchewan. It’s a tremendous undertaking and I’d 
like to take this opportunity to welcome him here today. 
 
And also point out that the member from Meadow Lake, the 
member from Cumberland House, and the member from 
Athabasca all play hockey. He does as well, Mr. Speaker, but 
by far I am the better player of the four. But I wanted to clarify 
that. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I have just 
received the annual report for the year 2000 from the Provincial 
Ombudsman and I hereby table the same. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 56 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 56 — The 
Tobacco Control Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
with pleasure that I have this opportunity to rise to speak in the 
adjourned debates on Bill 56, the tobacco control legislation 
that’s before the House currently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a result of a fairly long process that 
began last December when I had the pleasure of seconding a 
motion to establish an all-party committee that was going to 
investigate the issues surrounding tobacco consumption and 
sale in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the members of the committee have 
distinguished themselves I think by a very thorough process of 
consulting and listening to as many of the stakeholders and 
interested parties as was possible across the province. And so 
it’s with pleasure that I have the opportunity to make some 
comments this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this process was initiated and when I had the 
opportunity to second the original motion, it was done so with a 
sense that there was a civic and a social responsibility as people 
of this province to deal with the issue surrounding tobacco 
consumption. 
 
Every year we hear more and more of the ravages that are 
wrought on our society by the implications of tobacco 
consumption. We are in a period of time when we are 
concerned about the implications of increasing stresses on the 
health care system because of various diseases that the system 
is trying to cope with. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, every single person in this province 
and certainly in this House would agree that those diseases and 
the implications of the fact that if people did not smoke, if 
people did not chew tobacco, if people did not use tobacco, 
many of those diseases would be preventable. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, none of us can take a position that is not in 
favour of a stated objective of doing what we reasonably can in 
order to minimize the implications of tobacco usage in our 
society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it strikes me as a simple statement of principle. 
And it’s certainly a statement that this official opposition is 
prepared to make in supporting the general intention and the 
objectives of denormalizing and making a very strong public 
statement that tobacco is not good for you, is something that at 
all costs we should educate you as to the implications of 
tobacco consumption and use. And that we’ve got to send the 
strongest possible message to our young people that it is simply 
unacceptable, that it is simply foolhardily thought of as a 
socially acceptable thing, a cool “in” thing to do as a young 
person is to start smoking tobacco. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of us who are a little older than the current 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2101 

 

generation of teens, when we began to smoke, and I’m one of 
the people that started to smoke very young, we didn’t realize, 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think many of us, the very detrimental 
harmful effects that tobacco was going to have. Many people a 
generation ago did not understand the implications of first-hand 
and second-hand tobacco smoke. Many people did not 
understand, and I don’t think science completely understood, all 
of the different ramifications that smoking tobacco on a regular 
basis could have in your life in the future. 
 
And many of us, fortunately enough, a number of years ago — 
for myself almost 20 years ago — were able to quit smoking. 
And I think for anyone in this House or anyone listening that 
has faced that reality in their own lives and have faced the 
decision to quit smoking or to continue to smoke, realize that 
this was not an easy decision. Tobacco is not just any substance, 
it’s an addictive substance. It becomes a part of your whole 
physiological being. And it takes a hold of you in a very 
addictive way and it’s very difficult to break free of that. 
 
And it also, in the times past, was difficult to break free of it 
sociologically because it was sort of the in thing. It was the 
macho thing to smoke. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, many people have done serious damage to 
their health and well-being by the fact they started smoking and 
they continued to smoke and they now have . . . facing the 
implications of what that means. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I certainly am one among many who say 
that we have to do much more than is currently being done in 
order to curtail smoking and to send a very powerful strong 
message out that this is not an acceptable habit and it’s not an 
acceptable practice in our society. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in principle, in the second reading of this 
Bill, the official opposition very much supports the intent of this 
legislation. And I think it’s important that that is said on the 
record and will be demonstrated in our voting. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if we are going to live up to the objective 
that’s stated, about doing everything we can that’s reasonable 
and appropriate to send this strong message out, it is incumbent 
on me to point out that this legislation has let down, in some 
areas, the intent of the people that presented to the committee 
and, indeed, has let down the recommendations of the 
committee itself. 
 
And I want to speak first of all about two main areas where I 
think that the legislation is actually a disappointment to the 
recommendations of the all-party committee on tobacco. 
 
The first area that I think is important to talk about is the fact 
that while I mentioned a generation ago there weren’t all that 
many people who clearly understood what the ramifications of 
starting smoking and continue to smoke and use tobacco was 
going to be on their health, that’s no longer true today. 
 
Today the scientific community has established beyond any 
reasonable doubt at all the harmful effects that tobacco is going 
to have on your life if you’re going to use this product. It’s 
going to have the potential impact on carcinogens. It’s going to 
have impact on heart disease. It’s going to have impact on a 

number of serious ailments that are going to jeopardize your 
health and well-being into the future. That is no longer a debate. 
It’s no longer a question of not understanding those issues. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it is amazing to me, and I’m sure to most 
members in society, how poorly that message is getting into the 
ears of our young people because a very high incidence of 
beginning smoking is not happening among our adults, it’s 
happening among our children. 
 
(14:30) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there is a place where we have to take 
proactive initiatives in order to curtail this trend. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the committee clearly and strongly suggested that that 
was an important thing to do. And the first step in that process, 
Mr. Speaker, is education. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we think because the product is 
something that we may only start when we’re 13, 14, or 15 
years of age that that is the appropriate time that we should start 
an education program. I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker, because 
we begin to establish our attitudes much younger than that. And 
I think an education program initiated in a two-fold approach is 
very important. And I think the committee recognized that. 
 
The first approach is that it has to be done as a concerted, 
obligatory part of the school curriculum. From elementary 
school through to high school, we have to send a strong 
message that we are going to spend the time and effort needed 
to educate our young people about the perils of tobacco. It was 
one of the cornerstones of the all-party committee’s 
recommendation and, Mr. Speaker, we are extremely 
disappointed that this legislation is absolutely mute in terms of 
talking about the education process. 
 
I recognize in question period the other day, when the 
government was asked why they omitted that, and the Minister 
of Education got up and said oh, we do some of these things in 
the educational system. And that’s all well and good but it’s not 
enough, Mr. Speaker. Because if we’re going to send a strong 
message that it is imperative that we educate our young people 
firstly, we’re going to have to make that statement as part of 
tobacco legislation. 
 
And it’s going to have to be incumbent on the Health 
department and we as a society and the legislature to not say to 
the education system, you can do this if you like and we accept 
your good intentions; but it’s mandatory. It’s absolutely an 
obligation that you have — to develop a proper education 
program in our school system. And that is not even spoken 
about in this legislation and I think it lets down the intent of the 
committee and all those who presented by the fact it’s missing. 
 
The second component of it, Mr. Speaker, is to the broader 
community. We can’t just isolate ourselves and say the 
Department of Education, even if it’s well-intentioned, has the 
sole responsibility of educating people about the perils of 
tobacco smoking. I think we as a society and as a province have 
a larger responsibility and an obligation to talk to people in 
general. Because there still are people who are having difficulty 
in understanding the perils of beginning to smoke. 
 



2102 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

But also people need to be motivated to quit smoking. Even 
though someone has started and is addicted, people can, and 
indeed every day do, quit smoking. 
 
And I think what we’ve got to do in a general public education 
system is to say to them a number of things. Number one: you 
can quit smoking. Number two: it’s bad for you and if you’re 
going to continue, it’s going to be detrimental to your health. 
 
And thirdly, I think we’ve got to say as a society is we’re going 
to do everything we can to support you when you quit smoking. 
And if that is going to be things like patches and things of that 
nature, medical advances that allow us to ease out of smoking, 
then they should be provided and they should be accessible to 
people and they should understand through an education 
program that we as a society are prepared to do that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this legislation that’s proposed does not 
speak to any of those issues and I think that it is a tragedy that 
that area has not been addressed at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second area that I have concern about in this 
legislation is in terms of the mixed messages that we’re 
sending. Mr. Speaker, we say first of all that you cannot 
purchase or possess tobacco unless you’re 18 years of age and 
older. And I think that that’s good. It moves it from the current 
16 years of age to a much more mature age. And I think that’s 
appropriate. 
 
And we are saying to the retail trade that you can’t sell to 
people unless they’re 18 years or older. And I think that that’s 
appropriate as well. 
 
And in fairness to the retail trade, they are trying to do some 
initiatives that I don’t think are appreciated; for example 
Operation ID (identification), that the retailers are putting in 
place that are making a conscious effort to identify people who 
are not old enough to purchase tobacco. And I think we’ve got 
to recognize those initiatives and support them for what they 
are. They’re an attempt to limit the purchase of tobacco to 
people that we as a society say are not eligible to purchase it. 
And I think that that has to be recognized. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, time and time again we sit down and say if 
you’re going to effect any meaningful change in behaviour for 
people, you have to recognize that this is a mutual relationship. 
We got to have a society — an adult society — who recognize 
it’s inappropriate for young people to purchase or possess 
certain products, like alcohol for example, and now like 
tobacco. 
 
But we got to also say to these young people, it is not 
appropriate for you to be in possession of this product. It’s not 
appropriate for you to try to purchase this product. 
 
And in alcohol, we’ve done that. And so we’ve put penalties in 
place where we say you cannot only sell to young people this 
product, alcohol; we say to the young people, you cannot 
purchase it and you cannot possess it. And if you do there’s a 
penalty for you purchasing or possessing it, just as there’s a 
penalty for someone selling it to you. And that’s a balanced 
approach, Mr. Speaker. And I think that that’s appropriate. 
 

But in tobacco legislation it’s totally one-sided. All we have is 
that one-half of the equation that says we can’t sell — and I 
accept that; that’s part of the equation — but the second part of 
the equation, is saying to young people you can’t possess or 
purchase it either, is absolutely missing from the legislation. 
And it was an integral part of the recommendations of the 
all-party committee on tobacco. So, Mr. Speaker, that is 
inappropriate as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked to a number of people in the retail 
business in the last days and weeks. And talking to them, what 
is their experience? And they said, unfortunately they have a 
young person come in . . . And I’ll tell you a story, just 
happened in a convenience store last week. 
 
A young person came in. This retailer has the Operation ID 
program in place. He challenged this young person about the 
fact of . . . that he was 18 years of age or not. The young person 
presented ID identifying that he was 18 years of age. And this 
young person then purchased four packages of cigarettes, all 
different brands. And he went outside of the store, he went 
outside of the store and passed all four of those brands to four 
individuals who were obviously younger than he was. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, those four young people could walk away 
with impunity because there was absolutely no penalty 
incumbent on them for possessing that product. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this is not acceptable as a society. And the 
message that we’re sending out is not appropriate. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what the problem is. 
 
I have a letter here, and I know members have had letters and I 
know some of our members talking about this have also quoted 
from letters. But this is from the Preeceville School and I would 
like to quote it. It’s addressed to members of the Assembly, re: 
this proposed smoking legislation. 
 
And it says and I quote: 
 

Efforts to amend current laws regulating smoking are to be 
applauded. We, as a staff, spend an inordinate time and 
effort enforcing a hypocritic law, that which forbids those 
under 18 to purchase cigarettes but allows minors to 
possess and use. 
 
We are caught in the middle. We have been directed that 
our environment is to be smoke-free for staff and students 
alike, however provincial laws permit our minors to both 
possess and use tobacco. As a result, we spend time 
policing and enforcing, instead of teaching and preparation. 
 
Our provincial curriculum demands that we educate 
students as to the ill effects smoking has, yet our 
government tolerates cigarette use by minors. As promoters 
of education, health, and youth, we implore you to consider 
this legislation carefully as it has a huge impact on our 
youth. Possession and use of tobacco by minors can and 
should be made illegal. 
 

And this is signed by Marc Jaques, the principal of the 
Preeceville School. 
 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2103 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that pretty much sums up the thrust 
and the general direction of a lot of people’s feeling on this. 
There’s got to be a strong statement sent, but it has to be a 
balanced approach and both sides of this have to be addressed. 
And this legislation is lacking in that it doesn’t follow the 
all-party committee’s recommendation and does not deal with 
the whole issue surrounding the possession of tobacco. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Kelvington-Wadena 
on her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude: — Permission to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to my 
colleague for interrupting him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the gallery we have 20 grade 6 students from 
Watson School along with their teacher, Manny Lefebvre. I’m 
really pleased to see them here today. Their MLA, Donna 
Harpauer has asked me to introduce them and meet with them 
later. 
 
I wanted to tell you that this is one of the best schools in 
Saskatchewan. All my children went to school in Watson and 
enjoyed it very much. And I think today you’re having a special 
lecture from the member talking about the tobacco committee. 
This is legislation that’s being discussed at this time and it’s 
going to have an impact on many of you. So I hope you will 
enjoy your time here and I look forward to meeting you later 
on. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Tobacco Control Act 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
very much a pleasure to be interrupted by an introduction of a 
group of students from Watson. Watson’s my hometown. I 
grew up, was born and raised in Watson. And you’re right about 
it being the best school in the system. I graduated from Watson 
School so I mean it has to be terrific. So thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these two areas of this legislation, I think, 
unfortunately do not live up to the expectation of the all-party 
committee and do not live up to the exploitation all of us have 
as members about sending a message of denormalization and 
trying to do what’s reasonable in terms of sending a loud 
message to students across this province, to sending people 
across this province a message that’s saying this is something 
that’s important. 
 
You know what we end up with is a situation with this 
government is they sort of pick and choose and say look it, we 

want to, we want to make a message. And we want to do it on 
the backs of retailers. The member from . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Would the members 
please come to order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
have the member from Regina South stand up in his place and 
explain to this House why these important parts of what the 
committee recommended are omitted from this legislation. On 
what basis are they not there? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — On what basis are they not there? Either this 
government is serious about this or they are just sitting there 
saying . . . and picking and choosing again and are not willing 
to do those kinds of things that are not, that are not living up to 
those opportunities. 
 
Right now we have an opportunity to do something important. 
In other jurisdictions there’s penalties that can be imposed, 
either by modest monetary fines or by confiscation of the 
product. What’s wrong with that message, Mr. Speaker? 
 
What’s wrong with the message that says just outside of school 
properties that a gathering of kids can’t be sitting there smoking 
with impunity? It’s not right, Mr. Speaker, and the member 
from Regina South knows it. And he can explain to those 
organizations who realize that’s wrong, why he’s taking the 
position that he is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important, it is important when we’re going to 
do this important legislation, it’s important that we send a 
complete message in a pragmatic, sensible way, that what we’re 
doing is saying you can not just expect the vendors of tobacco 
to bear the whole responsibility and the only responsibility for 
behaviour of students under . . . or our young people under the 
age of 18. There has to be some responsibility borne by the 
individual themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And, Mr. Speaker, I think the member from 
Regina South recognizes that. And at least he’ll have to explain 
it to people outside about explaining why these clauses were 
omitted from this legislation. And perhaps it was at his 
insistence; I hope not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to . . . Mr. Speaker, when we get 
into Committee of the Whole, we’re going to propose two 
amendments. We’re going to propose two amendments — 
friendly amendments I think, Mr. Speaker, because they’re 
intended to address the very issue that we’re talking about. 
 
And I’ll be very interested to watch how the member from 
Regina South votes on those two amendments — the 
amendment to include an education program and an amendment 
to include a penalty for possession or purchase by people under 
the years of 18. I’ll be very interested to see how the member 
votes because he’s going to have an opportunity in Committee 
of the Whole. 
 



2104 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, the final thing that I’d like to talk about in a 
pragmatic way is the grave concerns that have been addressed 
by many people in the retail trade about how the display issue is 
going to be addressed. 
 
In the legislation, article 6(3), I believe, talks about the sales 
and prohibited practices. And it says that “No retailer . . .”; 6(3) 
says, and I quote: 
 

No retailer shall permit tobacco or tobacco-related products 
to be displayed in the retailer’s business premises so that 
the tobacco or tobacco-related products are visible to the 
public if young persons are permitted access to these 
premises. 

 
(14:45) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that this legislation as well is out of 
sync with what we’re doing in the alcohol industry. For 
example, I’ve used the example before, about saying that it’s 
illegal for a retailer to sell to people underage — alcohol 
products — and on the other side of the equation in a balanced 
way we have legislation that says it’s also illegal to purchase or 
possess that product. That’s a responsible attitude I think, Mr. 
Speaker, as well. 
 
But nowhere in the alcohol legislation that I’m aware of does it 
say that there cannot be alcohol displayed for sale in an alcohol 
vendor for example. In most vending establishments in 
Saskatchewan, alcohol is displayed; it is on a wall in the 
location and young people can go into that location but they 
cannot avail themselves of the purchase of that product and 
that’s fair ball, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to imagine that if you’re a young person 
you’re going to spontaneously go into a convenience store and 
decide to buy a chocolate bar or package of cigarettes. It’s just 
not reasonable. And if there is an equal onus or responsibility 
not to sell and not to purchase, then it becomes an academic 
point. 
 
And so in a practical sense, Mr. Speaker, we have now 
something put in here that is again some reaction to a 
theoretical NDP pick-and-choose attitude that makes no sense 
on a pragmatic way and says what are we going to do. We’re 
going to throw it all on the retailers’ back and somehow we’re 
going to rub our hands of any responsibility. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that this imposes an unfair burden 
on retailers and it’s going to have an absolute zero positive 
effect. And certainly it’s going to have no affect at all in 
comparison to the fact the NDP government has either 
deliberately or mistakenly omitted the very two important 
clauses that I spoke about earlier. And so we’re going to see as 
well, Mr. Speaker, if this government is going to vote for our 
amendments in Committee of the Whole or they’re not. 
 
And instead what they’re going to do, is they’re going to follow 
their trained seal act that they’ve always done in the past, 
they’re just going to vote for this legislation as it is. I’ll be 
interesting to see it. Because we want very much to come up 
with something that’s doable and workable and pragmatic and 
will get the job done, and that job we very much support. And 

that’s to send a strong message that tobacco is not appropriate 
for young people, that they have a responsibility for their own 
actions as we do as a society to educate them and make sure 
they are in possession of all the facts. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in closing I would like to say, in principle 
the official opposition is very much supportive of this 
legislation. We’re supportive in the intent of the legislation and 
we look forward to seeing how this government is going to deal 
with the issues that we’ve raised, and hopefully encourage 
members on the government side to realize that education and 
responsibility for the individuals that are possessing tobacco are 
critical parts of the all committee’s recommendations and they 
should be supported. 
 
And we look forward to that discussion in Committee of the 
Whole, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated directly 
behind me is our president and CEO (chief executive officer), 
Mr. John Wright. To my right is the general counsel, Mr. 
Myron Gulka-Tiechko, and to my left is our assistant general 
counsel, Margot Dynna. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of Committees. To the 
minister and welcome to your officials here today to talk about 
what is a fairly important Bill, I would suggest, to the 
committee members here today, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And maybe we could just begin, Mr. Minister, if you would, 
provide a brief rationale for the Bill and an explanation of its 
highlights and its impact on the electrical industry and, well, 
specifically on the communities of Swift Current and Saskatoon 
who own their own electrical utilities, but also generally on the 
electrical system in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There’s a number of changes that I 
would refer to here, as the member asked. First of all, there is a 
number of changes that are housekeeping in nature. We are 
modernizing the language. The last time when the Bill was 
drafted was, I’m advised, in 1949. So it’s some number of 
years. 
 
The substantial amendments though, however, deal with OATT 
(open access transmission tariff) and they will facilitate the 
open access, primarily for wholesalers wanting to provide 
electricity to your city, Swift Current, and to Saskatoon, that 
would allow them to purchase electricity from largely any 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2105 

 

supplier that’s approved. 
 
And of course the last area that he deals with is the opportunity 
for independent power producers to also access our lines to sell 
to the two cities. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I guess 
the obvious follow-up questions that we will have then, will 
stem from that answer; and certainly, that would be my 
understanding as you go through the Bill on a 
section-by-section basis. 
 
Clearly this does . . . I think the phrase that the minister chose, 
was open access. Others would characterize it as paving the 
way for a deregulated electrical industry, or at least a much 
more deregulated industry than is currently the case here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so, in light of that fact, before we get to some specific 
questions about the municipalities of Swift Current and 
Saskatoon and what this might mean to them more specifically, 
I wonder if generally you could comment on safeguards and 
precautions that the corporation has taken in suggesting these 
amendments, and that the cabinet has approved, in terms of 
avoiding some of the pitfalls that have occurred in deregulation. 
 
And if you will, Mr. Minister, maybe you could outline more 
clearly why efforts similar to this at least, in terms of 
deregulation, haven’t worked in some jurisdictions? And you 
also may want to talk about jurisdictions. I’m sure the 
corporation is aware of where these measures have worked 
quite well in the interests of consumers and the supply of 
electricity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, I don’t, in responding, I don’t want 
to suggest that this is opening the door to deregulation. Really 
all this is, is allowing deregulation as it pertains to wholesale 
sale of electricity to specifically the two cities, Swift Current 
and Saskatoon. 
 
Also the other area that we are dealing with in allowing this is 
what I would describe as reciprocal access into provinces, 
probably most specifically Manitoba, but it’s really an issue of 
safety so we can guarantee supply of electricity to our 
consumers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think in an earlier 
answer though you also referenced independent power 
producers, that this Bill would also enable independent power 
producers to use the SaskPower system to obviously sell power 
onto the grid. I don’t know what else independent power 
producers would want to do. 
 
And so in light of that, I think it is fair to say that at least it 
paves the way for deregulation. Certainly specific sections, I 
can think of 8.2, deal with those third parties in terms of them 
using the transmission and distribution lines at SaskPower. Now 
I wonder then if the minister could clarify if that is indeed the 
case and to the extent that that is possible, why would he 
suggest that this has nothing to do with deregulation? I’d also 
point out the minister’s earlier reference to open access, as well, 
in that question. 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, just to be absolutely clear, this 
— in reference to the independent power producers — all this 
does is allows them to sell to the . . . it’s specifically wholesale 
and only allows them to sell to the two cities in Saskatchewan, 
either Swift Current or Saskatoon, also allows them though to 
access our grid and sell electricity outside of the province to 
jurisdictions that would be interested in purchasing their 
electricity outside of Saskatchewan. This is not retail 
competition; it is only wholesale competition. And also, what it 
would also allow for is for the sale of electricity from, as an 
example, a producer in Alberta who wants to sell to someone in 
Manitoba to access our lines and sell across to a client or 
purchaser in Manitoba. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think it was about a 
year ago, a little bit over than that in the Assembly, when your 
predecessor, the minister responsible for SaskPower and the 
current Minister of Health, rose in the legislature to make a 
ministerial statement on the fact that the monopoly restriction 
SaskPower had placed on the two municipalities that own their 
own transmission or distribution electrical utilities . . . he made 
that announcement in terms of the lifting of that restriction. 
 
I have some specific questions on the Bill but I think it’s 
important that we resolve this without getting in too much of a 
general debate, sort of a nebulous discussion on the definition 
of deregulation. 
 
But clearly, clearly, if you’ve lifted that monopoly restriction, if 
you’re now opening up your transmission lines to be used either 
on an export basis, or an import basis on the cases of these two 
municipalities, for them to be able to use SaskPower’s lines for 
electrical . . . for the sale of electricity, I don’t understand why 
the minister is having a difficult time admitting or clarifying 
that yes, that is certainly a form of deregulation and indeed 
could pave the way for other deregulation of the electrical 
industry in our province. Especially in the event, down the road 
and I don’t think we should rule it out here in the Assembly, 
that maybe some other municipality also gets involved in terms 
of transmitting its electricity to its customers, or some other 
large customer of SaskPower wants to pursue some other 
source. 
 
I just would like the minister to clarify that a bit, and again, Mr. 
Chairman, I want to keep the comments specific to the Bill but I 
think it’s important we clarify just exactly what it is we’re 
talking about here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I guess I want to again confirm that this 
is really only wholesale competition. It doesn’t apply to large 
industrial. It doesn’t apply to commercial. It does not apply to 
retail. It’s only the wholesale competition and it’s applicable 
only to the two cities. 
 
This is the same opportunities, I guess, that would exist in 
Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, and in a number of the States. But 
it’s limited to exclusively the wholesale competition. And it’s 
specifically limited to the two cities, Swift Current and 
Saskatoon. 



2106 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess except in the 
case of those people who wish to export to other jurisdictions. 
 
So I guess then I would back up a little bit and ask . . . You 
know, I know I’m aware that the cities of Swift Current and 
Saskatoon — well I shouldn’t speak for Saskatoon — but 
certainly I’m aware that the city of Saskatoon has asked for 
many, many years for consideration of this option for them, that 
the monopoly restriction would be lifted. 
 
And for whatever reasons — under varying administrations, I’d 
hasten to point out, certainly not just this one — that request, 
either informal or formal, has been denied up until now, up until 
the minister’s statement in the House about a year ago. 
 
So what precipitated the change in position in policy of the 
government? I can tell . . . Well I’ll let you answer that 
question. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The thing that precipitated this, to the 
member, was that we needed to ensure we had reciprocal 
access. We needed to, first of all, ensure that we could protect 
our export access. Last year there was some $128 million in 
revenue for SaskPower as a result of exporting electricity. If we 
didn’t introduce OATT, if you will, we could have the scenario 
where Alberta would simply say you’ve not agreed to this, 
we’re simply not allowing you to sell any longer into Alberta. 
 
So it was that largely that precipitated the introduction of these 
amendments. And I use Alberta but certainly it also applies to 
the export of electricity into the United States where we’ve also 
received some significant revenues. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. Mr. Minister, I wonder 
. . . I know that SaskPower officials — and perhaps you have, I 
haven’t heard you speak about this specifically but certainly 
SaskPower officials — have talked about the whole concept of 
open access and open access agreements. 
 
And I wonder if you could confirm whether they were making 
those comments . . . I’ll tell you specifically what I recall and 
it’s from recollection so I apologize to you and your officials if 
I’m misrepresenting what I understand to be the case, that 
certainly we in the province won’t be able to avoid deregulation 
on a broader scale than what you say is represented in this Bill. 
 
Certainly this Bill would set some precedents in that regard if it 
doesn’t go beyond wholesalers and third parties who at least 
wish to export. 
 
So I wonder . . . I think it’s very germane to discussion of this 
Bill, and very important issue for the Assembly to have you 
clarify exactly what has been meant when we’ve heard that 
from, not just SaskPower officials, but others who would wade 
in on the debate on the electrical industry in our province, as to 
the inevitability of open access and deregulation in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We have had officials monitoring the 
situation in other jurisdictions. There are clearly many, many 
issues. 
 
I mean, I couldn’t say for sure whether it’ll ever come to 

Saskatchewan really, because of the unique situation that 
Saskatchewan finds itself in. I mean we have a huge geography, 
very sparsely populated and it makes for certainly a situation 
that may not even be attractive to other companies to want to 
sell power into Saskatchewan. 
 
But we are, right now . . . And I should say tying in with that, 
we are amongst the cheapest producers of electricity in North 
America. Clearly places, jurisdictions like Manitoba, Quebec, 
and I believe BC (British Columbia) who have access to hydro 
and produce electricity cheaper than Saskatchewan is able to — 
but because of our uniqueness with the very large geography 
and sparse population — I’m not sure that this is something that 
would . . . a full deregulation is something that would ever 
come to Saskatchewan. 
 
But any further changes that could be in any way described as 
deregulation would have to come back before this Assembly 
and amendments would have to be made again to the Act. 
 
Right now all this is, is simply the opening up for wholesale 
competition just to the two cities that I’ve referred to a number 
of times. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I think along 
those same lines, you know, I can recall the origins of the 
debate of deregulation of long distance in the province of 
Saskatchewan under a previous government. And that 
government too wasn’t excited at all and fought hard, the 
deregulation of long distance. But at the end of the day, it had 
no choice. 
 
Now as it turns out, of course . . . and I recall the same 
arguments being used, notwithstanding different appeals to the 
CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission). I can recall arguments like that used in this place 
and this Assembly where people would wade in and indicate 
that well, regardless of what the CRTC rules in this regard, who 
would want to come into our market. The same argument; 
sparsely populated, it’s not a very attractive market. 
 
And of course, when deregulation happened . . . I think, under 
the term of this government, deregulation of the phone industry 
did occur and other businesses, other carriers did enter the 
market. As it turns out, all of us, I think, have seen a substantial 
savings in our long distance, frankly, as a result of that. 
 
But I wonder if you could tie that into your comments just now 
that . . . what I heard you say is that, if we choose to in the 
province, if the legislature of the province of Saskatchewan 
chooses to, we can simply for an indefinite period of time avoid 
a much broader deregulation than what’s being proposed in this 
Bill. Would that be your position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think the parallels that you draw, if 
you would ask any retail purchaser of electricity in Alberta or 
California whether their prices . . . could they see benefits as a 
result of deregulation, I think probably would think they’ve not. 
 
Can we avoid full-scale deregulation? We believe the answer to 
that is yes. We think we can here in Saskatchewan but we do 
obviously need to continue to monitor that situation as well. 
 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2107 

 

I would argue as well that I would believe that the telephone 
system . . . there’s fundamental differences between the 
telephone system and the providing of electricity across our 
province. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With respect to some 
specific elements of the Bill, I want to draw your attention if I 
can to section 8.2 of the Bill, if I could do that. 
 
And you know, the work that we’ve done on this Bill is what 
I’m going to sort of paraphrase here, and our understanding of 
it. And maybe you could comment as to whether we’re off-track 
or indeed whether this would be the understanding of the 
officials as well. 
 
And if I may . . . Actually just before I get to that. Just before I 
get to that, in looking at this whole deregulation issue — and I 
think it’s fair that you’ve confirmed here to the Assembly, and I 
think it’s perfectly reasonable that officials are doing this — 
that the industry’s being monitored; that deregulation is being 
monitored. 
 
And I know that your officials are casting a wary eye, watching 
closely what’s happening in Alberta, in California, and frankly I 
think that’s something that we’re all grateful for because we all 
want to avoid the disaster that has occurred in those two 
jurisdictions. 
 
But as they’ve monitored this whole industry, can you confirm 
as to whether they’ve identified any jurisdictions in North 
America that have successfully deregulated their industry? And 
when I use the word successfully, I’m talking from the 
perspective of consumers where prices haven’t gone up, maybe 
they’ve come down, and also where the supply has been stable 
and safe and consistent. Have your officials identified in their 
work any jurisdictions like that? 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The one jurisdiction that is cited, I 
guess, as a successful area for deregulation would be 
Pennsylvania but the legislation . . . I should say the . . . It has 
been legislated that there are price caps so I would argue it’s 
probably not a pure, complete deregulation. 
 
Outside of North America the other area that would be I 
suppose described as successful in deregulation is the United 
Kingdom but they have a large population; they have large 
supply. And I guess I would argue that deregulation in an area 
where you have a very short distance to move the electricity, 
you’ve got lots of population, and you’ve got lots of supply and 
lots of competition, deregulation might very well work; and 
that’s why I would argue here in Saskatchewan it doesn’t work 
nearly as well because you’ve got such long distances with a 
very sparse population. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You indicated earlier 
that this government was basically ruling out a more broader 
deregulation than what we see here in this Bill but you did 
qualify it. You said it would continue to be monitored. And so I 
guess that would be the follow-up question, Mr. Minister, Mr. 
Chairman, and that would be this. Is there any situation or any 
condition under which this government, your government, 

would then consider it? You said: but officials will continue to 
monitor it. What in their monitoring, what in the international 
electrical industry or even our own, would cause the 
government to change its position regarding its ruling out of a 
broader deregulation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I guess the only situation that we could 
think of where consideration would be given to it, would be 
where there is benefits that could be clearly demonstrated for 
the consumers or for the client, and I would want to emphasize 
in a sustainable and a long-term way, it couldn’t be just 
something that we would think would be a benefit on a short 
term. 
 
There is however I should say, such volatility in gas prices and 
areas that provide, that generate electricity right now I should 
say, that there isn’t anything that we could think of or envision 
right now that would give us consideration to bringing 
something back to further deregulate. And again, any further 
changes would require us to come to the Chamber for further 
amendments to the Act before any additional deregulation could 
take place. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would you say there’s 
a comparison between this Bill, between The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act we’re considering today, and 
what happened in the gas industry in our province in 1995, I 
believe it was, when effectively that was deregulated. 
 
I guess private gas suppliers in the province currently could go 
after the residential market, but simply in speaking to some of 
them, there’s just not a . . . they don’t feel there’s a business 
case for that. I understand this Bill obviously doesn’t go nearly 
that far. But certainly the fact though, the deregulation that 
happened in the gas industry, also hasn’t gone that far where 
they are limited only to large institutional and commercial 
customers. 
 
So would you say there’s any comparisons, any similarities 
between what happened in that industry and this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There isn’t, from our perspective, any 
parallel at all. I guess the only minute parallel that you could 
draw is that those wholesalers who are wanting to provide 
electricity to those two jurisdictions that we talked about, or 
outside of the province, would have access to our lines the same 
way as with gas they have access to the pipes. 
 
But this is not about deregulating price. This is simply about 
deregulating the opportunity for wholesalers to provide 
electricity to the two, to the two cities that we talked about. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, just to 
return to an earlier question. And I apologize. I don’t think you 
specifically answered it. And it’s my fault; I think I asked about 
eight questions in the one. 
 
Could you specifically tell the members of the committee, what 
is it that the cities of Swift Current and Saskatoon did or said to 
have the government change, basically change its position on 
this about a year ago and follow it up with this Bill 9 now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I don’t want to be sort of blunt here, but 



2108 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

there wasn’t really anything that they said that prompted these 
amendments. They certainly do sit on the advisory committee 
and provide information for us. 
 
The thing that drove this is what I alluded to earlier, and that is 
the reciprocal access that we think is critical now that . . . where 
we need to ensure that we have ability to generate additional 
revenues by exporting power into other jurisdictions in Canada, 
into the United States. That was the thing that drove these 
amendments. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. I think we went on record — the critic for SaskPower 
at the time, the member for Rosthern, and I certainly did in my 
own local media — went on record congratulating the 
government for that move that it initiated a year ago as it relates 
to specifically the city of Swift Current and the city of 
Saskatoon. And certainly that position on our part hasn’t 
changed at all. 
 
But though as a follow-up and, Minister, you have talked about 
the reciprocity, SaskPower’s desire to want to export. And I’m 
reading into that then that you want to be able to demonstrate to 
those jurisdictions that you want to export to; that, you know, 
turnabout’s fair play. They can also have access to these 
wholesale purchasers here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And the very nature of that certainly is deregulation I think and 
it’s a recognition by the government that it sort of . . . it’s really 
a free trade principle at work here, I think. 
 
And I could . . . can I ask you this? Mr. Minister, what specific 
retaliatory action did SaskPower fear then if they did not 
proceed along this lines — this reciprocity — if they didn’t 
allow someone like EPCOR to make a pitch to the city of Swift 
Current and then deliver their electricity there. What retaliation 
did the Power corporation fear from other jurisdictions if they 
didn’t make this change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, it really focuses on the reciprocal 
access with the 128 million in revenue that I referred to last year 
. . . that we’ve generated, I should say, in the last budget year. 
 
You asked the question about what retaliatory actions were we 
concerned about? Specifically we would be concerned about 
Alberta or the US (United States) markets, that they simply 
might say if we don’t agree to these amendments that they no 
longer will be buying power from Saskatchewan. So that’s the 
. . . that really is the retaliatory measures that we were 
concerned about. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That would have been 
sort of my basic understanding as well but I appreciate your 
confirming that. 
 
So then I would ask this question. If, because as you have 
pointed out, this stops short of a broad-scale deregulation of our 
electrical industry, does the . . . do the officials of the 
corporation fear any sort of similar retaliatory action or any 
sabre-rattling on other jurisdictions if we don’t even go further 
than what this Bill would outline? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m advised that we don’t anticipate any 
further retaliatory actions if we don’t go further. 

Mr. Wall: — Again, not understanding, and not having . . . 
certainly not being an expert in the electrical industry by any 
stretch of the imagination, is that one of the circumstances that 
your officials could see in terms of them recommending to the 
government of the day, some future government of the day, that 
further deregulation occur? 
 
I guess what I’m saying is, the nature of how we are set up as a 
province in terms of our electrical industry, is there the potential 
then that retaliatory action, some sort of retaliatory action could 
occur in the future with sort of the . . . in terms of it being a 
threat in any way if we didn’t go further here in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well we could . . . I guess while we can 
never guarantee that there would not be retaliatory actions, as I 
said, we continue to monitor, as other jurisdictions have, the 
whole issue of full deregulation. But I would go back to my 
previous answer: if we move forward with these amendments, 
it’s not anticipated that there would be any additional retaliatory 
actions from any other jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Earlier on . . . Thank you, Mr. Minister. Earlier 
on . . . I will refer to a specific section, and once again I would 
like to sort of provide you the interpretation that we have of 
that. And certainly if it’s wrong, we accept any . . . and 
welcome any clarification you might have. 
 
Specifically section 8.2(1)(b). Our understanding is that 
basically this allows the corporation to set rules and standards 
for the operation of its generation or transmission facilities 
within an integrated, regional power grid. 
 
And that will be the first question in there — if you could 
identify exactly what that is. I have an idea, but if you could 
clarify what that is. This allows SaskPower basically to make 
the rules with regards to generation or transmission facilities. 
This would allow SaskPower to regulate other people’s use of 
its transmission facilities. And I think that’s also reiterated in 
section 8.2(2). 
 
Could you do a couple of things please today, Mr. Minister, for 
members of the committee? Could you comment on an 
integrated regional power grid? I’m assuming that might . . . 
Well I’ll let you comment on that. And also allow you to correct 
me if that general interpretation of that section is correct. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — If I don’t answer this question 
completely, just re-ask it again if you would please. 
 
First of all let me go to, you asked about the integrated regional 
power grids. What we are referring to there would be if an 
arrangement were struck between Saskatchewan and Manitoba 
as an example, there would have to be agreements and 
arrangements put in place. So what we’re talking about, as an 
integrated regional power grid would be something beyond 
Saskatchewan. So if we formed one region with the two 
provinces, as an example. 
 
With respect to the standards, just as an example we’re referring 
to some of the standards as set and put forth in NAERC, that’s 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2109 

 

the North American Electrical Reliability Council, so that 
would be some of the standards that we would be referring to in 
this amendment. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Other than that though, that’s a fairly reasonable 
interpretation then of that section and I appreciate the 
clarification. 
 
In section 8.2, still with section 8.2(2)(a) again, it would be our 
interpretation that this would allow SaskPower to establish 
standards for design and operation of facilities owned and 
operated by a third party that are interconnected with the 
transmission and distribution lines of the corporation. Unless 
the third party builds its own transmission and distribution 
lines, they will have to use that of the power corporation. 
 
Right. And that’s the question that I have then. When we talk 
about third parties building their own transmission and 
distribution lines, are we saying then that that’s not part of what 
this Bill is about and, if it is, where? Are these transmission 
lines in other jurisdictions, in these regions outside of the 
province or, indeed, does this Bill prohibit the third party from 
using its own transmission and distribution lines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — This legislation . . . As you refer to the 
construction of third parties that would construct their own 
lines, this amendment actually does allow for SaskPower to 
consent to that in . . . I would describe them as rare 
circumstances or exceptional circumstances. 
 
An example would be in the far North where one of the mines 
might require electricity. There are no private clients on the 
system at all. SaskPower might well consent in a situation like 
that for them to construct their own . . . in fact their own power 
lines. 
 
The standards I think that you’re referring to, if I understood 
your question right, and I don’t want to be presumptuous, but 
you may have confused the two issues here. The other third 
parties that require SaskPower’s approval is really when they 
hook into our system. 
 
We want to . . . before we give approval we need to ensure that 
the system that they have wouldn’t cause damage to 
SaskPower’s infrastructure or in fact even cause damage to any 
of SaskPower’s clients. We would want to ensure that there is 
conformity when they hook into our system. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Could the city of Swift Current — in light of that 
answer, Mr. Minister — could the cities of Swift Current or 
Saskatoon endeavour to construct their own transmission and 
distribution system as a result of this Act? 
 
Just to clarify that. Of course they have their own systems 
within their franchise areas currently. I’m talking about outside 
their current franchise areas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — While I guess technically it would be 
possible, clearly it would not be envisaged by SaskPower. It 
requires SaskPower’s consent. I couldn’t foresee a circumstance 
that SaskPower would think that it would be good to have 
duplication of infrastructure when this is clearly SaskPower’s 
jurisdiction. 

And again the only example that we can come up with here 
today would be, as an example, a northern mine in the very 
remote parts of the province where there isn’t any private 
clients wanting to purchase electricity. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That basically 
concludes the questions that we have so I want to thank you and 
your officials here today. But I also want to go on record, on 
behalf of the official opposition, to state that certainly we 
believe that this is . . . certainly it’s deregulation. Regardless of 
the fact that it only might affect these wholesalers, I think that’s 
exactly what it is. 
 
And we’d like to go on record, Mr. Deputy Chair, as the official 
opposition as saying that whatever the government intends to do 
— notwithstanding this Bill — in the future on this issue, we 
would express grave concerns that the pitfalls that have been 
experienced specifically in our neighbours in the west and in 
California be avoided. Nobody wants to go there in this 
province on either side of the House or in any of our 
constituencies. And we would want to go on record with that. 
 
And with that again, Mr. Deputy Chair, I thank the minister and 
his officials for their answers here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I also want to thank the member for 
very good questions. 
 
I think we would categorically agree with you that we have 
exactly the same concerns with respect to deregulation as we’ve 
seen in other jurisdictions, specifically Alberta, and the one that 
we’ve oft referred to is California. But again I would say for the 
comfort of people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair, this is just about 
the availability of wholesalers to provide electricity to the two 
jurisdictions here in Saskatchewan, Swift Current and 
Saskatoon, and to allow us to gain access to . . . insure access, I 
should say, to the US and to other markets for revenues to 
SaskPower. 
 
So again I want to thank the member for the very good 
questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(15:45) 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Mineral Resources 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated with me 
here today is our executive director of the exploration and 
geological services division, George Patterson, to my right. To 
my left is the director of the metallic minerals branch, Jay 
Fredericks. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair; and welcome 
once again to the officials from the Department of Energy and 



2110 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

Mines. 
 
Mr. Chair and Mr. Minister, this Act appears to me to be more 
of a housekeeping piece of legislation than anything else. My 
question, Mr. Minister, is can you please tell the House about 
this temporary 10 per cent, non-refundable tax credit. How will 
this work and much money can the industry expect to save by 
this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It is expected that this will generate 
about $2 million in exploration in the mining industry, and also 
expected that it would save investors somewhere around 
$300,000 per year. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Getting into the 
details of this Bill a little more, I understand that bulk samples 
will be utilized in the administration of this Act — bulk mineral 
samples. Are you relying on the federal definition of bulk 
samples for this? The reason I ask is because it’s my 
understanding that Ottawa is changing their definition. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We currently do accept the federal 
definition, but we are in discussion with the industry. The 
member may be aware that the diamond industry specifically 
has concerns around the definition. 
 
The Act clearly allows for the province to use . . . or prescribe 
its own definition, and if it’s clear that the federal definition 
becomes a problem for the industry, I think we would want to 
pay some considerable attention to that. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m certainly very 
happy to hear that, and you answered my next question about 
the diamond industry as well. 
 
Is your department working on other areas relating to tax credits 
for the industry? This is certainly something that prohibits work 
from being done or precludes work from being done in 
Saskatchewan. Will we see something in this regard soon or 
over the next little while in terms of setting an environment that 
will allow mining to take place further in our province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The member is probably aware that in 
this past budget we also introduced financial assistance as it 
pertains to geoscience, the mapping process. We have 
established a committee to deal with land administration and 
permitting process. We’ve reduced the permit fees and we have 
also established a committee with Finance and the industry to 
deal with a whole host of issues that may or may not relate to 
financial issues. 
 
But the reason we have Finance on the committee is clearly 
because we believe that some of the issues will be financial. But 
any further changes will clearly have to come through the 
budget process and be approved in subsequent budgets. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, that’s all 
I have at this time. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
new officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated to my 
immediate right is our executive director of the petroleum and 
natural gas division, Bruce Wilson; and to my left is the director 
of the petroleum development branch, Brian Mathieson. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
in your second reading speech you talk about how this Bill is a 
very important piece of legislation, and members on this side of 
the House agree. For the purposes of putting things on the 
record, could the minister please provide the Assembly with an 
explanation of this Bill? It’s my understanding that some of the 
oil and gas groups were a part of the committee that helped put 
this framework together. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again if I don’t answer this question 
completely, please just re-ask it. I think you were concerned 
that the oil and gas industry was involved in the process in 
developing this. They absolutely were. We consulted with three 
different associations — CAPP (Canadian Association of 
Petroleum Producers), SEPAC (Small Explorers and Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan), and the Saskatchewan Swab 
Association, which is — I’m quite sure you’re familiar — is 
small producers primarily in the Kindersley area. So they were 
very much involved in developing the legislation. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Mr. Minister, the other part of the question — and I’m sure it 
was a long and rambling question — could the minister please 
provide the Assembly with an explanation of the Bill, the 
mechanics of the Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In simple terms it’s really about the 
management of the liability for the abandonment and 
reclamation of wells and different facilities. It will deal with the 
issues of licensing and of course issues of the actual fund that is 
being created itself. 
 
We want to, again, we want to ensure that the liability isn’t 
downloaded specifically onto the province or onto RMs (rural 
municipality). And as I said, we’ve worked with the industry to 
try and ensure that that is not the case. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Mr. Minister, there appears to be two parts to the Bill. Could the 
minister provide an explanation of the part regarding what 
appears to be a system of financial guarantees to ensure that all 
licensees will be able to meet their abandonment and 
reclamation responsibilities? What kind of financial guarantees 
will be in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In this particular respect, we are 
following the Alberta program. As an example, if someone is 
able . . . is not able, I should say, or appears not able to manage 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2111 

 

their financial responsibility, clearly an assessment is done in 
advance. The role of the Crown in this particular case, or the 
department, would be that they would likely not issue a licence. 
 
Also if the licence is to be issued, they would have to then, as a 
company, put up a financial guarantee themselves to ensure that 
they could get a licence. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
Mr. Minister, there’s also talk about a fund financed entirely by 
the industry. Can the minister provide an update to the House 
on what this fund will consist of and how it will be 
administered? 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, this is with respect to just 
the orphan wells. We will be taking the two and a half million 
that currently exists in the Oil and Gas Environmental Fund and 
rolling that over into the Orphan Fund 
 
And then, on an annual basis, an assessment will be done. And 
if it is clear that because of new wells that are being abandoned, 
have come on stream, there may be a new assessment that will 
be required, that may be a very, very small assessment though. 
 
But I think the important thing is that we’re rolling the current 
money over and that an assessment will be done on an annual 
basis to determine if additional funds are needed. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
Mr. Minister, in terms of penalties, can the minister outline 
what fines those who are in contravention of this Act could 
expect to see levied on them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member, we’re not changing 
what currently exists with respect to penalties from what 
already or currently exists in the Act. We can go through this if 
you want, but the penalties are clearly laid out in the Act itself 
and I would refer you to those specifically. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s all I have on 
this Bill, Mr. Chair. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Freehold Oil and Gas 
Production Tax Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Staying with us 
of course is our executive director of petroleum and natural gas 
division, Bruce Wilson, seated to my right. To my left, the new 
official joining us is the director of economic and fiscal analysis 
branch, Dale Fletcher. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I would 
like to begin by having you give a brief, bottom line outline, if 

you will, of what Bill 11 will do and how it will help the 
industry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think probably, easiest for the 
member, is just for me to read parts of the three key points that I 
referenced in the second reading. They are as follows. 
 
First of all the Act, the amendments propose that we provide 
clear authority for the province to levy a tax on crude oil that is 
recovered from certain oil field facilities. And that was never 
measured at the time of production for purposes of applying a 
Crown royalty or freehold production tax. 
 
The second major change would be to protect royalty revenues 
that have been collected to date on the recovered crude oil. 
 
And lastly, and third key point, would be to prevent crude oil 
recovery facilities from being used as a means to reduce 
provincial royalties and/or taxes. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, how 
many people does this affect? How many freehold rights 
holders are there in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — This has nothing to do with freehold 
rights and nothing to do with . . . Mineral ownership is 
irrelevant. This, as I said, has nothing to do with freehold rights. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — In looking, Mr. Minister, in looking 
specifically at some clauses in Bill 11, 32.61 for instance talks 
about not paying the tax on recovered crude oil and basically 
shutting down facilities, I believe. Is that correct? Is that the . . . 
if the new tax is not paid, is that the recourse to shut down the 
facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — That, as I have been advised, that’s just 
one mechanism. We obviously have a number of mechanisms 
available to us. And clearly the department wouldn’t take 
lightly the issue of shutting down any of these producers. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, could 
you tell the House if fines are another avenue of recourse? And 
what size of fines, what type of fines would a company be 
looking at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I would say, first of all, that this is 
probably the last step in a process. And the short answer to your 
question is yes, fines are a mechanism; but again, as I said, it’s 
the last step. We would have to though, first of all, successfully 
prosecute, and I repeat — emphasize, I should say — the word, 
successfully prosecute. 
 
The fines are to a maximum of $10,000. If the producer 
continues to ignore that order, there would be an ability also to 
continue with fines that could amount up to $10,000 per day. 
 
Again these fines or penalties, if you will, do currently exist in 
legislation and also exist in a number of Bills that are, that are 
. . . that we are guided by, I should say. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
section 32.9 talks about royalties previously paid on recovered 
crude oil. Could the minister provide an explanation as to how 



2112 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

this will work? How will this tax replace the royalties and what 
rate will it be? What rate will this . . . 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member from Carrot River on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, three guests in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
We have Mr. Al Hunter, who is currently the president of the 
Board of Directors of Cosmo Industries in Saskatoon; Mr. 
Howard Stensrud, a long-time Saskatoon business person and 
long-time board member of Cosmo Industries in Saskatoon. 
And another little claim to fame that Mr. Stensrud had is that he 
is also one of the founding members of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rehabilitation Centres. 
 
And joining Mr. Stensrud and Mr. Hunter is another 
well-known individual to this House, Mr. Bob Pringle. And Mr. 
Bob Pringle is the executive director of Cosmo Industries. 
 
And I would like everyone to join with me in warmly 
welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Prebble: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thanks very much, Mr. Chair. On behalf of 
government members, I want to add our welcome to Al Hunter 
and Howard Stensrud. It’s very nice to have you as visitors in 
the Assembly today. 
 
And I also want to extend a very special welcome to Bob 
Pringle who, as members know, served with great distinction in 
this Assembly for 10 years. And I had the pleasure of serving 
with Bob for five of those years and I’m very delighted to see 
him back here today. 
 
So welcome to all three and I hope you enjoy the proceedings 
while you’re here. It’s great to have you here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax 
Amendment Act, 2001 

(continued) 
 
Clause 1 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Chair, if you heard any singing in 
the background, it won’t be from me. I’m sure it’ll be coming 
from the gallery. 
 
In answer to the question. First of all, since 1983 we have been 
assessing royalties on recovered crude oil. There have been 
questions raised as to the legality of collecting these royalties, 
thus the amendments here before you. And we have changed 
them to what we think is clearly legal now, if there’s any 
question about it. And we’ve changed it from a royalty to a tax. 
 
For those who have paid the royalty in the past, they will have 
been deemed to have paid the tax, if you will. So there won’t be 
anything . . . we won’t be going back to any of those people that 
have paid the royalty. 
 
I think you asked the question about rates as well. If the 
member has not yet received that information, I am aware that 
through my office we sent that to you. If you’ve not received 
that, we’d be happy to provide that for you if you’ve not yet 
received it. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would appreciate 
that very much. Mr. Minister. Do you have information on how 
much the government expects to receive financially from 
freehold . . . well from this legislation, from the fees that will be 
levied? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again I want to remind the member that 
the amendments here really are driven, today, around an issue 
of a questioning of the legality of the charging of royalties 
versus a tax. So the revenue will be contingent on two things. 
 
First of all, it will be contingent on the volume recovered. It 
will also be contingent on the rates that we actually do levy. We 
need to . . . there will be even further consultation with the 
industry. In general we are currently proposing something lower 
than what is being charged under the old royalty structure. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, that’s all 
I have, but I think the member from Cannington has a question 
or two. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As you can 
tell, there’s a general applause, an acceptance that I’m going to 
ask some questions here. 
 
Mr. Minister, on this oil, this recovered oil, was there royalties 
paid on the oil when it was first produced — not charged after it 
was recovered — but when it was initially produced, was there 
a royalty charged on it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No, there was not. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Since this 
Bill is entitled the freehold oil and gas production, would it be 
proper to assume that the oil being produced came from 
freehold mineral leases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The short answer again is no. This has 
nothing to do with mineral owner . . . the mineral ownership 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2113 

 

issue is irrelevant and nothing to do with the . . . anything to do 
with freehold rights. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Oh, I don’t think that the ownership of 
the oil is immaterial to this, Mr. Minister. Since the oil was not 
charged a royalty when it was initially produced, therefore it 
would not have been recorded as production allocable to a 
particular LSD (legal survey district) or zone. 
 
That being the case, if that was on freehold land, the mineral 
lease owner should have received a portion of the revenues 
from the oil generated. Since it wasn’t recorded, they received 
. . . they did not receive their percentage of revenues from that. 
When you charge this new tax on it now, the government 
receives their share, but the original leaseholder of the mineral 
rights is not receiving their proper proportion. 
 
What means or measure are you taking to ensure that the oil 
that should be allocated to the freehold mineral owners is 
actually being credited to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — This has everything to do with how the 
freehold lease actually reads. There will obviously be an 
agreement between the producer and the owner of the lease. We 
would not in any way interfere in this process. 
 
And taxing — formerly royalty charges — taxing is done at a 
very different point. It would be very difficult for us to go back 
to the freehold owners, because the waste quite clearly could be 
coming from 20 different well sites. 
 
So we would not interfere in the process where agreements are 
reached between the producers and the owners. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. The 
agreement between the mineral right owner and the producer is 
that the mineral right owner gets a percentage of all of the oil 
produced. Now if there’s oil being produced and not recorded, 
then the mineral right holder is being cheated. If at some point 
down the line that oil is recorded some place else, it needs to be 
allocated back to the mineral right holders. 
 
You used the example of 20 wells. If you have 20 wells going 
into allocation for processing, all you would simply do is take a 
percentage of all 20 wells, distribute it out . . . your recovered 
oil out, and allocate it to those 20 wells on a percentage basis. 
And the mineral right holder would then get his economic value 
out of his mineral. 
 
But simply by taxing it without doing that allocation, you’re 
cheating the mineral right holder. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well clearly with respect to the 
member’s question, and it’s a good question, the agreements are 
between the producers and the owners and the agreements, as I 
understand them, are around production. 
 
What we are proposing here today isn’t necessarily related to 
production. It is really about the recovery of oil from waste, if 
you will. And it is an altogether different — from our 
perspective — it is an altogether different product. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s not actually 

waste. It’s oil that has been recovered from the water tanks, 
from the gas system. The only time when it would even be 
considered close to waste is if you had a spill or something and 
then recovered the oil and washed the soil and recovered the oil. 
Even there, I would hardly classify it as waste. It may be in the 
waste disposal system, which is the water system, but it’s still 
recoverable oil and it is recovered on a normal basis, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
So somehow or another, the mineral right owner needs to be 
allocated their share. You’re ensuring that the government gets 
their share with this tax, their percentage of the royalty. You 
can call it a tax or a royalty. At the end of the day, you’re 
ensuring that the government gets their share of it. But 
somehow those numbers also need to be allocated back to the 
mineral right owner, the holder of the minerals . . . is said and 
done. 
 
When it’s Crown land, it doesn’t matter. You’re getting your 
money either at the front end or at the back end, but you’re 
getting your money. On the freehold, however, somehow or 
another it has to be allocated back, Mr. Minister, to ensure that 
the mineral right owner receives his proper proportion in it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, to the member, I want to 
point out that there is nothing fundamentally that has changed 
here with respect to the concern that he raises. The same 
concern existed under the royalty structure as exists under what 
we describe as the tax structure now. I’m advised that with the 
concern that he raises, anything that could be clearly identified 
or allocated as production, if you will, those revenues would go 
back to the leasehold owner. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I believe that’s all we 
have, and I’d like to thank the minister and particularly the 
department staff. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Particularly the department staff? What 
about the minister? Thank you very much. I want to thank my 
officials of course who always provide very good advice to me 
— for the previous pieces of legislation as well — and to the 
member opposite who asked good questions today. We 
appreciate that and thank everyone involved in drafting these 
Bills. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedule agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(16:30) 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Historic Properties Foundations Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much. And I’m here today 
in my capacity today as a Provincial Secretary and as such I 
would like introduce the official I have with me, Michael 
Jackson, of the office of protocol. 
 
Clause 1 



2114 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Welcome, 
Minister, and your official. And I’d just like to start out by 
saying that this Bill is set up for Crown foundations to support 
historic properties in Saskatchewan, and I’d like to go on record 
as saying that members on this side of the House certainly do 
support the preservation of historic properties in our province. 
 
And I was just interested this morning to see where Claybank 
Brick Factory held an occasion yesterday and had up to 1,000 
people there to tour and to observe the Claybank Factory. And 
it’s undergoing preservation, is my understanding, at this time 
and will be ongoing. 
 
And I’d also just like to mention that Souris Valley hospital in 
Weyburn is a very historic building and I would hope that the 
government would see fit to preserve this facility as well, as I 
know there is some talk about its usefulness in keeping it. 
 
Madam Minister, to get directly to the Bill, I’d like to ask you 
the main reason why your government feels it’s necessary to 
bring in this piece of legislation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I would first of all like to comment on the statement 
by the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy; and I entirely agree 
with her that it is important for us to be preserving historic 
properties. 
 
And I think that this is a change in Saskatchewan because it 
used to be that the philosophy I think in many sectors used to be 
well if it’s old, we should knock it down and we should make 
way for new. And as we’re approaching the province’s 
centennial in 2005, there seems to be a wonderful sense of 
looking back to our history and wanting to preserve these 
historic properties as much as possible. 
 
So I have taken your suggestions, particularly with respect to 
Claybank, and we will be giving them very careful 
consideration. 
 
You were asking, what’s the main purpose of this Act. As you 
know, it allows for the Lieutenant Governor in Council to 
establish foundations to receive gifts to the Crown for historic 
property. So I believe that’s really the main purpose of it, so 
that there is a vehicle for accepting donations from people for 
historic properties. 
 
I do want to emphasize that these foundations will be, in 
essence, that fundraising vehicle. They will not be controlling 
the historical properties per se but will by virtue of the nature of 
the people who will be on these foundations, will have a 
particular interest and a sense of passion about the historic 
properties. And we believe that this will allow them to go out 
and very enthusiastically raise funds for these historic 
properties. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess the major 
concern on this part — and I’ll ask some questions related to it 
— is how these foundations are being set up. And that loss of 
local control is of paramount concern to us. 
 
And I guess unknown to this side of the House is how many of 
these foundations are going to be set up. Is there one for the 

province or are we looking at numerous? And if we are looking 
at more than one, how will it be determined when a foundation 
should be set up? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much. First of all with 
respect to your question about loss of local control, I do want to 
emphasize that these foundations will be bodies that will be 
acting in a fundraising capacity. They are not the management 
boards for a particular piece of heritage property. And I think 
we’ve seen that model applied very successfully. 
 
For instance, one I’m familiar with was I used to sit on City 
Hospital Board of Governors. We also had a separate City 
Hospital Foundation Board for raising money to buy various 
pieces of hospital equipment. 
 
We already do . . . Another analogy I could use is the 
University of Saskatchewan has a foundation for the purposes 
of raising money but they are totally separate from the board of 
governors, for instance, of the university. 
 
You ask how many of these foundations we will have. Right 
now it is only anticipated to establish one, that being a 
foundation for the Government House heritage property; but if 
and when further foundations are desired and the case has been 
made for them, then we by virtue of this being enabling 
legislation, we would be able to establish those foundations 
without having to come back to the legislature and establish . . . 
without having to come back and pass yet another Act. 
 
And I would refer you to for instance the member from North 
Battleford who has I think on a couple of occasions during this 
session in the House, made reference to the courthouse in North 
Battleford and his desire to see a similar sort of foundation for 
that property. 
 
The answer is right now it would only be the one and that 
would be the foundation to raise funds for Government House. 
But if it is desired to have others for heritage properties then we 
would consider that. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well I guess I’m 
a little confused. I don’t understand why we need a separate 
foundation that their sole purpose is to raise the funds and yet 
once the funds are raised they’re going to turn it over to 
someone else to determine what’s going to be done with it. To 
me I don’t understand the rationale here and maybe you could 
explain that more fully. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well I think, Madam Member, the 
rationale is that people do volunteer service in this province for 
various reasons and have various sets of skills and expertise. 
And very often somebody who would want to be involved in, 
for instance, organizing teas at Government House would not 
necessarily be the same person who would want to be involved 
in approaching the corporate sector to see if they wanted to 
contribute money for enhancing the grounds at Government 
House. 
 
So by establishing a foundation, we are establishing the ability 
for people who have a specific interest and concern in raising 
money for a heritage property, to be able to volunteer their time 
for that purpose. 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2115 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well when I 
read through this Bill, I don’t see where these people are going 
to be volunteers. They’re going to be receiving funds for the 
work that they do, so it certainly is . . . Unless I’m misreading 
this Bill, these people are going to be reimbursed for the work 
they do. 
 
And in the past, we have many levels of expertise as volunteers. 
And some volunteers’ expertise is fundraising, as well as those 
that serve the tea at a tea as you used as an example. 
 
So if I’m incorrect in what I read in this Bill, that the people 
that are going to be raising the funds are going to be reimbursed 
for their services, then I would like you to clarify that for us 
please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Yes, I do thank the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy for raising that. And it is an issue that on 
first blush, as you read specifically clause 10 defining the board 
of trustees, one could assume that it is anticipated that the 
trustees will be paid an honorarium. 
 
But in point of fact — I would refer the member specifically to 
clause 10(6) and (7) — they refer to determining . . . the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council may determine the allowances 
for travelling and other expenses to be paid to trustees. 
 
I do want to clarify and I want to state it most clearly so that 
there would be no confusion or no sense that something other 
than this is intended. We do not intend to be paying the 
foundation members any honorarium. 
 
We do though feel that where we have, as we have for instance 
with the Government House Advisory Board right now, we 
have a large number of people who are from out of the 
province, who would be coming to the province to attend 
meetings and so forth, that we want to have the capability to 
pay approved travel expenses at the approved government rates 
and also to be able to buy them a lunch while they’re here. 
 
But I entirely agree with you that when people volunteer, that’s 
what they’re doing. They’re volunteering. They are not in it for 
the money or to be making a salary or an honorarium. 
 
So the intention is to have these people provide their services, 
their very good services, on a volunteer basis but at the same 
time, if they wish to have legitimate expenses associated with 
that volunteer work, such as travel and meals, and perhaps on 
the odd occasion hotel costs, reimbursed, then we would be able 
to. 
 
And I will just, just to further advise you about that, I would 
like to let you know that we do have a Government House 
Advisory Board established right now and it is my hope that 
those people who have been doing wonderful work in the 
advisory board capacity would let their names stand for 
nomination to the Government House Foundation, when and if 
we pass this Bill. 
 
We have for instance Senator Raynell Andreychuk, who may 
on occasion be coming from Ottawa; Scotty Cameron from 
Calgary. David Dombowsky currently resides in Kelowna. 
Leroy Larsen, I’m sure you know, is in Regina; Harold MacKay 

is also from Regina. Robert Mitchell, past attorney general in 
the legislature, is living in Saskatoon. Senator Jack Wiebe, the 
former Lieutenant Governor, resides in Swift Current. And then 
of course we have Pamela Wallin, who lives in Toronto. 
 
So that should give you some idea of the people that we’re 
looking at for this foundation and the travelling that they would 
have to do in order to donate their time and very considerable 
energy and enthusiasm to Government House Foundation. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, well there has been 
confusion about this clause by myself and also by our 
researchers and we will be moving an amendment to clarify 
this, because I believe that it needs to be clear that they will 
only be reimbursed for expenses and that they will be paid at a 
set rate the same as the public service, rather than make it wide 
open for the foundation themselves to determine what they’re 
going to pay themselves. 
 
And that’s really what we have here, where it says: 
 

. . . may determine the allowances for travelling and other 
expenses to be paid to trustees. 

 
And the: 
 

. . . foundation may pay any allowances for trustees and any 
other costs of administering the foundation from its own 
money. 

 
I think it’s open to interpretation what this means, and we will 
be moving an amendment to clarify that. 
 
My next question is what is this Bill going to do with regards to 
what we have today which are non-profit charitable 
organizations that support local historical sites and work to 
preserve them? Do you see them working together and 
enhancing each other, or do you envision that people are going 
to want to give to the foundation as opposed to local historical 
foundations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Madam Member, I just want to fuss a little 
bit about your earlier statements about the need to move an 
amendment. I would like to advise you that the wording that we 
have under clause 10(6) and (7) is basically the same wording 
that we have right now under the two foundations that both the 
University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan have 
established. 
 
There is no intent to pay any honoraria. There is, in my opinion, 
no need for you to move this amendment because what you 
want is exactly what is being accomplished with this legislation. 
So your amendment is not necessary. 
 
You asked then secondly about local control. It is not the 
intention of this legislation to usurp local historic groups or 
local control. This is a vehicle for raising funds for historical 
properties. Period. 
 
The Chair: — Order, if I could just remind the minister and the 
hon. member that . . . to direct the comments to the Chair. 
Thank you. 
 



2116 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, my apologies. 
Through the Chair, to the minister: I have reviewed the Bill that 
was introduced in 1996 called the Crown foundation for health 
districts. This Bill caused grave concern in . . . especially in 
rural Saskatchewan. This Bill was never proclaimed and last 
week it was repealed. 
 
This Bill is very similar in nature and what this — the Bill 
dealing with health districts — was that it took away local 
control and the local authority to do with what they wanted with 
their property, with monies that they had raised, with even the 
. . . went as far as the furnishings within these hospitals and 
other health care buildings. 
 
And I’d like the minister to indicate how, if that could happen 
under the previous Bill, how it cannot happen under this Bill. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Again, I think I know the example that 
you’re referring to. But what I want to refer you to is the 
example of Government House right now. We have a very 
active group of volunteers. I think there are probably around 
500 and if I’m exaggerating, hopefully by the time we finish 
there will be 500 volunteers doing very good work over at 
Government House. 
 
They set their own agendas, their own objectives, and they 
define for themselves the kind of work that they’re going to do 
with respect to working on the grounds, planting tulips, doing 
various teas, and so forth. 
 
This Bill will not usurp their autonomy or their local direction. 
This is, as I say, designed specifically to provide for those 
people who wish to use their skills and talents to raise money 
for an historic property — and very specifically in this instance 
for Government House. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, to the Chair, to the minister. Madam 
Minister, you say that we have volunteers now that look after 
the historical properties. But we also had volunteers before we 
had the Act, C-50, that established the Crown Foundation for 
District Health Boards. We no longer have those volunteers at 
the local level now. They are controlled by a health board that is 
paid in full and reimbursed for their expenses as well. And our 
concern is that that is exactly what you’re doing with this Bill; 
only we’re taking it to a different entity, which is the control of 
historic properties. 
 
I would like you to go on record as to indicate to this side of the 
House and to the people of Saskatchewan that this is not what 
your intention is and what this Bill will do. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Through the Chair. I want to state very 
categorically there is no intention to replace local volunteers. 
On the contrary, what is anticipated is that they will be able . . . 
the foundation would be able to raise funds on a larger basis 
than perhaps local volunteers would be able to do. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, the 
concern under section 14 is exactly that, that the funds will be 
raised by this appointed board and the funds that are raised will 
. . . that what is done with them will be determined by the 
board. And that is taking away local control. Section 14 reads: 
 

A foundation shall consider the directions of the persons 
who have made (the) gifts . . . 

 
I reiterate — shall consider. 
 

. . . grants, (bequeaths and) . . . donations to a foundation 
but the foundation is not bound by those directions. 

 
So in other words these funds will be collected but they will go 
into a central pool and it will be the determination of this 
foundation where these funds are going to go. The loss of 
control of what happens with these funds is . . . it’s right there 
in black and white, this is what it’s saying. 
 
And so to say that loss of local control is not in this Bill is 
certainly, I think, a stretch and I would like the minister to 
speak to this. And also I’d like to tell her at this time — I’ve 
discussed this with her before — that we will be bringing an 
amendment here as well so that local control is not lost. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Through the Chair, I would like to say that 
there is a difference, in my opinion, between local control and 
donors. And again, I think we’ve already jawboned it to death 
in terms of local control. There still will be local control. 
 
What we’re talking about here with this Bill is establishing a 
foundation that would be able by virtue of the membership to be 
able to canvass corporations across Canada for fairly substantial 
contributions. And we will be working, obviously, with those 
corporations to try to accommodate their wishes with respect to 
donations as much as possible. 
 
But it may be that on the very, very rare occasion they may be 
wanting something that simply could not be accommodated. For 
instance it may be that somebody would want to put up a huge 
neon sign advertising a particular product at Government 
House. Now that would be anathema for that building and 
obviously the foundation would not be able to agree to it. 
 
So wherever practical, the wishes of the donors will be taken 
into consideration. But we do feel that just for surety sake, it’s 
important to have the clause in, on clause 14, that says that the 
wishes of the donors may not necessarily be able to be 
accommodated. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well, Madam 
Minister, from what I hear you saying, there is no intent to raise 
funds on a local level, that this is something to do with raising 
funding throughout Canada, and large corporate donations. And 
I would hope that that is the intent. 
 
I think it should be on record though that the people of 
Saskatchewan are very nervous about this kind of legislation 
because, though you say the intent is not to do anything that 
local people would not want or the donors would not want, it’s 
not in the legislation. The exact opposite is in the legislation, 
enabling the foundation to do whatever they determined that 
they want to do with the funding. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan have found out, unfortunately, 
that this has happened in the past with The Health Districts Act 
and health district boards. And local money and buildings and 
equipment, etc., have been removed from local control and 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2117 

 

removed from the community altogether. So there is much 
nervousness about this Bill in that regard. 
 
My last question to the minister is: what is the difference 
between the tax write-off between this new Crown foundation 
and what we presently have today when people donate to 
charitable foundations or non-profit organizations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would advise, through the Chair, I would 
advise the member opposite that while the tax law has changed, 
there still is seen to be some advantage, some preferential 
advantage to donating to a Crown foundation as compared to a 
charitable foundation. And so it would be a tax benefit for the 
donor. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, I did say that was 
my last question, but I would appreciate if we . . . you cannot 
give us the exact amount of what the difference is? I mean, this 
is a concern is that we are going to have people donating to this 
foundation as opposed to their local charitable organizations 
and the funding is going to be again taken from the local areas 
and siphoned into a larger foundation. And this is something 
that we do not want to see. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would advise the member opposite 
through the Chair that if we’re talking about large donations by 
corporations, it’s a totally different playing field with respect to 
tax law, as compared to small individual donations by the 
common folk, by the real people of this province. 
 
And I’m not a tax law expert so I can’t give you exact details. 
And certainly in 1997 the tax law did change and the 100 per 
cent tax write-off that used to exist has dropped down. I think 
it’s probably now at about the 75 per cent level. And you will 
know from filling out your own income tax and filling out the 
line on charitable donations that I think it’s probably only about 
33 per cent. 
 
So there is a tax advantage to be had, but I can’t give you the 
specific numbers. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, I would think that 
that would be an important component of putting together this 
legislation that that differ . . . those figures should have been 
known and taken into consideration when you were proposing 
this Bill, because it is going to have a huge impact on local 
historical foundations or organizations that are trying to raise 
funding for local projects. 
 
(17:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well there is one other advantage though 
to be gained by having a Crown foundation. The Crown is able 
to accept certain things that would not be possible for instance 
under a charitable foundation such as real property, land and so 
forth. So there are differences between Crown foundations and 
charitable foundations. 
 
But I do want to emphasize again that what we’re talking about 
here, very specifically, is heritage property foundations. So 
we’re talking about, in this instance, the Government House and 
we’re talking about fairly substantial donations that we will be 
seeking from the private sector. And some of that private sector 

— I don’t want to mislead you — may be Saskatchewan private 
sector. But we will be seeking fairly substantial donations for 
Government House through this vehicle. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 10 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well I would like to propose an amendment to 
clause 10 (6) and (7): 
 

Amend Clause 10 of the printed Bill by striking out Clauses 
(6) and (7) and substituting the following: 

 
“(6) Trustees shall serve as volunteers and are only eligible 
to be re-imbursed for actual travel and other expenses 
incurred in accordance with and to a maximum of the rates 
payable to members of the public service. 

 
And 10: 
 

“(7) A foundation may pay any travel and other expenses of 
trustees and any other costs of administering the foundation 
from its own money”. 

 
Mr. Chair, it is the feeling of this side of the House that the 
minister has indicated that this is what these people are, are 
simply volunteers that are going to be reimbursed for their 
travelling and other expenses. We believe that those fees should 
be under a certain structure which is the public service, the 
same reimbursement that they would receive. And that, if this is 
the intent of this Bill, that there should be no problem in 
clarifying the language and moving this amendment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — And because it is the intent and because I 
have stated it very clearly, I see no reason for the amendment 
and I would urge the members of the House to pass clause 10 as 
drafted already. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 10 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 11 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 14 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to move an 
amendment to clause 14. And the amendment reads: 
 

Clause 14 of the printed Bill is struck out and the following 
substituted: 

 
“14 A foundation shall be bound by the directions of the 
persons who have made gifts, grants, bequests or 
donations to the foundation.” 
 

And, Mr. Chair, I believe this is what we’ve spoke extensively 
about, that the control of the spending of these bequeaths, gifts, 
or donations should be considered, should be bound . . . this 
foundation should be bound by what the donator wishes the 



2118 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

money to be used for or the donation to be used for. 
 
We do not believe that it should be up to the foundation to make 
the determination of how these gifts will be allocated, and so 
we are moving this amendment to give control of the donation, 
gift, or bequeath to the giver. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Again I would urge the Assembly not to 
accept this amendment. And I’m going to refer again to the 
comments I made with respect to the university foundations. I 
would say that probably in 99.9 per cent of the time they follow 
the wishes of the donor, but they do have to have that flexibility 
not to. And they do need to be able to deal with these things 
with good, sound, practical common sense. 
 
So I would urge defeat of this amendment. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 14 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 15 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Saskatchewan Natural Resources 
Transfer Agreement (Treaty Land Entitlement) 

Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. To assist me in the passage of Bill 34, An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Natural Resources Transfer 
Agreement (Treaty Land Entitlement) Act, I would like to 
introduce Mr. Glen Benedict, the executive director of Indian 
lands and resources in Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good 
afternoon to the minister and to her official. 
 
Mr. Chair, as the minister indicated, Bill No. 34 provides for 
treaty land entitlement agreements for three First Nations: 
Cowessess, Carry The Kettle, and Kawacatoose First Nations. 
 
I notice in the explanatory notes it indicates that this 
amendment provides constitutional certainty that 
Saskatchewan’s obligations to Canada to assist with the 
fulfilment of treaty land entitlements are met. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Chair, if perhaps the minister could 
describe what Saskatchewan’s obligations are. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much. Through the Chair, 
to the member opposite, I would advise you that paragraph 10 
of the NRTA — the Natural Resources Transfer Agreement — 
requires that Saskatchewan set aside unoccupied Crown lands 
as requested by Canada in order for Canada to fulfill its treaty 
obligations. 
 

Now the way that Saskatchewan is fulfilling its NRTA 
obligations is through cash payment instead of land. And we are 
doing that cash compensation over a 12-year period. We also 
will be fulfilling other obligations such as sale of Crown land 
and transfer of Crown minerals. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
as I understand it, this Bill will also allow for future treaty land 
entitlement agreements. Do you at this time have any indication 
as to how many agreements are potentially out there and close 
to being completed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would advise the member that the answer 
to the question is entirely dependent on research from the 
federal government. We’re aware that there are probably about 
seven or eight First Nations that are currently under research 
but that is not something that we are directly involved in. It’s a 
matter of treaty interpretation. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Chair, section 2(2)(d) of the Bill 
speaks to any agreement between the Government of Canada 
and the Government of Saskatchewan whether entered into 
before or after the coming into force of this subsection. 
 
Madam Minister, could you explain the purpose of section 
2(2)(d)? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Yes, I certainly can. As you have very 
correctly pointed out, clauses (2)(a), (b), and (c) deal with very 
specific First Nations being Cowessess, Kawacatoose, and 
Carry The Kettle. But because we are aware that there may be 
other First Nations that would also come under Bill No. 34, 
rather than having to come back and do yet another amendment 
to the Saskatchewan NRTA, we’re building in this broader 
clause. 
 
As you know, the long title to the Act, which is, by virtue of the 
way things work in this legislature, is part of the Act, states, 
quote: 
 

An Act to confirm an Agreement between the Government 
of Canada and the Government of Saskatchewan varying 
the Saskatchewan Natural Resources Transfer Agreement. 

 
And so this sets out the purposes of the Act. The only 
agreement that can be confirmed is one to vary the NRTA. So 
words must be understood and interpreted in their context, and 
the context of this Act is with respect to agreements like the one 
set out in the appendix and the agreements mentioned in clauses 
2(2)(a) through (c). 
 
So the reference to agreement in clause (d) must therefore be a 
reference to the same type of agreement. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and Mr. 
Chair. I have no further questions. I’d like to thank the minister 
and thank her official. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2119 

 

Bill No. 29 — The Student Assistance and Student Aid 
Fund Amendment Act, 2001 

 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Two officials to 
assist in the scrutiny by the Committee of the Whole today. On 
my left is the assistant deputy minister, Lily Stonehouse. And to 
my right is John Janzen, the acting executive director of the 
student financial assistance branch. 
 
And I look forward to the questions of the critic, the hon. 
member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I’d like to welcome 
the minister and his officials. 
 
I have a few questions dealing with this Bill. This Bill enables 
the new student loan program, and I wonder if the minister 
could just briefly outline the differences between the new 
student loan program and the old one, particularly any 
differences in the area of eligibility and assistance levels. 
 
And then maybe, perhaps later on you maybe could talk about 
debt reduction and that sort of thing. We may have some 
follow-up questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I thank the hon. member for his question, 
Mr. Chair. First of all, the purpose of the Bill is to make it 
possible for the province to make payment to the federal 
government on the new administrative arrangement which is 
really what this Bill is all about, is to make it possible to engage 
the new administrative arrangement on the integrated loan that I 
know that the hon. member is familiar with. 
 
On the matter of eligibility, the new student loan program is not 
impacted in the area of eligibility. All of the previous eligibility 
circumstances remain identical and the same. 
 
And on the matter of level of assistance, the answer there is the 
same. The level of assistance, eligibility remains the same. It’s 
not impacted by the integration to student loans nor by this Bill. 
 
In terms of the significant changes in the new integrated student 
loan, what we were able to do was, through the arrangement 
with the federal government, to have the joint administration. 
 
So One Student. One Loan. means not only is it more 
convenient for students because they’re just dealing with a 
single application, a single process in dealing with their student 
loan, it also means that in essence there is just one 
administration. There’d be some separate parts. We can relate it 
to the Canada and Saskatchewan but, in essence, one 
administration. And that enables us then to translate the monies 
that would otherwise be dedicated to administration, to 
improving the program. 
 
And your question there then related to interest relief and debt 
reduction. In terms of interest relief and debt reduction benefits 
for students in repayment, currently as it stands the 

Saskatchewan student . . . on the Saskatchewan student loan, a 
student who runs into difficulty, being unable to repay their 
Saskatchewan student loan, can have interest relief, interest 
frozen for up to a year and a half in total. 
 
On the new arrangement, that expands to the standard of the 
Canada student loan to four and a half years. So on interest 
relief, the Saskatchewan loan standard maximum of a year and 
a half increases to four and a half years. 
 
And on debt reduction, whereas it is currently possible for there 
to be up to a 50 per cent or $10,000 level of reduction on the 
federal portion of the loan, the Canada student loan — 
whichever is the lower of the two — we currently have no debt 
write down . . . debt reduction that is available to students on 
the Saskatchewan portion of the loan. 
 
With the integration, we’re introducing a new benefit to 
students who have difficulty repaying, and that is that the debt 
reduction . . . they can now, after the interest relief has expired, 
then they can be eligible for debt reduction on the 
Saskatchewan student loan of up to 50 per cent or $3,000, 
whichever is the lesser of the two. 
 
Those two factors will be the greatest difference in terms of 
benefits to students. 
 
What’s important for students as well to note, is that they gain 
on the one hand but don’t lose anything on the other hand. 
 
Of significance to many students is to know that the 
Saskatchewan bursary portion of the loan still continues. And 
just to put that into a context, I think I’ve said it before on the 
record in our estimates but not in dealing with this Bill, that last 
year — and I’ll ask the officials to correct me if I’m not correct 
— that on some $62 million in Saskatchewan student loans, 
some $32 million of that was converted to bursaries. 
 
So when people . . . when students will say Saskatchewan has 
one of the, in fact many will arguably say, Saskatchewan has 
the best student loan program in Canada, it will be usually that 
portion that they’re referring to. It’s the bursary that’s applied to 
the initial loan upfront. So students keep that. 
 
We also add the benefits of the Canada student loan, and they 
get . . . the students get the best of both worlds. Canada’s best 
student loan program, Mr. Chairman, just got better. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I wonder if, Mr. Minister, if you could 
. . . In looking through the program guide there’s an area that 
deals with remission. I wonder if you could briefly explain that 
portion in the guide — remission. And it has to do . . . 
remission has to do with special incentives — students may be 
eligible for a provincial benefit called remission. I wonder if 
you could explain that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for his 
question. It’s an important question. And if I could just explain 
very briefly, the remission program is a special incentive 
program that is targeted to encourage participation in 
post-secondary studies for groups that have not traditionally 
participated to a very high level here in our Saskatchewan 
experience. The targeted groups, Mr. Chair, fall into three 



2120 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

categories: single parents; secondly, non-status Indian and 
Métis students; and thirdly, Northerners here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The benefit of the program, Mr. Chair, is this: is that under the 
remission incentive, in the first 60 weeks — 6-0 — 60 weeks of 
post-secondary study, that there is a reduction of their student 
loan in the amount of $75 per week. That would be above and 
beyond the normal bursary that they would be eligible for by 
virtue of the student loan. 
 
The net effect of this, Mr. Chair, is that it will mean, number 
one, for these students, up to $75 times 60, it reduces their loan 
by that much — whatever that figure is, I don’t have it off the 
top of my head. But secondly, the net effect is that it does mean 
as well that for this period of time they will be accumulating no 
debt requirements for repayment of the Saskatchewan student 
loan. It will pay off their Saskatchewan student loan portion of 
their whole student loan. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if there was any 
consideration given to repayment options of student loans under 
this new agreement that would be tailored towards young 
graduates and young people who have started businesses who 
experience, you know, cash flow problems? The whole 
program, I think from what I can see in repayment options so 
far, centre around people, graduates, who are earning a monthly 
income. 
 
But we have a number of young graduates who have gone into 
business . . . started businesses, or whether they be commercial 
or farm businesses and those sorts of things, and quite often 
their ability to pay in those early years of those businesses is 
quite bit different than those people on a monthly salary. Has 
any consideration been given to addressing their needs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in many ways the answer to the 
hon. member’s question goes back to his first question. And it 
really rests with the interest relief portion of the student loan. 
 
The interest relief is there to provide protection for the student 
who’s in a position that they are unable to make payments on 
their student loan. And there can be a whole host of reasons 
why a student may find him or herself in that circumstance. 
And among those circumstances can be the fact that they are 
starting up a business and therefore are not generating personal 
income that makes it possible for them to make the payments at 
that time. 
 
So with this expansion from a year and a half max to four and a 
half years on the Saskatchewan student loan, which brings it in 
harmony now with the four and a half years max on the Canada 
student loan, this really I think is accurate to . . . One way it is 
realistic to reflect it is that it is more student friendly for that 
student who is, following graduation, going about setting up 
their own business and therefore may not be in a position in 
order to make the interest payments for a period of time. 
 
So the answer to your question, the simple answer to your 
question is, yes, it was thought of. And secondly, that the 
changes will facilitate accommodating the realities of financial 
circumstances of the student who’s in that position. 
 
(17:30) 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that answer. I have 
another question that deals with the expenses as mentioned in 
the Bill. The Bill in part says, that the minister may designate 
that any or all expenses incurred by the minister pursuant to this 
agreement are to be paid out of the fund. 
 
I wonder if you could outline what expenses you may have and 
the net effect that those expenses, those dollars coming out of 
the Student Aid Fund. Does this mean that there’ll be less 
dollars in the Student Aid Fund as a result of this agreement or 
is it an effect that won’t really affect the total dollars? Could 
you just explain that part of it, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the hon. member 
and other members’ curiosity, I’m happy to explain that what is 
happening with the fund as a result of this piece of legislation is 
that it permits the payment of a fee to Canada for the service 
provision. 
 
This is compared to the current circumstance where there is a 
risk premium being paid to the Royal Bank for provision of 
services. That will no longer continue; it’ll be replaced by a 
contract and provision of fee for services to Canada for the 
administration. 
 
And those services in essence are the disbursement of funds 
then to students, and the collection of funds, and all of the 
service and communications related to that. 
 
When one looks at the impact of the decisions here, what we 
will be doing is paying substantially less in our fee to Canada 
than we were to the Royal Bank. However, we will be 
providing improved benefits in the interest relief and debt 
reduction. 
 
When you take the savings in the payment of fee to Canada for 
the services, and then you add back in the costs in the 
improvement in the program, they approximately balance one 
another off. And so looking at the cost of servicing and the cost 
of providing the benefits, it’s pretty much fiscally a draw in this 
fiscal year. Which is one of the things that causes me to say this 
is a good deal for . . . this is a good deal both for students, but 
also a good deal for the taxpayers as well. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I indicated to 
colleagues in the House that I would ask one question, and — 
although it may be a double-barrelled question — I guess, as I 
understand the program, the students will apply, submit the 
application to your department, they will be approved. I wonder 
if you could then explain the process as to how the students 
actually access the funds? 
 
In the past they would take their approval to the Royal Bank, 
and then they would . . . the funds would be deposited it into 
their account. How do they do that? 
 
And one other concern and that has to do with repayment. 
Those students who presently have loans under the old student 
loan program and then will be accessing student loan under the 
new program, will they in fact then at the end of the day, when 
they are making repayments, will they then be repaying three 
student loans under that scenario? 
 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2121 

 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. In answer to the 
member’s question, which really had two parts, let me answer it 
with two parts. 
 
First of all, how does the student access the funds? The answer 
there is that the student will receive a certificate which then 
they can take to one of two places, whichever is more 
convenient to them. They can take it to the kiosk, which will be 
on campus. If they’re on one of the campuses here, that’s 
probably most convenient. Or they can take it to a post office — 
either one. And they take it there and indicate what credit union 
or bank they would like to have the deposits made and then 
their instructions are followed. So that’s the way they access the 
funds. 
 
Secondly, in terms of repayment, for those students who 
currently are holding a Canada and Saskatchewan student loan 
that are repayable to the bank that holds those loans, who is still 
continuing as a student, and now with the new system will be 
dealing with a third party, the simple answer is that they will be 
dealing with three parties. And it’s difficult to get around this 
given that the Royal Bank did not determine that it was not 
interested in continuing with the lender agreement that 
previously existed. It became obvious at that point that there 
was going to have to become a third party for students no 
matter what the circumstance was. 
 
So I think we found the simplest of the third parties. It’s a 
single one for both Canada and Saskatchewan student loan. 
 
Will we try and simplify that? The answer is yes. Can I 
guarantee that? The answer is no. Why? Because the current 
lending arrangements with the students are from banks who are 
beyond the control of the department or either government to 
determine how they can roll those into a single payment. 
 
If we can find a way of doing that that is acceptable to all 
parties, including governments of course, then we will and we’ll 
seek to have those kinds of discussions with the banks to that 
end. But at this point in time, there can be no assurance that 
that’s achievable because we don’t know the intentions of the 
banks and their willingness to participate in that discussion. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I’d just simply like to thank the 
hon. member for Last Mountain-Touchwood for his informed 
questions and also for the interest that he’s taken in dealing with 
this matter. I appreciate it very much, his ability to be there for 
the public announcement of the integration of student loans and 
the personal conversations and his support for improving the 
system for students. 
 
I also want to thank the officials for assisting and providing 
responses to his informed questions. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Today with me 
is Ken Pontikes, acting deputy minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation. And on my right, Gord Zakreski, intergovernmental 
and industry liaison. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. 
Madam Minister, I’d like to welcome your officials here. 
 
Looking through the file, Madam Minister, I see that a lot of 
questions have been asked already. There’s been an exchange 
back and forth. I think points have been made. I would just like 
to, for the record, just have you summarize if you would, the 
advantage of the film employment tax credit and why you think 
it has worked so well and would in fact it apply to other areas to 
stimulate the economy? Would you respond to that please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In fact it was the industry that first 
proposed this to the government because they had seen this 
model in operation in other places as a way to stimulate jobs. 
And what it does it provides a waiver of residency that allows a 
film production company to claim the wages paid to certain 
non-Saskatchewan personnel when calculating their tax credit 
and to extend the sunset clause for the waiver of residency 
provisions from December 31 of 2001 to December 31 of 2003. 
 
Now it provides a requirement that the non-Saskatchewan 
personnel may only be used if there’s no qualified 
Saskatchewan resident available. And it provides that the 
non-Saskatchewan personnel be hired expressly for the 
additional purpose of training a Saskatchewan resident. 
 
And we believe that these provisions will allow the industry to 
significantly speed up the process of training Saskatchewan 
residents. So it gives an on-the-job type of training. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Madam Minister, part of the question was, 
if this is deemed successful in terms of developing an economic 
strategy, would it be applicable to other areas of economic 
development? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well we’ve certainly seen in this case 
that it’s helped to stimulate activity in the area. But we also find 
that as the industry grows, there’s other parts that are needed. 
So in tax discussions and finance, usually it’s members of a 
particular sector that bring forward the tax proposals. So I’m 
certain that if people were to bring forward the proposal it 
would be considered seriously. But at this point this is the major 
part of the sector that we’ve had this request from. 
 
I think there’s people in recording and post-production that are 
interested but we haven’t actually examined how that might fit 
in a mix of tax reductions. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Madam Minister, I know it’s a very short 
amount of time but I wanted to thank your officials for being 
here. And we have no other questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 



2122 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2001 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
The Chair: — Does the minister have further officials to 
introduce? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We have joining us, Lynnette Skaalrud, 
legislation and regulation specialist. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Madam Minister, 
welcome to you and welcome to your officials. I thank you very 
much for taking this time. 
 
Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, this piece of legislation is a very 
important one and I think that it would be appropriate if we did 
spend some time asking some questions and getting some 
answers on it. And I know we are getting into the supper hour 
so I will be as quick but as thorough as possible. 
 
This legislation talks about a new funding strategy for the 
Associated Entities Fund. If the minister would, could she take 
a few minutes to give us a broad outline of where they hope this 
Bill is going in helping Métis people? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I thank the member for her question 
and of course, as you do know, that we’ve had this fund before. 
This is largely a set of amendments to improve the operations of 
the fund. 
 
Now one was to change the name of the Associated Entities 
Fund to the Community Initiatives Fund. I think everybody 
always thinks of entities as those things from outer space so it 
was thought important to make the name something a little 
more connected to what the fund actually does. 
 
As well it increases the number of members on the fund 
because it was felt that the board of trustees could use some 
additional representation. So that will go from six to eight. 
 
It confirms that the monies who were paid to the Métis 
Development Fund comprise a portion of the 25 per cent of 
gaming proceeds that go to the Community Initiatives Fund. 
And as well it makes the reporting requirements for the 
Community Initiatives Fund consistent with The Tabling of 
Documents Act, 1991. 
 
It gives the Lieutenant Governor in Council authority to make 
regulations for the purposes of the Community Initiatives Fund 
to improve effectiveness, transparency of adjudication, and 
decision-making processes for the monies that are granted from 
the Community Initiatives Fund. 
 
And finally it sets out the terms and the conditions for the 
establishment of the Métis Development Fund. It provides for a 
very significant degree of transparency and financial 
accountability, including full access to the records of the fund 
by the Provincial Auditor. And these provisions were developed 

with the input and full co-operation of the Métis Society. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
Madam Minister, we have some very serious concerns on this 
side of the House — and many people around the province have 
— regarding the issue of accountability with the many problems 
that have been well documented within the SLGA 
(Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) and SIGA 
(Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) recently. 
 
Could the minister please tell the House and assure the people 
of Saskatchewan that the funds will be properly distributed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much. We’ve never 
had any problems with the AEF (Associated Entities Fund) fund 
because of the trustees and the representatives of the 
community who are part of this decision-making process. 
 
But even in not having had any problems, we’ve still taken 
steps in this Bill to strengthen even further the accountability to 
the Provincial Auditor. And this makes it very different from a 
situation where there might be some type of more arm’s-length 
audit process. 
 
We have confidence obviously as well in the private auditors, 
but this brings it right to the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
Madam Minister, could you please share with the House exactly 
what is in the Bill to make sure that all sides are accountable 
and to make sure the money will go where it is in fact directed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Probably the greatest tool we have is 
the ability to revoke the fund if all the provisions aren’t met in 
terms of transparency and accountability and access by the 
auditor. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
Madam Minister, we on this side of the House understand the 
need for social growth within the Métis people of 
Saskatchewan. That is needed, and we appreciate the efforts 
that the government makes. 
 
But accountability is a major part of this, and I do have a 
question regarding what discussions the minister and her 
department may have had with the Métis groups around 
Saskatchewan in terms of setting this up, as who did you talk to 
and what were you told? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now just to be clear, this fund 
mentioned here is for economic development. And there’s a 
specific agreement that’s negotiated with the Department of 
Economic Development that lays out exactly what the monies 
can be used for. And that agreement is then signed by both 
parties, and audited according to the provisions of that 
agreement. 
 
And again, certainly we think there is a need for economic 
development in the Métis community and that they’ve had less 
access to resources than, for example, the First Nations have. 
 
So this is trying to deal with that inequity but to have the 
Department of Economic Development involved in negotiating 



June 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2123 

 

that agreement. with both parties signing. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Actually you 
answered the question I was going to ask next. My previous 
question was actually, which stakeholders did you meet with? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In matters of this kind we deal with the 
elected representatives of the Métis Society. And having been, a 
few portfolios back, the minister responsible for this area, we at 
that time had extensive discussions about the need for such a 
fund. And it was a long time coming. And I know that over 
several changes in the electorate within the Métis Society there 
has still been strong support for this fund. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
Madam Minister, did you have any contact with the locals 
directly? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess the best way I could answer that 
would be with the elected officials. And sometimes the people 
who are elected to the central executive are from the regions 
and whatnot. But it depends on who they elect would be the 
representatives that we meet with. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you. And, Madam Minister, could you 
tell me how the funds will be dispersed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes. The board of trustees, in keeping 
with the agreement signed with Economic Development, would 
let potential applicants know what the criteria are for applying 
to the fund. They would apply to the fund and the board of 
trustees would adjudicate the request. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
Madam Minister, I would just like to talk about the 
management board for a minute here. Section 25.3, it states: 
 

The management board for the fund is to be appointed . . . 
 
My question to you, Madam Minister, is: could you please give 
me an update on how this board will work? You’ve already 
stated that there will be eight people on it rather than the six that 
were on it previously. And how will it be broken down between 
the government and the Métis people? And will there be set 
terms of service, and if so, for how long? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The actual members of the board of 
trustees are from the Métis Society appointments. And then 
they are supplemented by a representative from Economic 
Development and a representative from Aboriginal Affairs. So 
the government is not a decision maker at that table but is there 
as part of the advisory and working process. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I hear 
expressions of hunger from that side so I will ask one more 
question and then I will turn it over to my colleague. 
 
In light of the disaster that took place within SLGA and SIGA, 
what parameters are in place to make sure that there are proper 
audits in place so that the board does its job properly? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I guess the assurance that I would 
give the member is that we do have staff directly represented on 

the board of trustees. As well there’s a signed document where 
both parties agree on the purposes for which the money can be 
used and that the Provincial Auditor in a very close relationship 
— it’s not arm’s length, it’s a very close relationship — would 
have a direct role in auditing in relationship to the agreement. 
And I think that provides quite a few safeguards. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Madam 
Minister, and thank you to your officials as well. And I’ll turn it 
over to my colleague from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, my question deals with the allocation of funds to the 
community funds initiative. Now I believe your original 
agreement was that the government received a certain 
percentage of the revenues from gaming, that that was the 
government got a percentage, First Nations Fund got a 
percentage, and a percentage went to the agricultural boards, 
and there may have been another name for those organizations. 
 
How will that distribution continue? Where will this new fund 
fit into it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This portion of the money comes out of 
the AEF portion of the formula. There’s the FNF (First Nations 
Fund), the AEF, and the GRF (General Revenue Fund). All 
those Fs but they still got a passing grade. 
 
Anyway what the Métis portion is, is 25 per cent of the 25 per 
cent that the AEF gets. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Chair: — It being past the time of 5 p.m., this committee 
stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 
 
 


