















































Hansard: June 26, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  
 June 26, 2001 
 

 

2141 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
again on behalf of citizens concerned with the hospital facilities 
in my hometown of Swift Current. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of 
their petition this afternoon reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today the petitioners are from the communities of 
Admiral, Frontier, Rush Lake, Hodgeville, Regina, and the city 
of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise today to read a petition from citizens concerned about 
cellular telephone coverage in their area. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in districts of Rabbit 
Lake, Hafford, Blaine Lake, Leask, Radisson, Borden, 
Perdue, Maymont, Mistawasis, and Muskeg Lake. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Rabbit Lake and Glenbush. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present, to do with the lack of funding to non-profit 
personal care homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the towns of Esterhazy, 
Togo, Kamsack, and Runnymede. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens concerned about the high cost of energy: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Signed by the good citizens from Elbow, Tugaske, Loreburn, 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition from concerned 
citizens of Saskatchewan in regards to the gas and oil revenues 
and rebates. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Duck Lake, Mildred, Spiritwood, La Ronge, the Witchekan 
Lake First Nations, Shell Lake, Glaslyn, and Mayfair. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present petitions 
concerning the restoration of Government House in Battleford. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to designate the restoration of 
Territorial House in Battleford as a centenary project and 
provide the necessary funds to complete the project prior to 
the Saskatchewan 2005 centennial celebrations. 

 
Your petitioners come from North Battleford, Mayfair, and 
Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province petitioning the 
Assembly on eight matters that are addendums to previously 
tabled petitions. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Recognition of Government Employees 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In this year’s 
Provincial Ombudsman report, members of the public service 
were recognized for their commitment to fairness and their 
exceptional effort in their everyday dealings with the public and 
their co-workers. 
 
Recognized in this year’s Kudos Honour Role are: Gordon 
Barnes who works for SaskPower in Yorkton; Rose Ann Baum 



2142 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

of Post-Secondary Education in Regina; Les Bell of Highways 
and Transportation in Regina; Isobel Coats at SaskTel in 
Saskatoon; Carol Fiedelleck from Saskatoon branch of Justice; 
Arlene Franko from SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) in Regina; Bev Huget from Social Services in 
Regina; Evelyn Hynes from Social Services in Saskatoon; Doug 
Kelly from Highways and Transportation in Regina; Tom 
Laverty from Justice in Saskatoon; Bill Maximiuk from Justice 
in Regina; Linda McNaughton of the Sask Housing Corporation 
branch in Regina; Ron Nicolson from Justice in Regina; and 
Dan O’Hanlon from Justice in North Battleford. 
 
I want to offer congratulations on behalf of all members in the 
Assembly to all of these fine members of the public service. We 
appreciate the hard work and dedication you have to your jobs 
and to the people of Saskatchewan. On behalf of all of us, we 
thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Fuel Ethanol Workshop and Trade Show 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had 
the pleasure just recently of attending the International Fuel 
Ethanol Workshop and Trade Show in Minnesota. It was a 
fantastic opportunity to listen and learn from people who are 
not just studying ethanol production but are actually making it 
happen. 
 
There were a number of presenters from various countries who 
described what their government was doing for initiatives to 
stimulate the industry. All of the keynote speakers at the 
conference from around the world had different strategies in 
place to create the necessary environment to encourage ethanol 
production. 
 
Of interest, Mr. Speaker, was the parliamentarian from 
Thailand. That government took less than a year to put close to 
10 policies in place to get things up and running for their 
country. It was especially encouraging to hear Mr. Bless Baker, 
president of the Canadian Renewable Fuels Association, 
announce Canada’s goal is to increase our production to one 
billion litres by the year 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I live just a short distance from Saskatchewan’s 
only existing ethanol plant so I have a special interest in this 
industry. I see first-hand what an asset it is to our community 
and how good it is for the environment. 
 
Although I did not see the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley, who is heading the ethanol study, at the conference, it is 
my hope that this government, who has been promising to bring 
in full-scale ethanol production for years, will get the ball up 
and rolling before another 10 years passes them by. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. As members . . . Order please. As 
members know, there’s only 90 seconds allowed for a member 
statement and I think members would appreciate if we could be 
able to hear the entire statement. And I ask members to keep 
their voices down during member statements. 
 

Contaminated Site Clean Ups 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, some of us will remember that a few years ago, on an 
otherwise quiet day, two blocks of downtown Mexico blew up. 
This because of a faulty underground gas tank, which leaked 
into the sewer system and then ignited. 
 
It has happened and it can happen again. Or less dramatic but 
equally harmful, underground tanks can leak into the water 
system causing serious contamination. 
 
There are several abandoned and more than 300 orphaned 
underground gas tank sites in Saskatchewan, which pose a 
potential hazard to the environment and to public health. That is 
why I am very pleased that SERM (Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management) has initiated a program in 
co-operation with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) to assist communities in clean-up efforts. 
Through the Centenary Capital Fund, the province has 
dedicated $1.73 million over two years to clean up the orphaned 
sites, those where the original owners no longer exist and 
municipalities are the current owners. 
 
This makes good environmental sense, Mr. Speaker, and also 
good economics because these cleaned-up sites may once again 
be used for commercial purposes. 
 
I also want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that responsible 
businesses and co-ops throughout Saskatchewan are actively 
cleaning up their own sites. At the risk of being exclusive, I’d 
like to for instance congratulate the Beeland Co-op of Tisdale 
for undertaking the clean up of its former bulk fuel station 
which can then continue to be used for commercial purposes. 
 
This is just one good example, Mr. Speaker, of the excellent 
clean-up projects that are underway. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Young Inventor from Craik 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I proudly rise in the 
House today to talk about a constituent of mine from the 
community of Craik. Mr. Curt Heinen is a young inventor of the 
age of 25 who has designed and built a new invention called the 
grease saver. This device is a small steel cylinder that fits over 
the nozzle of a standard-sized grease gun and locks any 
common grease needle firmly in place. 
 
This resourceful young man is an expert with the lathe work 
and fine machining tools that put his . . . his expertise was put to 
the test to develop this new product for agriculture and 
industrial use. 
 
Mr. Heinen had the opportunity to display his new invention at 
the recent Farm Progress Show. There he sold over 200 units 
and received a lot of interest from individuals, companies who 
may be ordering these new units in large numbers. 
 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2143 

 

The success of this gentleman’s achievement is even more 
remarkable due to the fact that Mr. Heinen was born without 
sight but Mr. Heinen has never let his blindness hold him back 
from achieving. He uses modern technology to increase his 
abilities in his profession. 
 
Most of his tools from the lathe to the drill work are done by 
talking tools wired to a voice box which always gives Mr. 
Heinen the exact measurements that he’s dealing with on his 
new products. 
 
I would like to personally congratulate Curt Heinen on his 
achievement and look forward to the many new inventions I 
believe he will be making in the future. 
 
I would ask that all members of the Assembly join me in 
honouring Mr. Curt Heinen today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Official Opening of Ruth Robinson Place 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I stand before the House today in 
recognition of an important project that officially opened 
yesterday in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Saskatchewan Municipal Affairs and Housing provided a 
$600,000 capital grant to the Saskatoon Housing Coalition to 
purchase and renovate an existing 12-unit apartment building. 
This building, to be used by people suffering from mental 
illness, will develop a supportive and secure living 
environment. Ruth Robinson Place was the name given to the 
new building. 
 
People with mental health issues are at greater risk than others 
in the general population of becoming homeless, and projects 
like Ruth Robinson Place help address this concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ruth Robinson has been given the honour to have 
this project named after her. She is a constituent of mine and a 
former Saskatoon citizen of the year. Mrs. Robinson has served 
as a volunteer in various capacities with the Saskatoon coalition 
since it was formed in 1983. Her dedication to the Saskatoon 
coalition, the city of Saskatoon, and the spiritual wealth of the 
province is second to none, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to congratulate Ruth Robinson on this very 
distinguished recognition and wish her and her namesake the 
best of luck into the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Trapshooting 
Provincial Championship Winner 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to bring to 
the attention of this legislature an outstanding achievement in 
trapshooting by a long-term resident of Lloydminster. 
 
Brian Sheppard achieved distinction recently by winning 
trapshooting version of the grand slam in the Saskatchewan 
trapshooting provincial championships held in Macklin two 
weeks ago. Brian achieved this coveted and elusive handicap 

championship to complete this four-piece winning set. 
 
In this most challenging of events, Brian was able to knock 
down ninety-five out of a hundred targets, one better than the 
closest contender — a most impressive achievement. Brian 
already holds Saskatchewan titles in the singles, the doubles, 
the all around scoring. He now has bragging rights as the 2001 
Saskatchewan all around title. 
 
In addition, he already owns Canadian singles and doubles titles 
and he’ll be leaving tomorrow for Brandon for the national 
championships — his eye set on the national handicap and the 
national all around champion. Congratulations to this 
exceptional athlete, Brian Sheppard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Payment for Requested Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance Medical Reports 

 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance and Saskatchewan 
Medical Association working committee has recently made a 
number of improvements to the policies of SGI’s medical 
review unit. One of the most significant changes to the review 
unit’s policies involves the payment for medical reports that 
have been requested by SGI. 
 
Saskatchewan is the only province in Canada to move to 
assisting motorists with these costs. In the past, drivers who 
have indicated they’ve had a medical condition, which may 
affect their driving, were required to pay for all the medical 
reports SGI requested. Mr. Speaker, SGI will now pay a portion 
of these costs for their requested medical information. 
 
By working closely with the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical 
Association), SGI is confident that the service being provided to 
drivers with medical restrictions on their licences while 
ensuring the safety to all drivers on the roads. Mr. Speaker, 
through improvements such as these, SGI is continuing with its 
ongoing efforts to enhance and provide highly valued customer 
service. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Declining Population 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan’s population is dropping like a rock, 
thanks to the NDP. In the first quarter of 2001, our population 
has dropped by nearly 2,000 people. In the past year 
Saskatchewan’s population fell by over 5,000 people. That 
represents the worst population loss in Saskatchewan in over a 
decade. Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the NDP’s economic 
policies are disastrous. They are driving people and jobs out of 
Saskatchewan at an ever-increasing rate. 
 



2144 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

My question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, why is your NDP 
government driving . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Please rephrase your question through the 
Chair. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government 
driving people out of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is a matter of concern 
I’m sure to every member of this legislature and to the province 
generally when we see the population decline or the job loss or 
young people leaving the province. We ought all to be 
concerned and this government takes it very seriously, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That said . . . that said, Mr. Speaker, let us also look at what is 
happening in this province to provide employment, to provide 
new life for communities, to provide opportunities for our 
young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just refer members opposite to this month’s 
publication of Saskatchewan Business — Sask Business — 
from the business community in Saskatchewan. They talk in 
this publication of things that are happening around the 
province. They talk about significant employment gains — 
gains, Mr. Speaker, in the non-agricultural sector. They talk 
about the significant growth in the retail sector. They talk about 
growth in gross domestic product. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some are looking at the positive things that are 
happening in Saskatchewan. Our colleagues opposite should do 
that as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure after 
much research you can find an article like that. But, Mr. 
Premier, our population is dropping. It’s in a nose-dive, thanks 
to the NDP government. 
 
Saskatchewan has just suffered the worst year of out-migration 
in over a decade. From April 1, 2000 to April 1, 2001 
Saskatchewan suffered net out-migration to other provinces of 
over 9,000 people. That is, we had 20,000 people move into 
Saskatchewan, but we had 30,000 people move out of 
Saskatchewan. For every two people that move into 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, three people move out to get away 
from that NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a huge problem for our province. It is the 
worst period of population loss since the NDP came to power. 
And it’s been getting worse since this Premier took office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the Premier and his government driving so 
many people — 30,000 people — out of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member 
opposite would recognize, and many would recognize, that 

some of the great difficulty we’re having is in the, in the ag 
sector, Mr. Speaker. And the member will know that this is not 
unique to Saskatchewan, but in ag-producing provinces and 
states we’re all having some of these same difficulties. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do not know why it is that members of the 
opposition seem to take such glee in this. And that opinion is 
being asked today in the editorial pages of the Regina 
Leader-Post where Mr. Marty Klyne in a letter to the editor 
says the following: 
 

There are those who will take some inexplicable pleasure in 
playing this up and scaring others into believing that the 
sky is falling. 

 
Well, then Mr. Klyne goes on to review some of the facts from 
this city alone — just from the city of Regina — when he says: 
 

In the first five months of this year, Regina’s total 
employment is up by almost 300 . . . jobs. 
 
Job growth in Regina over the next five years is expected to 
average nearly two per cent per year. That’s almost 2,000 
new jobs per year, or 10,000 new jobs over the next five 
years. 

 
In Regina alone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter what kind of 
a spin that the NDP try and put on these. These numbers are 
disastrous and if you don’t face up to them, they’re going to 
continue to be disastrous. 
 
Over 9,000 people have been lost to out-migration. That’s the 
entire population of the city of Weyburn, Saskatchewan — 
9,000 people packed up and left last year. Meanwhile other 
provinces are growing their population, all over Canada. Let’s 
look to our neighbour to the East. Manitoba’s population has 
grown by over 4,000 people. 
 
And what about Alberta? Should we mention Alberta? Fifty 
thousand people have moved into Alberta; their population has 
grown. It’s only the NDP Saskatchewan that is hemorrhaging 
jobs and people to other provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the worst population loss in a decade; that’s this 
Premier’s record. Why is Saskatchewan’s population dropping 
like a rock? It’s kind of similar to the NDP in BC (British 
Columbia) dropping like a rock. 
 
Why is the NDP driving so many people out of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve referred to recent 
articles in Saskatchewan Business, and an article from The 
Leader-Post today. Let me refer this member to an article from 
the World Spectator, Moosomin, Saskatchewan, where the 
editor writes: 
 

How are things in Saskatchewan (he says), I asked, slowly 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2145 

 

repeating the question to give myself some time to gather 
my thoughts. They’re not too bad, I said. 
 

Listen to this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Despite what one may hear from the Saskatchewan Party 
whose members are intent on making things sound so 
gloomy and beyond hope so that they may one day become 
rulers of this great province, things aren’t bad at all, I said, 
especially in eastern Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, what have we heard during this session from this 
opposition by way of progressive or positive change? What 
have we heard by way of solution? They stand in this House 
day after day, criticizing, criticizing the people of 
Saskatchewan, criticizing business people in Saskatchewan. 
What have we heard by way of one possible solution? None, 
Mr. Speaker. Not one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — It’s interesting, from the other side they 
always like to call doom and gloom. It’s their doom and gloom; 
it’s their numbers — 9,000 people. 
 
It’s no mystery why our province is hemorrhaging people. 
People go where the jobs are. And last year this NDP 
government killed 21,000 jobs in this province — 21,000 jobs 
you’ve killed. That is the worst number since the Great 
Depression, and it’s all happened since this Premier took office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the job loss is incredible — since the last Great 
Depression, the worst population loss in a decade. That’s this 
Premier’s record and it’s absolutely dismal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Premier and his government have absolutely 
no plan for the future; no vision for the future; and no hope of 
growing an economy. Why? Will the Premier admit that his 
economic record is an absolute disaster? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, several days ago the 
opposition came in to this House, had a press conference, paid 
$8,500 to have their own consultant study the circumstances in 
Saskatchewan. Their own consultant, Mr. Speaker, their own 
consultant points to the to the hurt that’s happening in 
Saskatchewan as a result of the agricultural sector. 
 
Now this is what their own consultant says. Fundamentally, 
fundamentally, this relatively modest growth is the result of the 
combination of the agricultural base of Saskatchewan coupled 
with the fact that it is the information technology 
knowledge-based tax . . . (inaudible) . . . of Ontario and Alberta 
which will lead Canada’s growth. 

 
Their own consultant says the province will grow. Their own 
consultant says it will grow, albeit at a smaller rate than we all 
would hope for. So what are we doing about it? They criticize. 
They do not come with one positive suggestion or solution. Not 
one. Not one. 
 
We have released the partnership for progress, we are taking 

steps to grow our energy industry, we are working with our 
farming people. This is a government that solves problems not 
just raises them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier just said that yes, 
we may grow modestly. If the growing is losing 9,000 people, 
then that’s how you’re going to be growing this province . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Once again, once again . . . Order, please. 
Order. Once again, I ask the member to direct his remarks 
through the Chair. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, let’s go through these 
numbers one more time: 21,000 jobs lost in the past year. Who 
said it? StatsCanada, Mr. Speaker. The worst job loss since the 
Great Depression. That’s the NDP record. 
 
Let’s try 9,000 people in net out-migration last year. Whose 
numbers? StatsCanada’s numbers, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
worst population loss in over a decade. That’s the NDP 
numbers. Saskatchewan is hemorrhaging jobs and people. It’s 
an absolute disaster because of this government. 
 
When is the Premier going to stop making excuses and excuses 
and excuses and start fixing his failing policies — policies that 
are driving more and more people out of Saskatchewan. When 
are you going to fix your policies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Would the member care 
to rephrase his question? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when will this Premier fix his 
policies and start growing the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have in my hand the 
Partnership for Prosperity, a plan of action developed with the 
people of Saskatchewan to take on the economic challenges and 
build this province. Mr. Speaker, page after page of progressive 
suggestion. We talk about the need to work with you. We talk 
about the need for growth and prosperity in our key sectors. We 
need . . . we talk about the need to work with our private 
investors, our private business, our Crown corporations, our 
co-operative sector. We talk about the need for revitalizing rural 
Saskatchewan, all with targets, all with plans, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I say to you and I say to them — where, Mr. Speaker, is their 
plan? Where is one suggestion? Well the only plan I’ve ever 
heard, the only plan I’ve ever heard is to cut taxes. That’s the 
only plan I’ve ever heard from them in a way that they cannot 
demonstrate is sustainable, in a way that they know is only 
going to benefit certain segments of our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have developed a plan. We are implementing 
the plan and we’re working with Saskatchewan to make sure 
that plan brings the prosperity of which we speak. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2146 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

SaskEnergy Rates 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Minister responsible for SaskEnergy. 
 
Last night, Regina City Council voted in favour of shopping 
around for the best price for natural gas. A recent report 
prepared for the city says that SaskEnergy’s current price is, 
and I quote, “higher than the current market price,” and 
suggests that the city would save at least $60,000 over the year 
and may in fact save up to $120,000 — that’s a substantial 
savings. 
 
So the city of Regina is going to negotiate a contract to buy 
natural gas from another private supplier in the province, and 
that’s good for the city of Regina and its residents. 
 
But it begs a question, Mr. Speaker. Why is SaskEnergy, a 
publicly owned member of the family of Crown corporations, 
overcharging for natural gas? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a week or so ago 
when I answered this question — it was raised by the member 
at that time — it was clear that at that point that I said that 
competition does exist in the sale of natural gas here in 
Saskatchewan. That’s been evidenced by the example that the 
member raises. This is nothing new, Mr. Speaker. The city of 
Regina has purchased gas from other companies before and 
they’ve come back to SaskEnergy. 
 
And I think if the member refers to the story — in The 
Leader-Post I believe that ran — even the city itself says 
they’re not sure that this was the right decision to make. It could 
well be if SaskEnergy is able to purchase gas later on at lower 
rates, that they might have been better to stay with SaskEnergy. 
So this was no guarantee. And that was acknowledged by the 
city, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Part of the reason 
why the city of Regina may have made the decision that they 
did make last night is the fact that SaskEnergy is currently 
charging $6.30 a gigajoule. Today’s spot price is $4.06 a 
gigajoule, and today’s one-year contract price is $4.66 a 
gigajoule. And when you add in the cost that the government 
says you must add in per gigajoule, which is 50 cents, you still 
get a rate, you still get a long-term rate that’s 27 per cent lower 
than what Saskatchewan people are paying today to 
SaskEnergy. That’s why the city of Regina concluded that they 
could go with a private supplier over SaskEnergy, why they 
decided it’s time to consider other suppliers. 
 
And they’re not the only ones, Mr. Speaker. The Humboldt 
Separate School Division has signed a three-year contract with 
CEG Energy for gas. They expect to save as much as $1,500 
from the switch. 
 
The question is simple, Mr. Speaker. Why is SaskEnergy 

insisting on overcharging for natural gas when it’s actually 
losing large-volume customers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, CEG 
specializes in commercial clients. Many of the customers that 
the member refers to . . . this is nothing new. I mean this has 
happened before. 
 
And again the member, or the expert, Mr. Speaker, refers to the 
spot price. Well today he’s advocating that we buy on the spot 
market. I mean, I’m not an expert and he’s not an expert; we 
should leave that to the people who are experts. 
 
And if I refer, Mr. Speaker, to the city, even they say — and 
here it is in The Leader-Post yesterday — it says: however city 
manager Bob Linner admitted there is no guarantee. He says 
what you’re doing is taking a calculated risk into the future, he 
said. So they’ve taken a calculated risk. 
 
SaskEnergy, if they’re able to lock in prices at lower prices and 
achieve savings — additional savings I should say — this will 
be passed on to SaskEnergy’s customers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this NDP government 
and that minister went to great lengths to take credit for 
SaskEnergy’s gas purchasing policies late last year when they 
were indeed providing low prices to Saskatchewan people. So it 
is completely fair that the people of Saskatchewan would expect 
that minister to stand up and be accountable when those prices 
seem to have us paying more than we should for natural gas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s the bottom line today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people don’t have the options that 
the city of Regina does or that the separate school division in 
Humboldt have because CEG and other suppliers aren’t yet 
ready to begin offering their gas services to residential 
customers and small customers of natural gas. And since they 
don’t have that option, Mr. Speaker, they must rely on the 
government and the minister and SaskEnergy. 
 
There is mounting evidence that the NDP is overcharging 
SaskEnergy customers. Will the minister be directing 
SaskEnergy to consider an application of the rate review panel 
or to adjust its price, lowering the price of natural gas for 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the one thing that 
SaskEnergy customers do have in this case, Mr. Speaker, is they 
have a guaranteed maximum with an opportunity — and I want 
to emphasize this — an opportunity to achieve even more 
savings and even a lower price, unlike the customers that this 
member refers to, the commercial customers. They’re locked in 
at a price now, which may or may not be better than what 
SaskEnergy can offer. 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2147 

 

But SaskEnergy has assured, through the process and the 
application to the Rate Review Panel, that $6.30 is the absolute 
maximum. If prices continue to decline, Mr. Speaker, if they 
continue to decline and SaskEnergy is able to achieve additional 
savings, this is good, this is a good thing and will be passed on 
to the SaskEnergy customers, Mr. Speaker. This is a good thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Conflict of Interest Guidelines at the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Liquor and Gaming minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in September 1995 Liquor and Gaming president 
Paul Weber sent a memo around to liquor store employees 
warning them, Mr. Speaker, of the rules against accepting free 
gifts from industry representatives. The memo said, and I quote: 
 

Accepting or soliciting products from industry will result in 
severe disciplinary action against the individuals involved. 

 
That’s the same Paul Weber, Mr. Speaker, that solicited and 
accepted free Leaf tickets from Corby, Wiser’s and accepted 
free trips to the Bahamas from Corby, Wiser’s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why the double standard? Why did Paul Weber 
threaten severe disciplinary action against others accepting 
freebies and then turn around and do exactly the same thing 
himself? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I have to stress that this 
information comes out of Justice Wakeling’s report to us. It’s 
not the government’s report; it’s not Liquor and Gaming’s 
report; it’s a respected, retired Justice’s report to us stating, yes, 
solicitation is not proper conduct. But what he also states, 
because of the circumstances surrounding this, that further 
discipline would be unreasonable and unjust. 
 
I have the Justice Wakeling’s report. I have his 
recommendation. On one hand this member says, respect 
Justice Kyle’s recommendations and his findings. On the other 
now he’s saying, but now you should not respect a retired 
Justice in our community who did a full . . . who has done a full 
report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on one hand he’s asking me to do this, and on the other hand 
that. What I said to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I have asked 
for this reporting to occur. The full investigation has occurred. I 
will respect the recommendations of the Justice Wakeling 
report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For day two the 
minister is trying to hide behind the Justice. Justice Wakeling 
said that those Toronto Leaf tickets, those Leaf tickets, were 
wrong — that Weber should not have taken those tickets. 
 
This government fired Mr. Dosenberger, punished Ms. Swan. 

What are they going to do with Mr. Weber? Are they going to 
be hypocritical and have two sets of justice or are they going to 
be fair and treat everyone the same way? What are you going to 
do? 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll just remind the member about the way he 
words his question. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I said in this Assembly, 
human resources have many issues attached to them. 
 
In the response to Justice Kyle, I respected the opinion of that 
Justice and the outcome of the court. In the respect of Ms. 
Swan, there were other circumstances there that have been 
thoroughly looked at and discussed. And with respect to Mr. 
Weber, we have a report now before us from Justice Wakeling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only double standard in this Assembly is 
coming from that member who says if the report says this and 
it’s slamming the government, go for it. If the report says this 
and says don’t act in an unjust and unfair manner, we should go 
for it anyway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not going there. I’m respecting the report that 
was presented to us in an unbiased and a judicial manner, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister has 
still failed to answer the question. The question was why the 
double standard? You take two people and you discipline them 
severely because they got the government into the mud. Well, 
on comes Justice Wakeling and said that Mr. Weber should not 
have taken those tickets — especially when they’re Leaf tickets, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what is this government going to do? When are you going 
to change your double standards . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member to rephrase his 
question through the Chair please. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — When is the minister going to treat everyone 
the same way and deal with these three people in the same 
manner? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, on the one hand the 
member says we should respect the decision of justice. We 
should respect the decisions that have been given to us, which 
we’ve done. Justice Kyle had his report and his 
recommendation. We accepted that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we have the report, Mr. Speaker, I would say that was 
commissioned to help to clear the air. Some of the comments 
from the members opposite were incorporated into the terms of 
reference so we could clear the air on this matter, and now we 
will follow Justice Wakeling’s recommendations, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s no double standard here. 
 
The member opposite knows full well that on page 20 of Justice 



2148 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

Wakeling’s report he states: 
 

I do not recommend that charges be laid against Mr. Weber 
or discipline be initiated for the reasons provided in my 
report. Nor do I see that further investigation by police is 
required. 

 
Mr. Speaker, he also stated . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The thing that this 
minister evades in all of her answers is the responsibility for her 
supervisory actions that she should be taking to ensure that 
these things weren’t happening the way they are in her 
department. Completely inept, Mr. Speaker; completely inept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what upsets people most about this case is that 
rules are not fairly applied. Most people have to follow the law 
but some senior government officials are allowed to break the 
law. Mr. Speaker, there are all kinds of laws in this province 
that some people may not like. They still have to follow them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, above all others, the people who enforce the law 
should be expected to uphold the law. What kind of message 
does this send to the province’s liquor regulator is allowed to 
ignore its own laws? Why the double standard? Why are others 
expected to follow liquor laws when the senior officials are 
allowed to ignore the liquor laws? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 
making it sound like there is no guideline within the Authority. 
At some point it was thoroughly discussed and conflict of 
interest guidelines were put in place to try and reflect what they 
believed to be the wishes of the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Wakeling says the Authority has guidelines to 
reflect modern industry and community practices, which Justice 
Wakeling described as quite reasonable. He also states, Mr. 
Speaker, we should move immediately to make regulatory 
changes necessary to reflect those practices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re pleased that Justice Wakeling provided this clear 
direction to us. The specific changes that are going to be 
determined would be presented in the form of an amendment 
which he will have a chance to discuss, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would ask of the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, what would 
you do with Justice Wakeling’s . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would remind the minister as well to direct 
all of her responses through the Chair. Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. members would 
cast their glance to your gallery, we would see an old friend of 
the Assembly seated in the gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Lori Rosom, who not many days ago had her place on the floor 
of the Assembly and after having served the members of the 
Assembly as a page from March through May, left to take 
employment. I understand she’s returned to Regina to attend her 
graduation from Winston Knoll tomorrow, and she’s getting a 
different perspective of the operations of the House today. 
 
I’d ask all hon. members to welcome back a friend of the 
Assembly, Lori Rosom. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, to you and to my colleagues 
in the Assembly here, I’d like to introduce a lady who’s spent 
some time with the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, that’s 
here today to visit. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Ms. Susan 
Graham. I would ask all members to welcome her to the 
Assembly here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Convert, please. And 
by leave, Mr. Speaker, I would like to table a correction to 
written question no. 214. 
 
The Speaker: — Item 236 has been converted and a correction 
has been received for item 214. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Leave to move to government 
business. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(14:15) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Hearing Aid Sales and Services Act 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask him to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me this afternoon, Drew Johnston, who’s the project 
manager with acute and emergency services branch, and 
Kathleen Peterson, who’s the legislative policy analyst with the 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2149 

 

policy and planning branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome, Minister, 
and welcome to your officials this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like you, first of all when we talk about 
Bill 26, is to . . . if you would please outline some of the 
conditions that we were and are experiencing in the province 
that motivated you to bring forward this legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the reason that this legislation 
has come forward relates to the number of complaints that came 
forward from people, both about hearing aids as consumer 
products, but also about some of the concerns about how the 
products were sold. 
 
And so as a result of those complaints — many of them, which 
came through the Department of Justice consumer affairs 
branch but also came through the Health department — it was 
agreed that we should meet with the people in the industry and 
come forward with some legislation which would regulate this 
area. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, I understand 
in our deliberations and in doing some research on this Bill, that 
indeed the Saskatchewan Association of Speech-Language 
Pathologists and Audiologists as well as the Saskatchewan 
Hearing Instruments Practitioners Society have both been 
involved with the drafting of this legislation. 
 
Minister, do you believe that it completely resolves the issues 
that have been brought forward by complaints over the last 
while? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, I would also add 
into that list of people who were very close consultants in the 
process, the consumer affairs branch of Saskatchewan Justice. 
 
We also consulted with the Veterans Affairs Canada, Health 
Canada, the Workers’ Compensation Board, the Saskatoon and 
Regina health districts, as well as private hearing aid businesses 
who weren’t part of either one of the organizations that you met 
with. And also the Wall Street ENT (ear, nose, and throat) 
clinic. All of these groups had . . . were part of the discussion. 
 
We’re not absolutely certain that we’ve covered every problem 
that’s there. Some of them had a desire to go a little farther 
maybe in one area than another. But in the end, they all saw this 
as a reasonable way to enter into the regulations of this 
particular industry. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, there’s a section 24 under 
regulations. Do those regulations or the wording of those 
regulations give you enough latitude that if it’s necessary in the 
future that it’s shown that there are some shortcomings, that 
adjustments can be made to address issues that may come up? 
 
I guess what I’m asking, Minister, is there enough flexibility 
built into the Bill in order to address some of the unforeseen 
concerns that some of these organizations may have identified? 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s our understanding that the regulations 
and all of the different headings that are there, are broad enough 
to cover almost every foreseen problem. And if none of those 
cover, then (u) covers because it covers anything else that is 
deemed necessary and important to deal with. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. We certainly 
have . . . In our discussions with many of the same agencies and 
organizations; they have expressed to us their support for this 
legislation. 
 
And in our review of it, we also see that it is a step in the right 
direction and we certainly are supportive of it. So thank you 
very much, Mr. Minister. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I just want to thank the member for the 
comments, and also the fact that you consulted with these 
groups because it’s important for us to know that. 
 
And I’d like to thank Drew for his help on this particular 
legislation because it was a mix between consumer legislation 
and health legislation, and we didn’t have very many precedents 
to follow. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — May I have leave to introduce guests, please? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to introduce to you . . . through you and to 
you 19 grade 6 students from St. Gabriel School in Biggar, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Accompanying the grade 6 students are their teacher Elan 
Grondin. And also a special welcome to my wife Cindy 
Weekes, who is accompanying our daughter, Alex Weekes; and 
also parents Denise Holt, Brenda Pochipinski, Janet Taylor, 
Henrietta Parenteau, Dennis Desrosiers, Sharalee Laventure, 
Cindy Keith, Darlene Ries, and Charlla Redlick. 
 
I had the opportunity of joining this group of students with their 
Legislative Building tour and also had lunch with them outside 
on the grounds. 
 
And I understand they just came back from the Science Centre 
and are on their way to the IMAX. So please join me in 
welcoming the students and staff and parents from St. Gabriel’s 
in Biggar. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



2150 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 2001 
 
The Chair: — I now invite the Minister of Health to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I have the 
same officials that were here before but I’ve added two more to 
deal with this legislation. Marlene Smadu, who is the principal 
nursing advisor for Saskatchewan Health is to my left, and then 
a little further to the left is Karen Layng, who is the executive 
director of the primary health services branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Minister, as we’re aware, advanced clinical nurses or nurse 
practitioners have been functioning in this province for some 
time prior to this legislation and, as we currently speak, they are 
operating in different areas of the province. 
 
Would you explain to the House please, under what legislation 
or under what guidelines they currently practise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the present practice 
that allows for the advanced practice nurses to operate in 
Saskatchewan operates under what’s called a transfer of 
function arrangement and this an agreement between the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan, and the 
Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association so that effectively 
physicians and pharmacists agree to delegate certain functions 
to those advanced practice nurses who are operating in the 
province at this time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, in order for 
nurses to practise under the transfer of function provision, are 
there special educational and training requirements that are 
required in order for these individuals to receive this transfer of 
function? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. The simple answer is yes. These 
people receive special training and there’s a program that 
allows them to be involved in this and it’s one that’s obviously 
operated through the SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association) and related groups along with the medical 
regulator and the pharmaceutical regulator. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, I was unclear, is there a special 
course? Is it offered at SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology)? Is it offered at all in 
Saskatchewan? Can you outline with a little more detail exactly 
what the course requirements are to function under this transfer 
of function? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The course is offered at SIAST and 
effectively it does deal with many of the issues. 
 
What we also know that those people trained under that course 
now are anticipating the bringing in this new legislation which 
then clearly sets out in The Registered Nurses Act the 
provisions that have traditionally been enabled through a 

transfer of function. 
 
But the course is at SIAST and just for information there are 18 
primary care nurses that practice in this way in southern 
Saskatchewan and a few more in the North. 
 
There’s 78 nurses that have completed the program in the 
province and there are 34 nurses that are currently in the 
training program. The program takes about 14 months at SIAST 
and it has a theory component, as well as distance education. So 
often people are taking the course while they’re still working as 
RNs (registered nurse) in their regular job. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Is there a prerequisite 
in terms of that you need a degree in nursing or is a diploma 
nursing program sufficient to add this to your credentials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — All that’s required is the RN diploma at 
this time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. You also mentioned 
nurses operating in northern practice. I believe that there has 
been some transfer of function in a special relationship with 
some northern nursing stations in the past. 
 
And indeed I believe there are add-on training programs that 
might deal with obstetrics, suturing and some of those areas. 
Are they covered in this advanced practice course or are they 
special add-ons that are over and above this advanced practice 
training? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Those particular things are covered in the 
course. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Are any of the nurses or all of the nurses . . . 
I know some of them operate directly with the Department of 
Health, some with northern health districts, some with the 
Nightingales and organizations of that nature. 
 
Is it a requirement for nurses to practise in remote northern 
nursing stations, I guess for a lack of better word, to have these 
requirements? Because I believe a great deal of what they do 
would be involved with some transfer of function either from a 
central location in Meadow Lake or La Ronge or something of 
that nature. 
 
Under what circumstances do many of those northern nurses 
practise and is it a prerequisite that they have this advanced 
clinical program in order for them to practise in those locations? 
 
(14:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There’s no simple answer to your 
question because there are many ways that you can get the 
training that allows you to practice in some of the northern 
more remote locations. Sometimes it’s the training that’s 
through SIAST. Other times it’s training from other parts of the 
country or maybe from the States or even maybe other parts of 
the world. 
 
But a big part is obviously the experience because that’s 
recognized wealth. When they work in these areas that are in 
the transfer of function, they operate with supervision in the . . . 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2151 

 

even though it’s not on-site supervision. But they would have 
contact with the medical personnel or the pharmaceutical . . . 
pharmacists that are involved. 
 
So basically it’s a situation where experience counts for a lot 
but there’s training for most of them, but not necessarily all of 
them. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, in the 
southern part of the province for how long have nurses been 
operating under the transfer of function? Has it been an ongoing 
program or is it a relatively recent phenomenon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The particular transfer of function 
arrangement that I described before was entered into in 1998 
and it allowed for this practice to go into the community. But 
within the hospital setting where you actually had the doctors 
and pharmacists right there, there were these abilities to transfer 
functions to nurses under supervision for many years. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. In the legislation it 
outlines, I believe it’s in section 15 that there are duties outlined 
that can be given by an advanced clinical nurse. And they range 
from prescribing drugs, and designating screening and 
diagnostic tests — along with interpretation of those tests — 
and designating minor surgical and invasive procedures that an 
RN may perform. It also can prescribe conditions or restrictions 
on the performance of these operations. 
 
How are these terms of reference arrived at and who was the 
consulting process involved . . . or who was involved in the 
consultation process to arrive at these terms of reference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer to your question is that this 
involved consultation with a number of groups, but the specific 
groups involved were the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association, the Saskatchewan Association of Licensed 
Practical Nurses, Registered Psychiatric Nurses’ Association of 
Saskatchewan, the College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Medical Association, the 
Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association, and the 
Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And in the 
discussions with these agencies, particularly the medical 
profession and the pharmaceutical profession who were the 
people that were involved in the transfer of function in the 
current situation, are they comfortable with putting these kinds 
of terms of reference in for the advanced clinical nurses into 
their own legislation and having the SRNA, I believe, take care 
of the details of the regulations involved? 
 
I’m assuming, and certainly in our discussions, that they seem 
to indicate a fair bit of support by this, but I think for the record 
it’s important for you to say that these agencies are comfortable 
with having these operational guidelines for advanced clinical 
nurses. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer to the question is yes, they are 
supportive of this, and they will continue as organizations to 
provide the consultation and monitoring service as the various 
skills are developed and then certified under this particular 
procedure. 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, is it part of 
the plan in the long-term vision of . . . We’ve spoken in the past 
about our concern about the number of nursing positions that 
are being initiated in the training programs and the long-term 
availability of nurses on every level. Is there a long-range plan 
for the number of training seats that you plan to have at SIAST 
in order to allow nurses to move into this advanced practice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the way that this 
particular program is delivered, there are no restrictions on the 
number who can enter the program because it has that 
combination of on-site, but also most of it is distance education 
where people can do it from their places of employment. 
 
So practically as many people who wish to enter the program 
have been allowed to enter the program. We don’t see that 
changing. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that that’s 
good news and I hope that that message goes out to the nursing 
profession because I’m aware of in my area of the world there 
certainly is one example operating out of the east . . . or the 
North-East Health District in Zenon Park, Arborfield — in that 
corner of the world — of an advanced practice nurse who is 
being extremely well received by the community and the people 
there find it a very positive addition. 
 
I’m also aware in the North Central Health District based out of 
Melfort that they’re advertising for a nurse practitioner in St. 
Brieux and Naicam. And to date to my knowledge they have 
been unsuccessful in recruiting someone for this position. 
 
So I think that there may well be an expanding need for people 
of this training and capability, and I think that they can fill a 
very useful role. I may add as well is that in my experience all 
the comments that I’ve heard from people that have experienced 
working with the advanced clinical nurses or nurse practitioners 
has been very positive. 
 
And some of the concerns and fears that were articulated in 
terms of turf protection — if you like, for lack of a better word 
— have not materialized. And where people are experiencing 
this practice that they’re finding it a very positive experience, 
and we certainly are very supportive of this initiative. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other part of the legislation that I want to talk 
about in moving on a bit is I understand there is also provisions 
in the Bill that will allow the SRNA to issue temporary licences 
to foreign graduates who do not meet the requirements for a full 
licence, and that they may work under the supervision of an RN 
while they are working towards meeting those requirements. 
 
Are you aware, Mr. Minister, of how many people would fall 
into this category that would need this special provision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, at this particular time 
it’s not possible to tell you what the numbers would be. But I 
think a good example is . . . for example is when recruited some 
nurses from New Zealand, they could come here, they were 
practising nurses, but they didn’t quite fit with the way the 
education was set up here so they made some special 
arrangements there. 
 



2152 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

This will set out some of the arrangements that will then allow 
us to have people on to this list, and then we will be able to 
answer the question of the number of people who are in a 
temporary position while they effectively qualify for the 
nursing profession here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One area that I 
neglected to discuss with you in terms of the nurse practitioners 
is the whole area of collaborative practice and primary health 
care teams. Many of the advance clinical nurses that are now 
practising while they’re under a transfer of function 
arrangement, because this legislation isn’t in place, they’re 
functioning reasonably independently in practices. And I 
outlined a couple of examples in my experience where that is 
the case. 
 
Minister, are there other examples that you can point to where 
nurse practitioners are working more in a primary team 
approach directly with and collaboration with physicians and 
other health care providers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, there are 18 primary 
care sites in Saskatchewan right now and all of those are 
situations where there is a physician working along with some 
of the advanced clinical nurse positions. So those are examples 
there. 
 
And I wasn’t sure if your question meant, well are there other 
places where people work? But clearly, in that situation, that’s 
what’s happening. 
 
The examples that you gave from up in your part of 
Saskatchewan, that’s another example. But basically that’s the 
main place that they’re working right now. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, I outlined a couple of 
examples of where they’re operating with a fair bit of 
independence in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Can you outline an example of where they’re operating in more 
collaborative practice in an urban setting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The simple example is the Department of 
Academic Family Medicine here in Regina, is where they 
operate quite independently but in a collaborative practice. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I don’t mean to 
badger you for more details, but I would like a little more of the 
example of how they function in terms of their role in that 
collaborative practice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, now that I understand 
the member’s question, what I would say is that a good example 
is if you go to a clinic you may actually go and see the nurse 
first without seeing the doctor and you may not even see the 
doctor. But if there is a particular concern the nurse would then 
possibly refer you to a doctor that’s there on that site or in some 
related site. 
 
So practically in the collaborative practice settings the nurses 
act as professionals in quite an independent fashion. But the 
overall planning for the patient and for the clinic would be done 
with the other professionals in the operation. 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, in the 
health field many people talk about the concept of point of entry 
to the health field. And does your department see that advanced 
practice nurses will have a critical role to play as a potential 
entry point into the health system, if you like, for clients? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, at this time when the 
advanced clinical nurses work in a collaborative practice, 
patients would come to see the team and then the appropriate 
person is assigned. Sometimes it might be the dietitian, 
sometimes the nurse, sometimes the doctor or other 
professionals that are there. 
 
So in the longer term, as we look at what are the models that 
would be appropriate, it could be that in that team model any 
one of the professionals could be the initial contact. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, we’ve 
talked about this legislation as an expansion, if you like, of the 
role of registered nurses and a greater scope of practice for 
individuals in that field. 
 
This morning at the Health Committee the registered 
psychiatric nurses made a presentation to the committee and 
they sort of presented two things; one that I think is germane to 
this topic. They have expressed their overall concern about the 
graduates that they’re receiving in registered psychiatric 
nursing. 
 
But they also expressed the desire to look at an advanced 
registered psychiatric nursing program. Has your department 
looked at something similar to this structure for registered 
psychiatric nurses? 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, this particular issue has 
been a subject of discussion at the Nursing Council so that they 
are looking at some of the different possibilities. But as to 
actually preparing legislation or coming up with specific 
programs that we would require legislative changes, that’s not 
happened at this point. 
 
But clearly it is a topic of discussion. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Deputy Chair, in closing my questions on Bill No. 4, I would 
like to state our support for the details and the specifics of this 
legislation as well as our very strong support for the overall 
direction and thrust of allowing nurses with the proper 
qualifications to operate under their own guidelines of 
independent practice. We think it’ll be a positive move for the 
delivery of health care in a number of settings, both rural and 
urban and a number of environments within that whole milieu. 
 
So, Minister, our consultations have been very positive with the 
people involved and we want to go on record as saying we’re 
very much in support of this legislation. So thank you and your 
officials today. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, committee. This Bill has a number 
of clauses. Is leave granted to deal with it by page? 
 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2153 

 

Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like to 
thank the officials who have worked on this particular 
legislation and all of the various groups that have been part of 
the consultation. And with that, I would like to move that the 
committee report this Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Dietitians Act 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Minister, I believe that this legislation updates or replaces 
legislation that has been on the books since the late 1950s — 
1958 or somewhere around there specifically. 
 
Will the minister please outline the circumstances that have 
changed that motivates him to bring forward this legislation at 
this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This particular legislation doesn’t have all 
of the newer provisions that we now have in all of our 
professional legislation around investigation and discipline of 
dietitians and so that was one of the key areas that we wanted to 
look at. 
 
Also, a number of the accountability provisions that also relate 
to the same area such as disciplinary hearings and filing of 
annual reports. Those kinds of things weren’t here. So working 
together with the people in the Dietetic Association, we were 
able to, to come forward with what is really a revised piece of 
legislation that conforms with our standard of professional 
legislation at this time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, I 
wonder if you would have the information available as to 
approximately or specifically how many dietitians who are 
functioning in the province would fall under the scope of this 
regulatory legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As of the year 2000, 222 dietitians are 
registered under this legislation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, a 
question was asked of the registered psychiatric nurses this 
morning about if you can identify approximately how many are 
practising in urban or rural settings. 
 
Would you have that information and I know it’s more detail, 
but would you have any breakdown at all about where these 
dietitians are practising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We don’t have that specific information 
here but every health district has a number . . . at least one 
dietitian but sometimes a number of them, so in many 
communities the dietitians work, plus there are consulting 

dietitians that go to the many of the care homes and other places 
like that. 
 
I guess I could also speak from personal knowledge, as I’ve told 
you before, my mother is a dietitian and I know that she knows 
people who are right across the province and many of her 
friends actually work as dietitians and as farmers. So it’s a 
profession that fits well with agriculture as well. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. We 
certainly, in our discussions, realize that the Association of 
Dietitians very much support an update to their legislation and 
gets them into a, you know, more modern, if you like, a more 
complete set of regulations and a proper framework for 
self-regulation and self-administration of their profession, and 
we very much support it. So thank you very much. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — There’s more than 50 clauses; is leave granted to 
deal with the Bill by part? Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clauses 3 to 53 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Once again 
I would like to thank the officials that are with me, as well as all 
of those people within the Dietetic Association who have 
co-operated in being involved with this particular legislation. 
And with that I move that this committee report this Bill 
without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Hearing Aid Sales and Services Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read for the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 4 — The Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Dietitians Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 



2154 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Chair: —I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I am 
pleased to have with me this afternoon, to my left, Glenda 
Yeates, who’s the deputy minister. And then to her left is Scott 
Livingstone, who’s the director of acute and emergency 
services. Behind Glenda Yeates is Rod Wiley, who is the 
executive director of finance and management services. Directly 
behind me is the associate deputy minister, Steven Pillar. Right 
to my right is Lawrence Krahn, the assistant deputy minister. 
And behind him is Bert Linklater, who is the executive director 
of district management services. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and Minister. And welcome to your officials. 
 
I guess the first question that I want to ask when I see them all 
here is who’s minding the store, because we’ve got a number of 
people here. But I appreciate the topics on this day of estimates 
are probably a little more far ranging and therefore it’s useful to 
have people here. 
 
Mr. Minister, there certainly is a number of topics that I want to 
touch on today and in no particular order of importance, but 
perhaps just sort of moving down in the areas that we’ve talked 
about in the past. We’ve pretty much covered the areas of 
administration and accommodation and central services. We’ve 
talked about district health services and those general issues in 
the budget document. 
 
I want to move to an area that is a new area for the Department 
of Health and that’s the early childhood development program 
that has been funded and budgeted in the estimates or in the 
estimated budget of $5.6 million. And I would like you to 
please give a background as to this program and how it’s fitting 
into the Department of Health and what other disciplines it’s 
interfacing with. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This particular 
initiative is a joint initiative from Saskatchewan Health, 
Saskatchewan Social Services, and Saskatchewan Education. 
And it’s also being delivered in co-operation with the health 
districts, the school boards, First Nations and Métis 
organizations, and community organizations. And there have 
been a number of initiatives that have been taking place in each 
of these departments or in the various community agencies. 
 
But this particular Kids First program comes together because 
of federal funding that’s directed this way. And so all of these 
groups have worked together to develop a program, which is to 
provide support to children in the first few years of their life. 
And so it’s especially focused at vulnerable children and how 
we identify those children which require assistance. 

Over the next five years there’ll be $73 million that comes 
through this program. And basically the plan is to involve all of 
those appropriate members within the community. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, as you 
indicated, sort of a multi-faceted program that involves a 
number of departments in the provincial government and also 
coordination with the federal government, at least by way of 
funding and perhaps from some other input as well. 
 
Is there a department that has the lead on this program and is 
providing the overall direction and coordination? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The particular unit of people that are 
running the program are located in Saskatchewan Health, but 
there’s a joint management committee that includes all three 
departments and they’re the ones that provide the policy 
direction. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Is the relationship with the federal 
government solely one of providing finances or are they 
involved in this management team as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The federal government is not involved 
directly in the management, but there are reporting 
requirements and they are monitoring those reports. Plus 
they’ve obviously heard what we planned to do and are part of 
the discussion at that level. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, are there minimum requirements 
or standards, guidelines that have to be met in order to qualify 
for the federal funding transfers that you outlined? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the federal guidelines around 
this particular program are relatively broad and each jurisdiction 
across the country has responded in a slightly different way. But 
practically, what we’re doing does fit exactly with the kind of 
thing that they want us to do which is to look at how you can 
help children. 
 
But for example, in our program we have elements of child 
care, we have elements of some of the education issues, and we 
have health issues. Some provinces have directed more of their 
money, for example, into child care than we have. But 
effectively the goal is to deal with the early childhood years 
because we know how important it is that children get a good 
start in life. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. In terms of looking at 
. . . I understand you have the management group that looks at 
the overall plan and it’s coordinated through the Department of 
Health. How is it determined which share of the global budget, 
if you like, for a given year is allocated to the different 
departments — you know, $5.6 million in this budget to Health, 
and how much would be to Social Services or Justice or the 
other components of the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the original plan was to 
develop a broad goal for what we wanted to do. And once that 
had been developed, then we had to figure out what the 
components were. And when those components were then 
defined, then it was looked at, well which department delivered 
which piece of that. And then from that, it was decided how 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2155 

 

much or how many dollars would go to each particular 
department. 
 
And so basically in the Treasury Board sort of budget-building 
processes where the final decision was made as to how the 
money was allocated between each department, but the 
recommendation that came forward as one joint 
recommendation had started out with well, what do we want to 
do here for our children. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, I see that in 
the sub-programs the bulk of the budget allocation for this year 
is in home visiting and professional support. And it talks about 
. . . in the general preamble to this subvote, it talks . . . it’ll 
provide home visiting and professional support to families who 
face challenges, providing an environment for the children that 
is supportive of good childhood development. 
 
Minister, specifically how does this program work? Are these 
like public health nurses working within district health boards 
who are part of a visitation program that is ongoing as early 
childhood development, as the visitation program for early birth 
weights, and all those sorts of things that are going on? Or is 
this running separate and independent from the district health 
programs? 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — To introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Through you and to 
you to the rest of the Assembly, it gives me great privilege to 
introduce 16 grade 5 and 6 from the . . . students from the 
Wishart School that made their way into Regina today. The 
teacher is Virginia Latoski; parent, Mary Skolney; and the 
driver, Dena Nelson. I’d like to welcome you here. 
 
And I’m sure you grade 5 and 6s have got maybe only two days 
left on the calendar to cross off before summer holidays. I know 
our calendar is getting crossed off and I think there’s two more 
days or one more day left. So I hope you . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . one more day left I was just told. You are 
counting. 
 
So I hope you enjoy the proceedings today. It’s a little quieter. 
We’re in a little more of an informal process right now in 
estimates. I hope you enjoy your stay here and good luck in 
grade 6 and 7 next year. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, perhaps I’ll give a . . . paint a 
little picture of how this particular program is going to work. 
Effectively what we have is a couple of different components, 
but primarily the initial components relate . . . well how do you 
identify those vulnerable children and how do you get some 
help to them. 
 
So there are referrals from the public health nurses to the 
program, which would then be run probably by a 
community-based organization in a local community. And 
working for the community-based organization would be the 
home visitor or the layperson who comes and is part of the 
family where there is children that are in a vulnerable situation. 
 
This process of identifying and working with the families is one 
that has to be done with the local community and so it will 
depend on which place we’re at, which community-based 
organization is involved. 
 
And what then happens is those lay professionals have the 
backup from professionals, especially in the mental health area 
and the addictions area. And then there is also support for child 
care so that, for example, if a particular parent needs some help, 
mental health worker help, they would not be prevented from 
going to their appointments because they couldn’t get child 
care. That child care would be arranged for them. 
 
But I think the key to the program are the lay professionals 
involved, which are identified as home visitors. They have a 
role of sort of family advocates in a way too, that they are out to 
see what things that particular family and those children need to 
make sure that these children get the best for their development. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, is this another layer of 
bureaucracy, if you like, that we’re creating here? We already 
have in all of the health districts, the public health nurses who I 
believe visit the homes of children early on after the baby is 
born and address issues of nursing and lactation, address issues 
of birth weights and growing rates, and things of that nature. 
 
Now it strikes me that is what you’re saying is you have these 
lay professionals — and I’m not sure what that means — who 
will they work for? Will they work specifically under the 
Department of Health? Or will there be another subagency that 
is working in local communities? Will it be a function of Social 
Services? How is this extra bureaucracy going to be constructed 
in order to deliver these services that in many instances, we 
might be able to support local health districts to provide an 
expansion of their services in a more effective way than 
creating another layer of bureaucracy that may lead to 
unnecessary duplication? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, basically the province and the 
departments that I have outlined will provide central leadership 
around setting policy, program direction, and priorities, but the 
communities based organizations or partners which already 
exist — they won’t be created but most of them will exist, but it 
could be the health district, it could be school division, it could 
be First Nations health services — they will put forward a 
community plan often in conjunction with others in their 
community where they’ve identified the local administrative 
group. But clearly the goal here is not to create another 
organization or another place. The goal is to use what’s there 



2156 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

and have the resources go through some existing organization. 
 
There’ll be partnerships working with the First Nations and 
Métis service delivery wherever possible, and that’s an ongoing 
discussion. But the whole point is that the province will have 
the . . . set the overall policy but the local communities will 
define and deliver the services in their area. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I’d like to move on if I could now under provincial 
health services and support section, and begin with the 
sub-programs. And again, in no particular order, but use the 
ones that are listed in the budget documents, and begin with the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you outline briefly for us, please, the 
general roles and responsibility for the Cancer Agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency has been set up to provide cancer treatment services in 
the province. And they have two cancer clinics, the Saskatoon 
Cancer Centre and the Allan Blair Cancer Centre in Regina. 
 
Basically those centres provide chemotherapy and radiation 
therapy to cancer patients. And they also end up administering 
— the Cancer Agency as itself — all of the cancer treatment in 
the province. So there is a relationship then with the family 
doctors and with the surgeons, if that’s required, or the radiation 
oncologists. 
 
The radiation oncologists operate at the clinics. And the 
chemotherapy is provided mostly at the clinics, but we’re 
seeing now more operation through satellites across the 
province in various health facilities. 
 
The Cancer Agency has a mandate and a role of keeping up 
comprehensive follow-up data and making sure that the activity 
is . . . the follow-up activity continues. Because what that means 
then is that the patients, once they’re registered in the system, 
will have a comprehensive treatment plan organized for them. 
And hopefully, if they end up being successful at the various 
treatments, they’ll go on to follow up for years or sometimes 
decades. And practically there are a number of specific services 
that are provided within the Cancer Agency, but the overall goal 
in Saskatchewan is that when a person is suffering from a 
cancer then it’s being treated in a coordinated fashion. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. From what you said 
then, I take it that when a patient is identified with needing or 
requiring cancer therapy, then he is referred to the Cancer 
Agency in essence, who then take care of his treatment process. 
Can the minister tell me what the timeliness is of that transfer 
and what is the waiting time for different therapies — 
chemotherapy, radiation, etc.? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The waiting times for cancer treatment in 
Saskatchewan have remained relatively stable over the last 
while. And there are three primary forms of cancer treatment. 
 
The first one is chemotherapy. The average wait to see a 
medical oncologist for chemotherapy is approximately one 

week in Regina and two weeks in Saskatoon. 
 
For radiation therapy, the average wait to see a radiation 
oncologist in Regina is one week and about two weeks in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Cancer surgery is the third method of treatment or is provided 
by the health districts. And all patients with a diagnosis of 
cancer or suspected cancer are considered urgent. The target for 
urgent surgery is within 21 days in both Regina and Saskatoon. 
Often it’s better than that; now and again there may be times 
when it’s a little bit longer. But specifically the concern is that 
these kinds of surgery move right to the front of the line. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. As I’m sure 
you’re aware — as we all are — timeliness is a very important 
component in initiating cancer therapy of all three types. When 
you say a 21-day target, are we hitting that target? Is that the 
actual average then that we’re hitting? Or are we exceeding that 
target or doing better than that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Most of the time the surgeries take place 
much sooner than 21 days, but there are some times when the 
cancers are quite complex and when there has to be a fair 
amount of planning on how the surgery is to take place, that it 
would take longer than 21 days. But clearly these kinds of cases 
are urgent because they’re urgent medically, but they’re also 
urgent in the public’s mind and so they move right up to the 
front. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, I believe as 
well the Cancer Agency is also responsible for the screening 
program in Saskatchewan, particularly breast cancer screening. 
Would you outline the fundamentals or the basic organization 
of that program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, the breast 
screening program is indeed part of the overall Cancer Agency 
program and it operates with a, I think, a general rule of trying 
to screen all women age 50 and over. And so that that is the 
general target. And so once you hit that age, well then they on a 
regular basis will have you registered as part of their program. 
 
It’s been quite effective at early detection of cancers which then 
makes it the . . . I guess the success rate of one of the other 
treatments, usually a combination of surgery and chemotherapy, 
to prevent . . . or bring the cancer rates down. 
 
There are two clinics in Saskatchewan and one mobile unit that 
travels around the province. From age 50 to 69 years is sort of 
the target years. They end up encouraging people to have this 
particular screening, mammography, every two years. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I believe in addition to 
a straight demographic age category, there also are women who 
are identified as potential high risk by way of their genealogy or 
if they’ve had a mother or a mother and sister who have 
suffered breast cancer, and so they’re identified as being at high 
risk as well and they are encouraged to participate in the 
screening position as well. 
 
Minister, you mentioned that there’s two clinics in addition to 
the mobile mammogram unit that’s in place. Are you 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2157 

 

suggesting that there are only two hospital locations where there 
are the permanent clinics? Or I believe there is also certain 
hospitals that are designated in other jurisdictions that are able 
to do the screening mammograms in their institutions as 
opposed to using the mobile unit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that the way it works is that there 
are two dedicated clinics and the mobile screening unit but all 
the regional centres have the ability to screen as well. And so 
there’s screening done at that level within the hospital structure. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, as I understand the program the 
screening is done in these regional centres in addition to the two 
main clinics. It’s done in the regional centres and it’s done in 
the mobile clinic. And there are a team of experienced 
radiologists, if you like, that read the results of these tests; and 
they are very experienced in this particular type of report I 
guess or the actual mammogram so that they are very 
competent and very proficient at screening these results. 
 
Minister, in the regional hospitals, do they forward the results 
of the screening . . . the screening test, if you like, is that 
forwarded by clinic or by courier to where the radiologists are 
located as would be those tests from the mobile lab? Do they all 
go to a central location where experienced radiologists then 
read the tests? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, all of the screening readings 
done by the radiologists are done in Regina and Saskatoon. The 
information is sent in to those two centres. 
 
Just out of interest, from the 1999-2000 annual report from the 
Cancer Agency, there were in 1999 35,074 mammograms. They 
detected 2,743 abnormal readings. And out of that number there 
were 181 cancers identified. And this is an important part of 
this program, is to identify those cancers early on so that they 
can be treated. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I certainly agree that 
early detection improves the eventual outcome, very 
exponentially actually. 
 
Minister, a concern in specifics. And don’t get me wrong. I’m 
in no way taking anything away from the mobile unit. I think 
it’s very important because it offers the availability of taking 
the screening processes near to people as possible so that 
everyone doesn’t have to go into all of the regional centres or 
the two main clinics. And so I’m very much supportive of the 
mobile clinic. 
 
But for example in my community of Melfort we have a very 
. . . you know, a de facto regional centre that has a diagnostic 
mammogram. It’s of the highest calibre of scientific instrument 
and yet what we have happen in Melfort is for the women who 
participate in this program, they’re forced on a January day to 
go out behind the Co-op mall where this van is plugged into a 
post to get its power and go there for their screening. 
 
Where many women have told me they’d much prefer . . . 
Because the instrumentation is available in the Melfort 
Hospital, they’d prefer to be able to go into the Melfort Hospital 
and have their mammogram done on that diagnostic 
mammogram. And then I support the concept that that test 

would be submitted with the other tests that would go to the 
central locations where radiologists who are particularly versed 
in reading these tests would happen. 
 
Minister, is there any possibility, where those communities are 
capable of providing a level of equipment that is acceptable — 
and I know for a fact that Melfort’s diagnostic mammogram is 
of that calibre — would there be the possibility and indeed the 
opportunity for, instead of women going to that mobile van in 
Melfort, that Melfort could be again designated as a regional 
centre where women could have the option of instead of going 
in a pretty crowded van — and I think that that’s better than 
nothing, if you don’t have that option — but would they have 
the opportunity to go into the hospital and have their test run 
there if the health district was supportive of that initiative? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The goal in the program is to try to get 
consistency of results in the sense of what kinds of pictures that 
they get so they can be read by the radiologist. 
 
But practically, your suggestion is one that we would probably 
want to take a look at because I agree with you, that the 
sophistication of the radiological equipment with the 
technology change has improved the ability to do these kinds of 
services in places where, even 10 years ago, it would have been 
quite difficult to do. 
 
So I will take that question more as a suggestion, that we look 
at the possibility especially, you know, in light of working with 
the local staff in this particular area to see whether or not you 
could add on to the numbers of centres. 
 
And just out of interest, I think you probably know, but Regina 
and Saskatoon have the dedicated parts. But Swift Current, 
North Battleford, Yorkton, Moose Jaw, and Prince Albert are 
the centres where they now do the mammograms that are sent in 
to be read in Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
And just out of interest, approximately 28 per cent of the 
mammograms in the province are done through the mobile 
system, which travels all over the province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I’m very supportive of 
the mobile system and I think it’s a very important feature of 
the program to reach out to those areas of the province where 
they don’t have the ability in their health centre to do this. 
 
But I think certainly a number of women who have talked to me 
about this issue talk about the issues of comfort, of 
convenience, of privacy, of all of those issues, and say it would 
be very much preferred by them if they could come to the 
Melfort hospital for example. And I also am very much familiar 
with the fact that the quality of equipment and the quality of the 
technicians that would be employed in that place would 
certainly be very capable. 
 
And so I welcome your willingness to look at this issue and to 
see if that could be expanded because I think for the clients this 
would be much preferred. And if we’re thinking ultimately of 
what’s best for the clients, that this would be a good move. 
 
And I appreciate the consistency in those issues, but they can 
courier these prints out of the Melfort hospital just as easy to 



2158 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

your central radiologist group as you can out of the van parked 
at the Co-op mall. So I really welcome your commitment to do 
that. 
 
Minister, I’d like to move on then to the issue of the Canadian 
Blood Services. Minister, briefly I would like to ask you how 
you relate with the Canadian Blood Services. It’s a national 
program and Saskatchewan has its part in that whole program. 
 
So would you please outline what the relationship is between 
the Department of Health and the Canadian Blood Services on 
an operational sense and what input you have in determining 
how the 27-roughly-million dollars that’s allocated in the 
budget are spent? I understand it’s a per capita thing but if it’s a 
per capita and straight per capita calculation, what input do you 
have in terms of being involved with policy direction of the 
Canadian Blood Services? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the Canadian Blood Services 
was set up in response to the Krever report. And one of the 
strong recommendations made by Mr. Krever was that the 
board that runs the particular blood service should be 
arm’s-length and transparent. So there is an independent board 
of appointed individuals. 
 
As minister, I’m a member of the corporation, and basically the 
board reports to the members. And each of the provinces and 
territories are members, except for the province of Quebec. 
What happens on an annual basis is a global budget is presented 
to the members — in other words to the ministers across the 
country — and this is given approval at that level. 
 
And so, practically, this is a new agency, new organization with 
a new structure which has an independent board but reports to 
the members, which are the provinces and territories that use 
the particular service. 
 
And that’s where we have our say in the process. And it’s 
obviously an ongoing dialogue. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, I’d like to 
move on to the provincial laboratory system if I may now. 
Minister, would you outline how laboratory services are 
delivered in the province and the relationship between the 
provincial lab and laboratory programs in individual health 
districts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the provincial laboratory which 
just out of interest used to be located up the stairs on the third 
floor, up into the dome — that’s where the provincial lab used 
to be located when it was quite a small organization. It’s now 
located just down Albert Street. 
 
But basically the provincial lab provides infectious disease 
surveillance data and medical microbiology and chemistry 
testing results for health providers across the province. The 
day-to-day lab results are often done by the health districts 
within their various facilities that are in their particular districts. 
But the provincial lab covers some of these more technical 
ones. As well they do water testing. 
 

And everyday at the lab between 2 and 3,000 specimens are 
received. And approximately 6,000 test results are generated. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, in terms of 
provincial lab, is there any kind of program where there is 
combined purchasing power and things of that nature that 
would perhaps mitigate some of the costs of individual lab 
tests? 
 
They probably are repeated across a number of health districts, 
Regina and Saskatoon having a certain size and volume, but 
some of the health — the smaller districts — may be doing the 
same tests and the actual costs for disposal, disposables, and 
things of that nature for these tests may be much more 
expensive for individual small districts who are only purchasing 
a limited number of them. Is there a central purchasing plan for 
lab testing disposables, for example? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, there is some joint buying by 
the health districts but that’s organized through SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) and it 
relates to sort of public health testing. The provincial lab tests, 
the kind of things that they do are sometimes more technical or 
more specific and don’t necessarily relate to the kinds of 
day-to-day testing that goes on within the health districts. So 
there isn’t a coordinated buying in that sense. 
 
But the question I think you asked about the districts coming 
together and working, will they do that through SAHO, and one 
of the things that we had talked about one of the previous 
sessions was about the Health Information Network and the 
ability to have testing results transferred throughout the system. 
That’s one of the goals, which then would eliminate some of the 
tests that are done more than once in some situations. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. One final question. Is 
there a process that involves sort of establishing what the role of 
the provincial lab is as it relates to the health districts; what 
tests are going to be done on a district level, what tests are done 
on more regional level, and what tests are going to be done by 
the provincial laboratory? 
 
And again, I am thinking there must be kind of a hierarchy of 
support and sophistication of laboratory services in the various 
districts and in the regions and in the smaller hospitals. Is there 
a coordinated plan that outlines that and builds it right up 
through the provincial lab? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The specific question that’s been asked 
around the coordination of the provincial lab’s responsibility 
versus some of the district labs has been the subject of reviews 
over a number of times; I think the last one in the ’90s. 
 
And basically the way the division of work has gone is that 
most of the day-to-day lab results required in medical practices 
are done in the districts in their labs, but that the provincial lab 
does the public health surveillance kind of tests. That includes 
the HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), communicable 
diseases, hepatitis — those kinds of ones where there’s a 
reporting requirement and therefore they can . . . virtually all of 
those kinds of tests are done at the provincial lab. This allows 
them to I guess keep the profile of how those diseases are in . . . 
well what is the status of those diseases in Saskatchewan. 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2159 

 

So that’s kind of the division of how it works. So sort of 
day-to-day lab kind of things that you might have at your local 
hospital or even at some of the medical labs related to doctors’ 
offices, those kinds of things wouldn’t be done at the provincial 
lab. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to move 
on to health research now if I could. 
 
Minister, I notice in this subsection that the expenditures overall 
go from about $100 million to almost $120 million — arguably 
something in the magnitude of about a 20 per cent increase in 
the area of provincial health services and support. 
 
But I also notice that in the area of health research, we’ve 
moved from about a little over $5 million to 5 million 
200-odd-thousand, which is only a four and a half per cent 
increase. It is by far a small amount in terms of this general 
subcategory that has received approximately a 20 per cent 
increase. 
 
Minister, why such a small increase for health research? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The health research money from 
Saskatchewan Health has increased as you’ve said to 5.233 
million this particular year. And basically it hasn’t increased 
with the same percentage as the Cancer Agency or as the Blood 
Services, but it has increased. We are continuing to look for 
more money in this particular area because what we know is 
that the funds that are required by many of our medical 
researchers require matching funds locally so they can get 
national funds. So we work there. 
 
But in addition to the funding that comes out of Health, there 
also are other health research funding sources that come out of 
Saskatchewan Economic and Co-operative Development. 
There’s a $15 million Innovation and Science Fund out of that 
particular department. There’s also some funds that we 
anticipate coming forward in the next couple of years as a result 
of the Government Growth Fund. 
 
And we’re continuing to work with other departments to see if 
we can enhance the ability to get more money for health 
research. 
 
We know the goal that Mr. Fyke set out in his report was 
around 1 per cent, which puts us up around $22 million and 
ideally we’d like to be at that level, but at this stage we’re not 
there. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, I appreciate your concern and 
your desire to get to a more appropriate level of medical 
research. 
 
Would the minister also agree that this is part of the puzzle, if 
you like, about the College of Medicine and the University of 
Saskatchewan? Because, as we’ve gone over before, I mean one 
of the very important programs or very important components 
of someone who wants to work at a College of Medicine is a 
research program. And it not only is grants for the raw research, 
it’s got to be facilities that are going to . . . laboratories that are 
near and in proximity to where they’re teaching and working 
and have their office. 

And so I would encourage the minister to look at this as part of 
the bigger picture if you like, because I think by the fact that 
you have not found it a priority, increase the research grant, at 
even at the same level of increase as other subvotes within this 
department I think is a concern. 
 
And I certainly would like to go on record as expressing my 
concern for the University of Saskatchewan and the need for 
them to attract quality researchers who become quality 
instructors and quality clinicians in the College of Medicine. If 
we’re going to really build a foundation and rebuild the College 
of Medicine and all the things that go around it, I think medical 
research is going to be a part of that piece. 
 
And I would encourage the minister to redouble his efforts to 
look seriously at this shortfall in future budgets, if it’s not able 
to be done at this time. 
 
Minister, an area that has also received some increase is the 
issue of immunizations and I would ask a general question. Is 
this increased budget a combination of new immunization 
programs or new indicators, or is it that the actual products are 
getting more expensive? Or what leads to that increase in the 
immunization program? 
 
And could you outline briefly how this program is working. I 
believe it works in conjunction with the districts and public 
health nurses who actually administer the immunization 
program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the way this particular area 
works is the department buys the products for the province 
centrally and then distributes them for the distribution to all of 
the districts so that they can take care of that. 
 
And effectively the increase in the amount budgeted this year 
primarily relates to an increase in the cost of the product. There 
has been an increased number of influenza vaccinations and 
also pneumococcal vaccinations. Those two areas have gone up 
somewhat but the majority of the increased cost does relate to 
the product. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, does the Department of Health run 
programs to encourage more at-risk people for influenza 
infection to participate in an immunization program; and are 
those programs administered through district health boards and 
public health? And what is the pickup rate, if you like, because 
certainly we always find a cyclical problem with influenza 
infections, particularly among our elderly, and it does increase 
the strain in the acute care system somewhat. What is the result 
of programs to encourage voluntary immunizations in the 
province? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Most of the publication of information 
about immunizations is done through the districts but they 
obviously work together with the provincial department, 
population health. People do this. 
 
For example, last fiscal year, 2000-2001, it’s estimated that 
155,000 Saskatchewan residents received influenza 
immunization free of charge, and that was part of this particular 



2160 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

program which encourages, as you say, the high-risk people to 
have the immunizations because it obviously is good for the 
individual but it also is good for the communities in which they 
live if we can keep the level of influenza down. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d 
like to move to the subsection medical services and medical 
education programs, if I may. 
 
Minister, I note that in the two sub-programs, medical services 
fee-for-service and non-fee-for-service, actually the increase in 
the funding, the percentage increase in the funding for 
non-fee-for-service has grown at a greater rate than the 
fee-for-service. 
 
And, Minister, I’m wondering if you could outline . . . I think 
the numbers are about a 20 per cent of the budget or somewhere 
in there on a non-fee-for-service basis. Is there an increase 
percentage-wise in the non-fee-for-service category? Are more 
practitioners in the province opting to go to this remuneration 
model over time? Is this a trend that you see developing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think there is no . . . or there are no 
simple answers in this whole health field as we both know. 
 
But the specific answer around this kind of an increase in that 
non-fee-for-service category relates to the fact that in Saskatoon 
and Regina primarily there’s been an increased number of 
specialists who are funded through the districts. And they’re 
actually paid and they’re a part of a program, medical services, 
as opposed to a doctor in private practice providing those 
services on a fee-for-service basis. 
 
And that’s good news for recruiting often, because you can 
assure an income to a specialist who comes; and it also helps in 
the overall budgeting process because you have a better sense of 
exactly what your cost is going to be. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. In the fee-for-service 
there is a contractual arrangement between the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association and the districts, Department of Health . . . 
I’m not sure exactly who the contract is with. 
 
Can you outline the status of that contract? Is it up for renewal 
in a year or two years, or where are we at in the contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The agreement with the SMA was agreed 
to in December of 2000, and it was signed earlier this spring 
and it goes until March, 2003. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, are there 
concerns in the future, given some of the contractual 
settlements that have happened to the west of us particularly, 
that this area’s going to be an area of increased pressure when 
that contract comes up for renewal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that in the health field in these 
years that’s always a concern, but practically we know that we 
have many other attributes in how the doctors are able to 
practice in Saskatchewan, whether it’s in the larger cities or in 
some of the smaller cities, or in smaller communities. And what 
we find is that we need to be in the marketplace on the kinds of 
fees that are paid, if it’s fee-for-service or on the salaries, if 

that’s how it’s done, or whatever the combination is. 
 
But practically we have what we feel is a good arrangement 
with the SMA at this time, and we’ll have to keep monitoring 
the situation as it proceeds over the next couple of years. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, my 
colleague, the member from Swift Current has a different topic 
that he would like to address at this time, and we’ll renew or 
pick this up in a little while. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of Committees. Mr. 
Minister, a couple of questions regarding the Swift Current 
Health District. Specifically, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can 
confirm that you are in receipt of a letter from last month, I 
think, from the nurses in Swift Current requesting departmental 
action over concerns they have with the district? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I assume that the member is referring to 
the letter from the SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) 
district council president, dated May 21, 2001. Yes, I have a 
copy of that. 
 
Mr. Wall: — And what consideration is currently being given 
to their request, Mr. Minister? It’s been, you know, it’s been 
well over a month now I think since they will have . . . would 
have sent the letter. 
 
And I know what they’re talking about is a very serious matter, 
so I’m not suggesting to you or to members of the committee 
that a reply would necessarily have to be that quick. But what is 
the department considering in regards to their request? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, on this particular issue the 
concerns are related to the nurses. And what has happened is 
that the particular issue has been sent from my office to the 
department, and individuals in the department are working with 
the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association to address 
these nursing issues in the Swift Current area. And that’s the 
process that’s ongoing right now. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then I take it from that 
answer then that the government is going to be denying the 
request, specific request that they’ve made, and want to find 
alternate means of trying to resolve any of the concerns that 
they have. Would that be fair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The problem has been identified by these 
people in that particular community and they had one 
suggestion about how to solve it. That may be one of the array 
of possible solutions. 
 
But what’s . . . The advice that I have received is that should 
work through the professional nursing association to address 
those issues and hopefully that can resolve all the issues. But if 
that can’t, well then we still have the option of looking at some 
of the other suggestions. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, through 
you to the minister, just before I ask another question, just an 
encouragement, I think, for someone in the department then or 
yourself, someone in your office, to contact at least the local 
SUN representatives. Maybe they have. 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2161 

 

But as of a very late date I’m not sure that they knew that that’s 
what was happening and I think that they would . . . you know, 
they might appreciate hearing that, Mr. Minister. 
 
And also in addition to that, would any officials of Sask Health 
have informed the district of the request to you? I mean 
obviously you’ll have to check with your officials on this, Mr. 
Minister. I don’t mean to ask an unfair question, but that is the 
question. Could you please confirm or deny, I guess, that any 
officials of Sask Health may have informed the district of this 
request that has been made, prior to the people that actually 
made the request, that wrote the letter, ever hearing from the 
department, from yourself, from your office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, I can’t 
answer that specific question at this time. 
 
What happened, when the issues were identified, was to take a 
look at some of the information that we had from the district to 
see whether or not there were administrative difficulties or 
financial difficulties in the regular reporting structure, and then 
this attempt to sort out some of the nursing issues the other way. 
 
But at this point I don’t know and the officials that are here with 
me don’t know if it was shared with the local administrative 
staff. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, a 
different topic if I may. Just a few quick questions . . . 
surprisingly enough, I just wanted to ask a few more questions 
about the hospital in Swift Current. 
 
I know that the board there has been doing some planning, I 
think, with Sask Health regarding upgrades to the hospital as it 
exists now, and we have this dilemma in the community I think. 
And I don’t want to speak for the board, but I’m sure they feel 
this way a little bit too; I know I do. 
 
On one hand you certainly want to see every possible capital 
improvement occur to the hospital in the hopefully unlikely 
event that that’s the hospital that we have in our community for 
the foreseeable future. But if it does appear that the community 
is willing to come together in the kind of community effort that 
you highlighted the last time I asked about this — and I 
appreciated that response — but if that kind of community 
effort can be developed in Swift Current and indeed we can be 
on our way, at least, to the potential of a new facility, I think it’s 
. . . we’re sort of on the horns of a dilemma frankly. 
 
Because on one hand there needs to be improvements to the 
hospital. Certainly code issues are essential; nobody would 
disagree with that. On the other hand if we have a chance for a 
new integrated facility some day in the not too distant future, 
you hate . . . you know you hate to spend too many tax dollars 
on the sow’s ear when you’re going for the silk purse, to put it 
perhaps too bluntly. 
 
So I wonder if you could comment on that item in the budget, 
and if officials have indeed been working with the Swift 
Current district to try to accomplish both having a hospital 
that’s safe currently and suitable currently, but also not 
eliminating the potential of a new one down the road? 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I thank the member for the 
question again so that I can explain what I have learned since 
the last time we talked. Because I’m learning many things about 
the process of developing health facilities in Saskatchewan as I 
go and visit each and every community each week. 
 
What I do know — more so than the last time we talked — is 
that it is a long process to identify the kind of facility and the 
scope of the services that are going to be presented to the 
community for two, three, or four decades, depending on how 
long that works. 
 
And so what has to happen, for example, in a community like 
Swift Current, is that the existing facility . . . You obviously 
have to do the things that will try to keep it up to code, but you 
also have to recognize that all of these facilities have a useful 
life of a certain time. 
 
And so, practically, the community works together with their 
local management people. The health district capital people 
work with the local planning to identify the needs and 
requirements and then we see how we can fit it into the whole 
process. 
 
And so I don’t have the specific detail about what kinds of 
projects are there in Swift Current. We know that Swift 
Current’s a thriving community and a place where many people 
like to come to live because of the medical services and many 
of the other services. And I don’t see that changing now or 10 
years or 20 years from now. So the task we have is to get the 
right combination of ideas and resources to make sure that we 
have the very best care we can for that community. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you for that answer. And I don’t think I’m 
reading into it too much to hear what you’re saying and that is 
that this balance between making sure we have a suitable 
facility now and also, you know, wanting to sort of keep our 
powder dry for the hopeful day when we can have a new facility 
— that’s a balance that you’re concerned about. 
 
So those are some concerns that I had. And I thank you and 
your officials for your time and I’m sure the Health critic, my 
colleague from Melfort, has some additional questions. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Minister, I 
want to continue on in these medical services area that we 
talked about. In the medical education system there is a grant 
this year increasing by approximately . . . or I guess exactly $1 
million to medical education, to $20 million. Is this the 
honorarium or the stipend to the College of Medicine? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That makes it real 
easy. 
 
In addition I see that, if we move on to chiropractic services, 
there has been some concern about the level of chiropractic 
services such that the Chiropractics’ Association has addressed 
the concern that in many instances clients are turning to perhaps 



2162 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

lower cost services because they are fully covered, where in 
their profession only a portion of the actual cost of the service is 
covered by the system. 
 
I see as well in this area that the grant has gone up 
approximately a million dollars or about 15 per cent. Does this 
address the concerns that were raised by the Chiropractics’ 
Association last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, there have been no changes to 
the payment system and so what this increase reflects is an 
increase in utilization using the co-payment system that exists 
now. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If this is a 15 per 
cent increase in utilization then in effect, is this a trend that 
you’ve seen developing and is it projected to continue into the 
future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The utilization as set out here is within the 
range that’s been expected. It sort of goes up and down a little 
bit but it’s usually right in this particular range. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in this sub-program section as well, there’s optometric 
services, and that has increased only modestly. Is that again a 
utilization increase or is it a change in the service fee delivery? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The change in this budget reflects a slight 
increase in the contract with the Optometric Association. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much. 
 
The next section is dental services and that too has increased 
modestly. Is there again a change in utilization or a change in 
fee schedule? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This particular budget amount reflects the 
change in utilization, not the fees. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, out of province is budgeted for 
about a 9.3 per cent increase, approximately a little less than $4 
million. Has that budgeted amount been distorted at all by any 
potential transfers that had to occur by virtue of the work 
disruption that we’ve experienced in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I think we need to all 
remember that the budgets are an estimate and they’re based on 
past experience. And so to give you an example, payments for 
out of province in the ’97-98, the actual payments were 
42,946,585. In ’98-99, it dropped about $2 million, down to 
40,967,439. Then in ’99-2000, it went up again to 44,665,769. 
And then last year’s went up a little bit higher to 47,331,841. 
 
So that the figure that we have in the budget this year of 
44,491,000 is an estimate in the range that’s been there for the 
last four years. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, I have a 
news release from the Manitoba Government dated May 31, 
2001. And the headline is “Podiatrist Act Proposed by 
(Minister) Chomiak” and it would allow provision for a 
podiatrist Act. 

And my question is, is are we looking at expanded podiatry 
programs or an Act to regulate this profession or what is the 
status in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, this particular area is an area of 
fair . . . well intense study. And we have been working with the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons and the podiatrists who 
would like to be registered and have looked at a number of 
different legislative options. We’re still studying it, but we 
anticipate coming up with a suggested solution probably by 
next year. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. As you’re aware, you 
know there are many issues surrounding the diseases of 
diabetes, etc., that have a pretty severe impact on our 
Aboriginal community. And many times that we find that we 
end up with amputations and things of that nature that may be 
in large measure preventable if we had a proper complement of 
podiatrists operating in the province. And I certainly encourage 
the minister to work in that regard. 
 
And I’m also pleased to hear that you’re actively looking at this 
issue because I think it’s another huge area and another issue 
where we may be able to take more preventative measures that 
would indeed not only be a benefit to clients but also to the 
system as a whole. So I’d like to encourage that. 
 
Another area that I would like to look at in terms of shortfalls of 
personnel is the whole issue of speech pathologists. Currently I 
believe that . . . Can you tell me I guess, first of all, is there any 
speech pathology program available in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
My understanding is is that that isn’t the case; that many of our 
speech pathologists receive their training in Minot, as a matter 
fact. Can you outline the issue in terms of speech pathologists? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, there is no training program in 
Saskatchewan for speech pathologists. I think you are right that 
a number of them go to Minot, but I think there are bursaries 
and other arrangements where the province is involved. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, you know, the whole issue and 
you know there’s been articles in the past and I have one here 
from The StarPhoenix that indicates that . . . This is The 
StarPhoenix of March 12, 2001. The story is “Children suffer 
from shortage of speech pathologists.” And in many instances 
speech pathology, if they’re not being adequately met in our 
health districts, forces parents who maybe have children that 
require these services to seek them on their own. 
 
And I wonder, have you done an assessment of the requirement 
that we have in this province for speech pathologists, and how 
short are we indeed and where are these pathologists located? 
And is there a program in place to expand the services so that 
there aren’t people falling through the cracks and lacking this 
service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I thank the member for that 
specific question because it allows me to talk about an area 
where the Department of Health co-operates very closely with 
the Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training. 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2163 

 

And they have the job also looking at the labour market and 
what kinds of jobs are necessary. We give the information. 
 
Just for the information of the public, as of March 29, 2001, 
which I guess is a couple of months ago; the number of speech 
therapists and audiologists in Saskatchewan was 226. And that 
was an increase of six over the previous year. So that’s the 
number of people that are there. 
 
But what we do know is that there are particular areas that don’t 
have the full complement, but that particular need is then 
presented to the Post-Secondary Education people. And they are 
looking at, well are certain kinds of programs ones we should 
introduce in Saskatchewan or not? Or how do we make 
arrangements with our neighbours, both across Canada and to 
the south to get training for our Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, is one of the options that you look 
at, perhaps if Minot has a program, does the department or 
Post-Secondary Education I guess — and maybe unfair to ask 
you this, I understand that — but is there the possibility of 
looking at almost purchasing training seats in audiology or 
speech pathology at the university in Minot so that we can be 
assured that we have a certain number of people that would be 
trained there, in alternative to introducing the program ourself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Within the Health department there are 
bursaries that are provided but we don’t specifically buy the 
seats. But there are some situations where the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training does buy the 
seats; for example, I think at SAIT, Southern Alberta Institute 
of Technology, there are certain programs that . . . where they 
buy seats and we know, I think, that in some of the radiation 
technology area that they do purchase specific positions. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, I’d like 
to go to the next subsection, the drug plan and extended benefits 
subsection. 
 
Minister, we see and we’ve seen I guess over the last number of 
years a fairly significant increase in the costs to the 
Saskatchewan Prescription Drug Plan component of the Health 
budget. And I wonder, first of all, if you could outline where 
. . . or where you’re experiencing these cost centres and where 
you see this moving into the future. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the increased costs in the drug 
plan relate to an increased number of prescriptions. The 
projection is that it’ll increase by about 6 per cent. As well the 
cost of an average prescription will increase about 5 per cent. 
And these estimates are based on recent trends around the use 
of newer, more expensive drugs and the funding that has been 
approved or may be approved through the Formulary 
Committee over the coming year. 
 
So it’s numbers of prescriptions are up by 6 per cent, and the 
average cost for each prescription is up 5 per cent. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, I think it’s pretty easy to 
understand why the average price for prescriptions are 
increasing. I think increasingly in the Formulary there is a 

number of higher-priced alternatives as individual drugs, so it’s 
pretty easy to understand that the average would go up. 
 
I’m interested to hear you say that the actual number of 
prescriptions are going up. Is there a way of identifying why 
that might be if the prescription numbers are going up? Is it 
because of our changing demographics? Or to what does the 
department attribute the fact that there is actually a higher 
number of prescriptions being written? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Once again, the member has asked a very 
complicated question because it’s . . . you can’t clearly point to 
one specific thing that does relate to the increased numbers of 
prescriptions. 
 
But just to give you the information that comes out of the 
annual report. The numbers of prescriptions processed in ’97-98 
was 6,216,167. The next year it went up to 6,622,455, and last 
year, ’99-2000, which I guess is the previous year but the one 
that’s in this report, was over 7 million, 7,014,580. So you have 
that trend. 
 
One of the things that’s happening is as new drugs come onto 
the Formulary, these drugs are used by physicians and patients. 
Also there are a number of drugs that have come into play 
where they’re used in combination so you end up using more 
than one of the particular drugs. 
 
So it’s a whole number of factors that relate to the 
pharmaceutical industry. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, in terms 
of when you approve drugs to go onto the Formulary, do you 
look at — for lack of a better word — the big picture? For 
example, if a drug, although it may seem to be expensive and 
may indeed contribute to the rise in costs of the drugs on this 
line item in terms of the prescription drug plan, but if it can be 
shown that proper use of this drug would maybe allow for a 
person to be independent and not require hospitalization or 
home care or long-term care facilities that may indeed be much 
more costly, does the system look at those kind of cost benefit 
analysis, if you like, to see if it makes sense to put what would 
seem to be even a very expensive drug, but you analyze the 
benefits, might be even more advantageous? Is that cost-benefit 
analysis done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, that particular question 
is exactly the question that the Formulary Committee looks at. 
They have the role to look at obviously the effectiveness of the 
drug from a straight medical basis, but it also looks at the net 
benefit. And so a good example is the whole issue around 
Betaseron and how that particular drug was identified for use 
and it did relate to the ability of people to function much more 
fully in the community with the use of that drug. 
 
So what does happen is that they do look at well, what is the 
effect on the overall, I guess, position of the patient, and also 
the . . . how it fits into the cost of the health system. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. One final area that I 
want to talk about today is the Saskatchewan Aids to 
Independent Living. Mr. Minister, would you outline the 
program for orthopedic services that happen out of the Wascana 



2164 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

Rehab Centre and what programs or what practitioners, private 
or otherwise, does the program allow to have and provide 
services for and be funded through SAIL (Saskatchewan Aids 
to Independent Living) programs as independent practitioners? 
 
For example, I’m thinking specifically of Spalding Orthopaedic 
Design who is an independent practitioner who has all the 
qualifications to practise in this province, but I understand has 
some difficulty being recognized for the services he’s able to 
provide. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the present 
arrangement around prosthetic and orthotic appliances, which I 
assume is the question, is that these services are provided on 
behalf of the Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living or 
SAIL through provincial workshops located at the Wascana 
Rehab Centre in Regina and the Saskatchewan Abilities 
Council in Saskatoon. 
 
So that’s the way that these particular devices are provided to 
Saskatchewan. It’s possible that an individual company, such as 
you’ve suggested, could work together with one of those 
organizations and become part of the supply there, or I think 
these kinds of contracts come up for renewal now and again and 
there could be a possibility of being part of that discussion 
when there’s a renewal of the contract. 
 
But right now these are the places where these services are 
provided. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
Minister, I would like to thank you for your attention this 
afternoon. We’ve covered a great number of areas. I would like 
to very much thank you and your officials for your attention. 
 
And I would like to turn it over to my colleague, the member 
from Humboldt, who has some questions to ask at this time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And good afternoon to the 
minister and good afternoon to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ve had concerns forwarded to me from the 
special care aides at St. Mary’s Villa in Humboldt. And I know 
from their correspondence with myself that they have issued to 
your department, as well as the health district, as well as Mr. 
Romanow who is now heading the Health Care Commission, 
and a number of other involved agencies and people about their 
concerns surrounding their deep concern for the residents of St. 
Mary’s Villa and what the understaffing is doing in that regard 
— jeopardizing patients’ lives and well-being. 
 
As well they bring to my attention and to yours, that in fact high 
numbers of staff are on sick time — their injury rate is high — 
and many other concerns surrounding understaffing that have 
been brought forward and have not been addressed up till this 
point. 
 
I’d just like to read to you the letter that they have put forward 
and an excerpt from it that does explain quite clearly and 
describe quite clearly why they’re concerned and what is 
happening at St. Mary’s Villa. They say: 
 

We come with deep concern for our residents who are not 

receiving the full care they require, given the present 
staffing levels. There is resident neglect and systemic abuse 
happening daily at St. Mary’s Villa due to the shortage of 
staff versus the high-care needs. There’s also staff abuse 
present making our staff work in conditions that could and 
do affect their present quality of life and future quality. 
 
If injury rates are high, then look at why they are high 
please. And our main answer to that is they are high 
because of short staffing. And these staff are put in 
situations where you cannot ask for assistance because 
there was no one available to give you assistance. 

 
Now if you’ll bear with me, Mr. Minister, they have also put 
forward some points that point out the present norm for the 
residents and the staff at St. Mary’s Villa and they want to have 
this addressed. Because as you well know in just the latest 
strike, there was an issue of pensions and money and so on 
involved, but there was also the issue of understaffing. And 
these special care aides from St. Mary’s Villa point out very 
clearly what this is doing. 
 
And as I’ve said, if you’d just bear with me for a moment I’d 
like to read to you what they would like you to hear. 
 
There have been many challenges in health care in the last 
several years. Long-term care is one sector in health care. This 
area in our experience is our main concern. 
 
The proposed vision and desire of health care presently, as we 
understand it, is to provide quality care for those patients who 
are residents in the long-term care system. But the reality of the 
term quality as we live it in our workplace falls far short if 
quality is to include loving, humanitarian care for the very 
people who made this province what it is today. Due to 
understaffing versus high levels of care, systemic abuse has 
become the norm in health care and not the exception. 
 
The present norm for the residents in St. Mary’s Villa is that 
they have to wait for long periods of time for basic personal 
care needs to be met. The special care aides contend that 
residents should have a right to the basics. They should have a 
right to be toileted when they need to, versus when the staff has 
time. They should have the right to be fed a warm meal. But the 
staff says that when you are one staff taking care of 22 persons 
that need to be fed, and of course by one aide, you’re going to 
wait. 
 
The staff maintains that residents have a right to be laid down 
for a rest when they are tired and presently they’re left for long 
periods of time in chairs, etc., because the staff doesn’t have 
time to get to them. The residents have the right to be 
transferred in the safest way possible and that’s not happening; 
to be repositioned if you cannot move yourself. 
 
They have the right to being attended to when they have a need, 
not being found and then the need attended to long after the 
patients require help. Patients should not have to apologize for 
needing help or to say to the staff, I’m sorry I had to call you; I 
know you’re so busy. 
 
The staff contends that if a resident is dying alone and/or if 
another resident is severely sick with the flu, there are no 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2165 

 

guarantees that either will be given the comfort of someone 
being with them. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Minister, if you are dying alone and you have 
no family, it is very hard for the staff. They are very hard 
pressed to even stop in the room every 15 minutes. And the 
staff says yes, these facts are very appalling. 
 
And I think we should bear in mind, Mr. Minister, that the 
special care aides that brought this to our attention have risked a 
great deal. They have brought all of this information forward to 
all the officials that they believed should hear about it with the 
risk of maybe losing their jobs or the risk of being admonished. 
But they felt that the necessity was so great that they were 
going to risk it because they’re concerned about the patients. 
 
Now the present norm for the worker, for the special care aides 
in St. Mary’s Villa, is coming to work and leaving with a 
broken spirit. It’s caused by increased workload and the high 
speed in which they’re expected to do their work. Working 
exhausted, working in cramped conditions, working in unsafe 
environments, doing transfers alone that should be done with 
the assistance of two, they’ve had work injuries. 
 
The norm for the worker is having to constantly priorize, 
leaving the silent patients who cannot speak to attend to the care 
of those who can speak. Dignity provided first to those who 
have a voice. This is not right. Everyone should be available or 
have available to them immediate and the best care. 
 
When this happens and they have to attend to people who are 
crying out rather than those who don’t have a voice, it causes 
the staff immense guilt and frustration. They say that we’re 
looking after people here — all who have the right to dignity; 
all for whom we carry an immense responsibility. Working 
under the duress of knowing we have not met the full needs and 
expectations of our residents and their families causes us grave 
concern. 
 
We are constantly also expected to incorporate new ways and 
means of attending to our residents. 
 
And they’re referring here, I think, to the lift program where 
they have to transfer patients in a lift which must have two 
people doing it, two staff members. As it is right now, they’re 
not able to, to provide two staff members at any one time in any 
one place because they’re so understaffed. 
 
(16:30) 
 
New programs and policies for the potential desired result of 
increased well-being for staff and residents are there. But those 
people that put forward those policies and new programs know 
full well that without the proper amount of staff, that the new 
program or policy is impossible to deliver successfully without 
more direct repercussions to the residents than they already are 
dealing with. 
 
The front-line workers, not the policy makers, are the ones to 
deliver the news to the residents that they must now wait longer 
for help due to a program or policy that must be adhered to. 
 
And they finish, Mr. Minister, by saying if health care can be 

looked at like a vast ocean, then you have placed upon the 
workers an army tank on which to cross the ocean. And you 
have also expected those very workers to keep that tank afloat 
without sending more help. 
 
They say we understand the changes in health care are 
overwhelming at present and offer an immense challenge, but 
we are asking for the basics, the foundation of a good health 
care system. And that foundation is sufficient hands to do the 
work. They say if we have that, we have a solid foundation on 
which to build. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Minister, we ask this to you, the hon. member 
. . . minister rather, of this legislature. In order to resolve the 
crisis in understaffing being experienced in long-term care 
facilities today, we, the front-line workers who care for the 
residents of Saskatchewan would like to ask our Health minister 
when there will be additional funding forthcoming and placed 
into health care to increase staffing levels and meet the growing 
needs of the Saskatchewan people for whom they are 
responsible to and for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I thank the member for 
the question, after that particular letter from these workers in 
the Humboldt area. 
 
Our goal obviously as a government is to provide good care to 
people. We know that that happens on the one-on-one basis as 
identified by these particular workers. But also what we 
recognize is that on a broader basis, the services are provided 
through the health districts and then through the various 
institutions that relate to the health districts. 
 
It’s my understanding that a number of these kinds of concerns 
from these particular employees in that area have been 
discussed with the local management, but not all of them have 
been sorted out. Some of them have. 
 
And even in the information provided there is a reference to the 
lifts and the basic policy of SAHO and the government that we 
should get away from having our staff doing the lifting without 
some assistance. Now that’s a change that also requires a 
change in how people do things, and some getting used to. 
 
And sometimes some of the lifts that are provided don’t do all 
of the things that are expected of them. But I know that at that 
particular facility that they did bring in the lifts; they are part of 
the overall provincial plan to try to reduce the number of back 
injuries because of the . . . in the health area. 
 
So I guess what I would say is that the best way to resolve these 
kinds of issues is to work with the local management as to the 
specific issues. 
 
Now the broader question that’s asked is about the numbers of 
people who work within the health system in particular sectors. 
And I think the question or the point made here is that when 
you’re dealing with the elderly in institutions, the level of care 
that’s required has increased over the years as we have people 
that have more requirements in the institutions. 
 
And that is an issue that we are addressing but it’s addressed in 
a number of different ways. One is by trying to get the 



2166 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

appropriate amount of staff. Another is to increase the skill 
levels of all the people that operate. And another is to look at 
the kinds of facilities that we have now because some of them 
have outlived their usefulness and need to be replaced with 
facilities that are easier to work in for the workers. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Well, Mr. Minister, St. Mary’s Villa 
has a good part of it that is — like the dining room, those areas 
that patients are transferred back and forth from — some of 
those areas are well equipped. 
 
However the special care aides refer here to the crowding in the 
rooms actually that the patients stay in and, you know, the 
number of articles in that room. They refer to trying to get a 
patient out of the room to take them out, to take them to toilet, 
to take them to whatever, and having to remove four or five 
pieces of furniture — chairs, whatever — from the room first 
before they can get them out of there and then moving all of 
that back in. And they’re talking about how much time this 
takes to do. With the understaffing they have it’s impossible to 
do this in good, efficient, and effective timing. 
 
Now the other thing I wanted to mention, Mr. Minister, who 
deals with an issue when . . . For instance the special care aides 
were telling me when they took their concerns to the acting 
CEO (chief executive officer) of the health district, the acting 
CEO said well it seems to me that according to the numbers of 
patients you have in the villa, you have a substantial number of 
people working, staff there. What he’s doing is he’s including 
the RNs which do not do hands-on work in that villa. 
 
So it seems to me that somehow somebody should be able to 
look at this with some common sense and say well, you don’t 
have the hands if people are not doing the practical work. 
 
Why are the RNs being included in the staffing numbers when 
doing a comparison here as to staff/patient ratio? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I think the way to 
answer the question is in sort of a broad scope and then maybe 
more narrowly. 
 
But on a broad basis, what happens in studies that I guess are 
done Canada-wide or maybe even worldwide, they look at the 
staffing requirements for different levels of care, and standards 
are identified. And those standards are then translated into the 
local situation which, in our case, would be all of 
Saskatchewan. So there are some ranges of staffing 
requirements that are used to attempt to see whether appropriate 
care is being provided. 
 
But when it comes down to the specific staffing arrangements, 
it often comes down to how the work is defined and who does 
which part. And that’s very much the local managers working 
together with the workers to define some of that. 
 
And clearly there’s frustration registered by a number of these 
people around some of those decisions and they are obviously 
attempting to address those. And I think the most appropriate 
place to address them is at the local level with the director, I 
think it’s called health services, and the management staff in the 
particular facility. 
 

But those people, and probably the overall administrator for the 
whole district, would have reference to provincial standards or 
international standards and try to see whether they are 
somewhat in relationship to some of these kinds of standards 
that have been set. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d just 
like to switch gears a bit here. I had alerted you earlier that I 
wanted to have some discussion with you on what role the 
province is playing as far as prescription drug abuse of 
primarily Aboriginal people in the province. And as we know 
there has been a standing committee recently on public accounts 
in Ottawa to investigate the drug abuse issue or prescription 
drug abuse issue among First Nations. 
 
And when I was reading all of this material, Mr. Minister, and it 
was brought to my immediate attention that Darcy Ironchild had 
died of prescription drug abuse. In fact he was allowed to fill 
307 prescriptions within a year comprised of potent 
antidepressants and sleeping medication. He died of an 
overdose of chlorohydrate. 
 
What occurred to me is that, what is the matter with the system 
here? I mean what is the matter with . . . why are pharmacists 
and doctors prescribing this amount of prescription drugs? Why 
isn’t there a monitoring situation that’s going on? 
 
I understand that there is a privacy issue that has been brought 
forward at the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, but I 
know that the Auditor General of Canada is charging the federal 
government — and really hoping that the provincial 
governments will get onside — with not setting up or being 
responsible for setting up some sort of a system that would 
track the use of prescription drugs because people are dying. 
And the way the system is, people are being sacrificed on the 
altar of the Privacy Act. We have to do something about it. 
 
I’m asking you today just what it is that your government is 
doing in order to computerize incidents of abusive prescription 
drugs and how soon will we have something in place? And, Mr. 
Minister, is there something available right now for doctors and 
pharmacists to track the use of prescription drugs by First 
Nations people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I think the answer to 
the question — and I recall our discussion around this — is that 
we presently in the province do have a plan which records all of 
these kinds of information for the use by the doctors and by the 
pharmacists. But it includes those particular drugs that are paid 
for by our system. And so that information is there. 
 
What we are doing as a province is we are asking the federal 
government who pays for the prescriptions of Mr. Ironchild — 
so it was on a different system; it wasn’t related to what we 
have as a province-wide system — we’re asking the federal 
government to connect their information into our system. 
 
And the technical people say that that’s something that’s 
possible to do. But it requires co-operation from the federal 
government, Indian and Northern Affairs, I guess INAC (Indian 
and Northern Affairs Canada) kind of responsibility, and it also 
requires co-operation from the First Nations in Saskatchewan 
because they obviously work in consultation with those people. 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2167 

 

So what we have right now is the Saskatchewan Health 
information technology people working together with 
Saskatchewan Health Information Network — which is a close 
partner in all of these kinds of things — working with the 
federal government and with the other Western provinces so 
that we have a common approach of putting this information 
together. 
 
But we in Saskatchewan have a good system working right now 
for the people who would obtain their drugs outside of the 
federal system. And we want the federal people to get their 
information connected into that. 
 
And so given the comments that you’ve made about the federal 
auditor saying these things, well basically the encouragement 
from our side would be to have him encourage the federal 
people, and working together with the First Nations, to get this 
information into our system. Then we in Saskatchewan would 
have the kind of comprehensive system you’re looking for. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, had SHIN (Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network) been up and running at the time that Mr. 
Ironchild was abusing all of these drugs, would that have 
prevented . . . possibly prevented his death? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The system was running. It’s been 
running since 1989. And so what happens though is that the 
federal government drug purchase information doesn’t go into 
our program. And so if in fact when our system had started, it 
included all of the prescriptions given in the province including 
the ones paid for through the federal system, then yes, of 
course, that information would have been in the system. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Why do you think 
there’s a resistance on the part of the federal government to 
connect with the provincial system? What is the big problem? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, we as a department are 
optimistic that the federal government will come in and that 
they seem . . . the resistance doesn’t seem to be there any more. 
 
I think it’s, you know, work by the coroner’s jury in this 
particular case that identifies the problem as to where it is. The 
kinds of concerns raised by the auditor, the concerns raised by 
people throughout the community have identified for the federal 
government that they need to participate in this. 
 
So we’re hopeful that this will happen sooner rather than later. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the issue 
of addictions that we’re talking about brings to mind alcohol 
addictions that certainly have been identified by people such as 
Matthew Coon Come. He’s concerned about the addictions to 
alcohol and he has made that statement publicly and is asking 
that there is responsibility taken to address the issue, personal 
responsibility, and I commend him for that. 
 
But I also recognize — and I’m sure that you do too — that in 
order for people to overcome addictions, they need some help. 
 
Now the Saskatchewan Party in the previous session had asked 

for the government to work with cities to provide detox centres 
for all people who need it. The need is higher in the Aboriginal 
community and there has been an outcry, especially in 
Saskatoon, for some detox centres. We don’t have sufficient 
spaces at all, and we need an emergency detox. 
 
So I’m wondering whether or not there have been some really 
intense meetings between yourself and the city of Saskatoon on 
how this might come about, and possibly shared funding for it? 
Have you entered into those discussions; and do you intend to 
see that there are emergency detox centres up and running in 
Saskatoon soon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The question is a very timely question 
because there is a meeting about this specific issue in Saskatoon 
this Thursday and our officials are going to be part of that 
meeting. And basically it’s the Saskatoon city police, the 
Saskatoon Health District, as well as a number of community 
groups in Saskatoon who are looking at exactly that kind of a 
facility that you talk about. And it’s one where everybody has 
to work together because it’s clearly a problem we have to deal 
with. 
 
Ms. Julé: — To your knowledge, Mr. Minister, at this time, is 
there a willingness by your government to contribute to the 
funding of these emergency detox centres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — At the present time, as the member maybe 
knows, there are six detoxification centres across the province 
which are funded through Saskatchewan Health. But the 
specific project or idea that’s being looked at in Saskatoon is 
this emergency detox facility. And we’re going there to be part 
of . . . some of the officials are going there to be part of the 
discussion and examination of what are the requirements and 
how can this be done; what are the options? 
 
And at this point there haven’t been any budgets set or any 
requests for money. But obviously we’re there and we want to 
hear what’s being proposed so that we can look at it in light of 
the overall system in the province. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, again I 
want to switch gears one more time. This is, if you will bear 
with me a little bit more, a request that I make to you on behalf 
of the Gabriel Springs Health District. 
 
The Gabriel Springs Health District met recently to discuss the 
Fyke report, and they are quite concerned about the fact that 
they might be consumed into a larger health district and not end 
up having a hospital in Wakaw and Rosthern. 
 
Now Wakaw doesn’t appear to be that big a community when 
you start to look at the needs, but these people make the very 
good point that the population of Wakaw is equal to that of 
Melfort for six months of the year because there are 750 
cottages at Wakaw Lake plus the regional park and the 
campsites that need hospital services there. 
 
So I want to make that plea to you on behalf of them to make 
sure that there’s sound reasoning and recognition of this fact 
when any consideration is made as far as to where hospitals will 
be with doctors. 
 



2168 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2001 

 

Now they also point out that Pioneer Lodge is there. There are 
many, of course, senior patients there. If that hospital closes, 
these people will be at a great disadvantage. In fact many of 
them could lose their lives because of the longer distances to 
hospital in case they have a heart attack or something that’s that 
severe. They would need immediate attention. As you well 
know, a senior person, or anybody having a heart attack for that 
matter, needs to have a doctor accessible immediately. 
 
These people and many others throughout the province are not 
convinced that if a community centre is set up that the doctors 
will stay in those regions. And so what that means is that 
patients would have to be transported longer distances and 
would not get the immediate attention that they need. 
 
Even the proposed Fyke recommendation into ambulance 
services and emergency measures technicians being close at 
hand is not going to be the same thing as a doctor right there 
with them. It takes time for all of those technicians to be 
notified and to come to the site, and this whole idea of 
centralizing services is very adverse to rural people. 
 
And these people as well as others in Central Plains Health 
District make the point that centralization might be all right for 
condensed populations, for really congested populations, but it 
is not a good concept when it comes to sparse populations, and 
Saskatchewan has a very sparse population. Centralization 
would be a big mistake. 
 
So I thank you very much, Mr. Minister, and I’m very pleased 
that you could be here today to address these issues. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Class Actions Act/ 
Loi sur les recours collectifs 

 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To my right 
is Madeleine Robertson who’s the Crown counsel in the 
Department of Justice. And I ask the members to welcome her 
to the Assembly. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Deputy Speaker. 
Welcome to the minister and to his official. 
 
The Class Actions Act is a new one, a new concept for 
Saskatchewan. And I’m wondering if the minister would like to 
explain how this will relate to no-fault insurance. Will people 
under that situation, if there happens to be a car model or a tire 
type that’s the cause of a lot of accidents, will people in 
Saskatchewan be able to sue, keeping in mind that we are a 
no-fault province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — This Bill I think which is an important 
piece of legislation for the province is designed to ensure that if 
a product, in the case the member raises, a car which is 
defective or a tire which is defective, injures a range of people, 

that an action can be brought on behalf of that whole range of 
people without having to identify every single one; but to 
develop the process — and the court would oversee this process 
— the process to identify who would be affected and what 
damages they would experience and how to quantify those 
damages. 
 
So it’s precisely that kind of case, a product liability case, 
which this legislation would be used in fairly . . . and has been 
used in those areas in other provinces and in other jurisdictions. 
Similarly medical appliance cases are frequently dealt with 
under this kind of, under this type of legislation. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. You talked a bit about the courts 
making some decisions as to how this class action suit would 
progress. Under what circumstances might a court terminate 
proceedings of a class action suit, or put limits on it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asks under what 
circumstances would a judge decide that a class action was not 
the appropriate process to follow once it’s begun, is my 
understanding. And I guess what a judge might do is look at the 
way in which the class action is proceeding and conclude that it 
was improperly designated class action in the first place. Or it 
could conclude that another process would be preferable to the 
class action, might be an action which makes it impossible to 
identify the plaintiffs. 
 
But generally those matters will be addressed when an 
application is made for an action brought in one person’s name 
to be used as a class action for a range of plaintiffs suffering the 
same kind of injury as the person in whose name the action is 
being brought. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. There are presently a number of 
lawsuits going on against manufacturers of breast implants. 
How will this affect that for the women in Saskatchewan? 
 
(17:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Those actions to which Saskatchewan 
women have attached their names would generally be, would be 
taking place in provinces where there’s already the possibility 
of class actions — BC (British Columbia), Quebec, and 
Ontario. And those could continue there or they could bring . . . 
people here in the province could, once the legislation is 
proclaimed, bring an action here or apply to a court for an 
action to be a class action should they so wish. 
 
But those actions which are presently in place now are class 
actions in the three provinces where class actions are presently 
permissible. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. My last question is probably one 
of great import but it’s also interesting. 
 
This piece of legislation comes into force on New Year’s Day 
of 2002. Why was that particular date selected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well I guess it’s slightly ironic in the 
sense that the court will be closed that day but the opportunity 
was taken to discuss this matter with the Chief Justice and it 
was felt necessary to have a little bit of a lead time for the 



June 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2169 

 

judges to get familiar with the legislation because they will 
have to make important decisions about whether or not a class 
action is appropriate in the circumstances. And the few months 
leading up to January 1 was deemed to be an appropriate period 
of time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — That concludes our questions on Bill No. 13. 
I’d like to thank the minister for taking time to answer the 
questions, and for his official as well. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you. The Bill in question has many 
clauses and the Chair requests leave to deal with it by part. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 46 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Chair: — It being past 5 p.m., this committee stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 
 


