















































Hansard: June 11, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1685 
 June 11, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to present today 
again regarding the Fyke Commission. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena health centre 
be maintained at its current level of service at minimum, 
with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral services 
available, as well as laboratory, public health, home care, 
and long-term care services for users from our district and 
beyond. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Wadena. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition regarding the North Battleford water crisis, 
the prayer of relief of which reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to call on the 
provincial and federal governments to provide immediate 
financial assistance to the city of North Battleford in order 
to facilitate necessary improvements to the North 
Battleford water treatment plant. 

 
Your petitioners come from North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the condition of 
Highway 339. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

 
And the petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Briercrest and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today with a petition from citizens concerned about the 
reduction of services to the Wadena health centre. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena health centre 
be maintained at its current level of service at minimum, 
with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral services 
available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, public 
health, home care, long-term services available to the users 
from this district and beyond. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And this is signed by citizens of Wadena, Hendon, Kuroki, and 
Kylemore. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
again on behalf of people from southwest Saskatchewan 
regarding the state of the Swift Current hospital. And the prayer 
of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by residents of 
the city of Swift Current. It’s also signed by people from Gull 
Lake; Hazlet; Moose Jaw; Abbey; Cabri; Bragg Creek, Alberta; 
Admiral; Pennant; Waldeck; and Shaunavon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
who have presented a proposal to the Government of 
Saskatchewan to build an in-patient treatment centre in the city 
of Weyburn. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
support this in-patient treatment centre in the city of 
Weyburn and provide funding for the same. 

 
And the petition is signed by citizens of Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
of citizens concerned about the huge rate increases for 
residential and business customers: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil, gas revenues to provide a more 
substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Kelvington, 
Saskatoon, Bladworth, and Beechy. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
dealing with ambulance services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 



1686 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signators to this petition come from Saskatoon, Wishart, 
Elfros, Wynyard, Punnichy, and Foam Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition 
regarding citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the Fyke 
report. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce current levels of available 
acute care, emergency and doctor services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Spiritwood, Meeting Lake, Shell Lake, and Lloydminster. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by citizens concerned with the high energy costs, and the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Battleford and 
North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with a petition from citizens who are concerned about 
the lack of cellular telephone coverage in the rural part of the 
province. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service to all communities 
throughout the Wood River constituency. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed in total by the good 
citizens of Aneroid. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to do with the lack of funding to non-profit personal care 
homes. The prayer reads: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of 
Kamsack and Runnymede. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order a petition presented on June 8, 
2001 regarding increasing the foundation operating grant to 
school divisions has been reviewed and, pursuant to rule 12(7), 
is found to be irregular and therefore can not be read and 
received. 
 
The following petitions have been reviewed and are found to be 
appropriate and are hereby read and received, and they are 10 
petitions that are addendums to previously tabled petitions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce four guests from the Midwest Legislative Conference 
that are visiting our Assembly today. They are seated behind the 
bar on the opposition side. 
 
Today, they are shadowing members of the opposition, and 
tomorrow they will be shadowing members of the government. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you representative Pam Gulleson. Pam is 
the minority leader in the North Dakota House. She stands and 
represents district no. 26 for the Democrats. Representative 
Gulleson sits on the Appropriations Committee and is a licensed 
nutritionist and farmer. 
 
Also within her constituency or her district is the Melroe 
Bobcat plant. So most people in Saskatchewan have some 
connection with that implement and would recognize where it 
comes from. 
 
Representative Gulleson was with the North Dakota State 
College and was the director in charge of distance education, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would like to ask all members to welcome representative 
Pam Gulleson to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The second member of the delegation, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce is Representative Willard 
Jenkins from Iowa state. Mr. Jenkins is on the committees for 
Appropriations, Commerce and Regulation and Economic 
Development; was first elected in 1996, and is here today, I 
believe, with his wife Kay and they have four children. Mr. 
Jenkins’ hometown is Waterloo, Iowa. 
 
I would ask all members to welcome him here today. 
 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1687 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The third member of the group, Mr. 
Speaker, is Representative Bob Skarphol. 
 
Mr. Skarphol is actually closer to Regina I believe than he is to 
his own state capital. It was only a two and a half hour drive to 
get up here today because his district is right across the border, 
southwest of Estevan. He represents district no. 2 for the 
Republicans and his hometown is Tioga, North Dakota. 
 
Representative Skarphol is a buffalo rancher and an 
independent oilfield contractor. Is married to Diana and they 
have three children. 
 
I would ask all members to welcome them to the Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the fourth representative of 
the MLC (Midwestern Legislative Conference) today is 
Representative Robert Tomlinson who sits for district 24 in the 
Kansas State House. Sits as a Republican, Mr. Speaker. His 
home address is Roland Park, Kansas, which I believe is a part 
of Kansas City area. So he’s not too rural. 
 
His occupation prior to being elected, or currently perhaps, is a 
special services teacher. And he’s here, I believe, with his wife 
Carol, Mr. Speaker. And I would ask that all members welcome 
Representative Tomlinson to the House today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 
to welcome our special guests. I had the opportunity to visit 
with them in our home last night along with spouses and Ilene 
who is their hostess. And so we’re very pleased to have you 
here in the legislature. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I rise to introduce some other very special 
guests who are seated in the west gallery. And I have with me 
today my parents, Tom and Randi Nilson. I’d ask them to stand. 
Along with my mother’s sister, Gertrude Satre and Curtis Satre 
who are here. Please stand. And then Curtis’s sister Eunice 
Gulbraa and Karl Gulbraa and Ralph and Lilly Erickson. 
 
My parents live in Regina but the other six live in Irma, 
Alberta, which is not too far from Saskatchewan. And they are 
on a trip this year to celebrate 50 years of marriage. So the six 
of them that are visiting from Alberta have all been married 50 
years. My parents have been married 51 years. 
 
And 50 years ago the six of them took a trip to Seattle, 
Washington to the Luther League Convention. And they 
decided, to celebrate that trip that they took together as six, they 
would come to Saskatchewan. And they spent a couple of very 
nice days in Moose Jaw and now they’re going to go out into 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
So we’ll ask all to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
legislature, a constituent of mine, Roger Kaeding, in the east 
gallery. Roger and his son, Warren, own and operate Wagon 
Wheel Seed farms at Churchbridge. 
 
So I would ask everyone to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
welcome and have you . . . introduce to you and to the members 
of this Assembly, 77 students from St. Angela School, who are 
in the west gallery. St. Angela is in the northwest corner of my 
constituency. And they’re accompanied by teachers Mr. 
Walker, Mrs. Burant, and Mademoiselle Dube. Chaperones 
accompanying them are Mr. Oglivie, Mrs. MacFarlane, Mr. 
Cascanette, and Mrs. Theresa Colburne. 
 
So I would like to welcome them here, and I’ll look forward to 
meeting with them later. And I hope that they enjoy their time 
in the Assembly this afternoon. Join me in welcoming them, 
please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, 14 adult education students seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, on the east side. The students are from 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology), and they’re accompanied today by teachers 
Warren Gervais and Linda Holowaty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re here to watch the proceedings, with 
interest look at question period. I’ll be able to meet briefly with 
them and have a photo on the stairs following that, and I’m sure 
they might have a few questions for me at that time. 
 
I’d ask all members to give a warm welcome to the adult 
students from SIAST. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you I want to introduce a guest in your gallery. The 
guy’s name is Mervin Leonard “Tex” Bouvier. He is from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. And his father and I were very good friends and 
I hope to continue on that friendship with him through his son. 
 
And Mervin travelled all the way from Ile-a-la-Crosse to be part 
of the Assembly today, and he’s a very avid spectator of 
politics, and this is his first opportunity to visit the Assembly. 
And I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming Mr. “Tex” 
Bouvier of Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, by leave of the 
Assembly, I would also like to welcome our guests, visiting 
representatives from Iowa, Kansas, and North Dakota, and three 



1688 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

special guests who are in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
First I’d like to introduce to the Assembly, Ileen Grossman, 
who was the assistant director for planning and development for 
the midwestern office and has come here with the 
representatives. She manages the 12-state Midwestern 
Governors’ Conference, and staffs the Midwest Canada 
Relations Committee for the Midwest Legislative Conference. 
 
And seated beside Eileen are two spouses of two the 
representatives who are doing job shadowing today, and I ask 
you welcome, Mrs. Kay Jenkins from Iowa, and Mrs. Diana 
Skarphol from North Dakota. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Public Service Week 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, June 
10 to 15 is National Public Service Week across Canada, and I 
ask all members of the House to recognize the many valuable 
contributions made by the public service sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme of this year’s of National Public Service 
Week is “Proudly Serving Canadians” and here in 
Saskatchewan we are fortunate to have an extremely dedicated 
public service sector. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, while the rest of Canada’s public 
service employees celebrate their achievements, there’s quite a 
different story unfolding here in Saskatchewan. We were all 
watching events unfold after Saskatchewan’s 14,000 CUPE 
(Canadian Union of Public Employees) health care workers 
were forced into job action this past weekend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the impact of this job action will 
undoubtedly be felt in every corner of the province. We also 
know that this workers do not want things to come to this. 
 
For years they have been saying the working conditions could 
not continue as they were, that something needs to be done. 
They want a firm commitment that their government would not 
only recognize their concerns but would also act upon them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Canada celebrates Public Service Week here in 
Saskatchewan, we remain hopeful that the current job action 
will not be lengthy and that the government recognizes the 
many important and valuable contributions made by our public 
service employees. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tourism Saskatchewan and SaskTel Mobility Partnership 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As members know, we 
are entering tourism season and last week members of the 
Assembly took part in debating a motion recognizing the 
importance of the tourism industry to our economy. We 
recognize the importance of this industry to our province and as 

a government we tend to build upon its many successes. This is 
why I am pleased to say that there is more good news for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thanks to a new partnership between Tourism Saskatchewan 
and SaskTel Mobility, residents of and visitors of this great 
province of ours can get news about the tourism industry 
delivered to the palm of their hands, Mr. Speaker. As of today, 
Saskatchewan tourists can now use their cellphones to call up 
information on more than 2,200 of Saskatchewan’s special 
events. This was able to be achieved through the use of SaskTel 
Mobility’s new mobile browser product. The browser provides 
wireless Internet access and two-way e-mail over digital 
cellphones, Mr. Speaker. It will allow SaskTel Mobility 
subscribers to access Tourism Saskatchewan on-line events 
guide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a dynamic tourism industry in 
Saskatchewan. This new initiative will help us to get the word 
out to the people of Saskatchewan that it is a vibrant province 
and it is a happening place, and it is the place to be. Now if only 
the opposition could admit it. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kiwanis International Peace Care 
and Rededication at Monchy 

 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I had the privilege, along with my colleague from 
Swift Current, to attend the Kiwanis International Peace Care 
and Rededication at Monchy, which is a border crossing in my 
constituency. 
 
Over 100 people attended the ceremony, which is sponsored by 
the Kiwanis clubs of Swift Current and Malta, Montana. The 
idea for peace markers came from the construction of the 
Harding International Goodwill Memorial, erected in 1925 in 
Stanley Park. In his last public address before his death, 
President Harding stressed the spirit of friendship between 
Canada and the United States. Part of his speech, he said: 
 

What an object lesson of peace is shown by our two 
countries to all the world. Our protection is our fraternity, 
our armour is our faith. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the inscription on the cairn reads as follows: 
 

This unfortified boundary line between the Dominion of 
Canada and the United States of America should quicken 
the remembrance of the more than a century old friendship 
between these countries. 

 
A lesson of peace to all nations erected by the Kiwanis 
Club of Malta and Swift Current, Kiwanis International, 
October 13, 1957, rededicated June 2001. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it was an excellent ceremony, dampened only by a 
small shower. But what really dampened the day was the folks 
that had to drive down Highway 4 to get there. It was a total 
embarrassment. 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1689 

 

Mr. Speaker, our American friends tell us that at least two 
people per week turn back because of that highway being so 
bad. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Broadway Theatre in Saskatoon Receives Funding 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, on a more positive note, 
for those who are familiar with the city of Saskatoon, you will 
know that the Broadway area in my constituency is recognized 
for its diversity, its history, and its character. Broadway is the 
place to be if you want to enjoy the fabulous Fringe Festival, 
participate in a poetry slam, take in a live performance of music 
at various genres, or simply enjoy a great dinner in one of our 
many fabulous restaurants. 
 
At the heart of this unique community is the Broadway Theatre. 
This theatre is a community-owned venue for the performing 
and literary arts, for independent film and repertory film. And 
it’s one of the only 12 remaining independent cinemas in all of 
Canada. 
 
Last Friday I was pleased on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan to present the Friends of the Broadway Theatre 
with a $300,000 grant. This money which comes from the 
Centenary Fund will go towards a new stage and dressing 
rooms that will make the Broadway Theatre an even better 
place for live performances. 
 
And I want to mention that The Saskatchewan Heritage 
Foundation is also providing funding toward replicating the 
theatre’s historic marquee, the building’s most prominent and 
visible feature. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to thank the group that was 
instrumental in the revival of the theatre, Chris Jones and the 
Friends of the Broadway, for all of the work they’ve done to 
keep this important facility in our community. 
 
The Broadway Theatre is truly an important part of Saskatoon’s 
cultural and artistic heritage and community, and I want to 
thank the Friends of the Broadway for all that they do to make 
Saskatoon a wonderful place to live and work. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Seniors Health Care Facility Opens 
 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Wednesday the 
Minister of Health and myself attended the official opening of 
the new Golden Acres integrated health care facility in 
Wynyard. 
 
I should mention, Mr. Speaker, that the reason the Minister of 
Health was able to attend is that I had earlier made a 
commitment to be there so that I would be absent from the 
House the same time as he was — a commitment that I made 
and I honoured. 

The new Golden Acres facility cost $8.3 million and consists of 
a 55-bed long-term care home which was attached to the 
existing hospital, making use of the expanded kitchen and 
laundry facilities at the hospital. 
 
Golden Acres home boasts the state-of-the-art design in 
monitoring features, which provides a pleasant and secure 
environment for its residents. Residents of Wynyard and 
surrounding municipalities along with the villages of Dafoe and 
Leslie, the stakeholders, worked tirelessly to raise funds and 
coordinate plans so that Golden Acres could become a reality. 
 
The Department of Health contributed 65 per cent of the cost, 
and the stakeholders came up with the additional 35 per cent. 
However the stakeholders had to assume 100 per cent of the 
cost for such things as paving, landscaping, and furnishings. 
 
The people of Wynyard and area are to be commended for their 
efforts so that their seniors can spend their last years in comfort 
and dignity. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Opening of Moose Jaw Portion of Trans Canada Trail 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, there are already dozens of 
good reasons to visit the city of Moose Jaw, but as of yesterday 
there’s another one to go along with our tunnels, our downtown 
murals, our multicultural motif, our festival of the written word, 
our museums, galleries and shops, and our excellent spa and 
fine restaurants. 
 
Yesterday at the Kiwanis River Park I was proud to take part in 
the official opening of the Moose Jaw and area portion of the 
Trans Canada Trail, the national project that is creating a hiking 
and cycling trail across Canada from sea to sea. The Moose Jaw 
trail will connect with the Devonian and Rotary trails already in 
our city, along with new trails in and around Wakamow Valley. 
 
Future plans call for extending the trail south to 15 Wing Moose 
Jaw, and north to Buffalo Pound Lake. 
 
It’s very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that with this trail which will 
link us with Corner Brook, and Port Alberni and Yellowknife, 
we are revisiting and renewing history. We began with foot 
trails and waterways to cross the land. And then came the 
railroad, then the Trans-Canada Highway, and now we’re back 
again to the trail. The better to rediscover this great nation, I 
believe. 
 
I want to congratulate the many volunteers of the Moose Jaw 
and area Trans Canada Trail Committee who worked with 
Chair, Arnold Giddings, and secretary, Mary Field. As is so 
often the case in Saskatchewan and in Moose Jaw, volunteers 
led the way. The opening of this trail was because of their work 
and to their credit. They are helping Canadians, literally, Mr. 
Speaker, walk together right across this great land. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1690 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

Davidson Resident Receives Saskatchewan Association for 
Community Living Honorary Lifetime Membership 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise in 
the House today to talk about a constituent of mine who resides 
in Davidson. Mrs. Marg Thompson was recently awarded an 
honorary lifetime membership to Saskatchewan Community 
Living. The association made this announcement at a special 
ceremony in Prince Albert a few weeks ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Thompson was a driving force in starting the 
Davidson and district branch of the Association for Community 
Living back in 1965. She’s been involved in this association at 
both the local-provincial levels ever since. 
 
She was instrumental in starting the Davidson Interlake 
Agency, as well bringing the fundraising capacity of the 
Saskatchewan Institute on Community Living to the district. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Association for Community 
Living’s goal is to create a world where all people with 
intellectual disabilities are full citizens, valued, and included. 
 
Mrs. Thompson has been dedicated to this goal for many years. 
The commitment and dedication that she’s given to this 
association over the years is outstanding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members to join me in congratulating 
Mrs. Marg Thompson on her lifetime of dedication and service 
to the people of the community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Strike by Health Care Workers 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
On Friday, Statistics Canada exposed the worst job creation 
crisis in Saskatchewan since the great depression. Ten years 
with the NDP (New Democratic Party) flying the plane, has 
plunged Saskatchewan into an economic death spiral, and the 
Premier doesn’t appear to have a plan for pulling us out. 
 
And then on Saturday morning Saskatchewan woke up to even 
more grave evidence the NDP has lost control — 14,000 health 
care workers, licensed practical nurses, laboratory technicians, 
kitchen, and janitorial staff were on strike in health facilities 
across Saskatchewan. 
 
And this morning it appears that SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations) and the unions aren’t even 
talking to each other any more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what action is the minister taking today to get 
SAHO and the union back to the bargaining table? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The top priority 
of the government is the health and safety of the patients, and 

we will continue to monitor that on a regular basis, hourly if 
necessary. 
 
What has happened over the weekend is that there has been job 
action. The parties were talking yesterday about getting a new 
conciliator or mediator. That process is ongoing. And we hope 
that there will be some announcement by the parties later today. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this NDP government appears 
to be stumbling blindly from one crisis to another. Now 14,000 
health care workers are on strike. And most people in 
Saskatchewan aren’t holding out much hope that this NDP 
government can handle the crisis. 
 
After all, it was Louise Simard and her sidekick the Premier 
who started the now failing health care reforms in 1993. And 
it’s Louise Simard and her sidekick the Premier who are now in 
charge of cleaning up the mess they themselves created. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, what specific steps other than 
talking and discussing and having more committee meetings is 
the minister taking to restore health care stability in 
Saskatchewan. What actions is the government taking 
concretely to get SAHO and the union back to the bargaining 
table? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What we know is in the ’95 election and 
the ’99 election, the people of this province said we trust you 
with our number one priority, and that’s the health system. 
 
We on this side of the government are here and we are going to 
work together with the workers, with the management, all the 
people, to provide the health care that people need. 
 
And what I would remind the member opposite is that in their 
platform in the ’99 election, they came forward with zero 
increase for health. We have provided extra money for health 
and we’re going to continue to provide good health care for the 
people of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, for the minister’s memory, in 
1999 the majority of Saskatchewan people voted to give the 
NDP the boot. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier should be very 
familiar with the reason for the strike by 14,000 health care 
workers because he was taking notes . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Let there be some peace. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
fact it was the Premier who followed Louise Simard around 
Saskatchewan reassuring everyone that the NDP so-called 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1691 

 

wellness model would save our health care system. Today the 
NDP is presiding over a health care system crippled by that 
leadership — a massive health care strike, a critical shortage of 
doctors and nurses, the longest waiting lists in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is that what the Premier meant when he travelled 
around in Saskatchewan promoting health care reform, saying 
trust us and the system will get better? Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
gotten worse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t really detect a 
question there, but what I will say is that on this side of the 
House we’re concerned about people, we’re concerned about 
the people in the long-term care homes that need help. And we 
ask both parties to come back to the bargaining table and to get 
this matter resolved. 
 
It’s unfortunate that the member opposite and his colleagues 
have unbridled glee in the fact that people are out on strike. 
That is not the kind of support that the public needs as it relates 
to labour issues. Because basically what we have is a process 
whereby people can resolve their difficulties, and we accept the 
fact that they can take some steps that are appropriate in our 
labour legislation. 
 
But ultimately the goal is to come up with a solution that allows 
all of the workers to provide the kind of care that all of our 
people in Saskatchewan need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the more things 
change, the more they stay the same. Eight years ago the 
Premier got stuck carrying Louise Simard’s bags, and now eight 
years later the Premier is stuck with her baggage. It’s no 
wonder the NDP has 14,000 health care workers on strike. After 
eight years of failed NDP health care reform, health care 
providers are overworked and many have reached the breaking 
point. They’re tired of being ignored and taken for granted by 
the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier admit it was NDP 
mismanagement of health care that has led to this strike, and 
will he share with the legislature what he plans to do to fix the 
mess that he and his NDP government has created? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
have entrusted us with managing the health system, and we are 
going to do that in a way that provides the care that people 
need. 
 
We know that the members opposite had proposed some ways 
of dealing with this, which would have been an absolute 
disaster in the province. We know that the people of 
Saskatchewan know that as well. What we will continue to do is 
work with all of the people within the system. We know that 
there’s a dispute right now. 
 
We’re requesting that the parties get back to the bargaining 

table and resolve the issues that are outstanding. There are 
many people that require assistance and we would ask that they 
resolve their dispute as quickly as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan is in the middle of a full-blown health crisis. 
 
The Regina Health District has closed almost 200 beds, 14 
operating theatres have been closed, and all elective surgeries 
have been cancelled. 
 
There’s no glee for out-of-scope employees, no glee for health 
family members, no glee for volunteers who are doing their best 
to try to make a dangerous situation from getting out of control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s people on waiting lists and our senior citizens 
that are paying the highest price, and it’s long-term care 
facilities for seniors that’ll have the most difficulty coping with 
this strike. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the Premier doing to address the reality 
that if family members, volunteers, and out-of-scope managers 
become increasingly fatigued that the critical needs of our 
senior citizens are not going to be easily met? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that the member 
opposite acknowledges all of those people who are going an 
extra mile in this time to care for those people who need help. 
 
And I would like to specifically thank those members of CUPE 
who, through the union, have agreed to provide essential 
services. That’s a very important part. 
 
I’d like to thank all of those managers who are working the 
extra shifts. I’d like to thank the family members and friends 
and volunteers who have come in to help and provide care for 
people in this situation. 
 
What we need to do is continue to monitor this situation. We 
also need to encourage the parties to get back to the table and 
resolve their dispute so that they can continue to provide good 
care for all of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
while the minister sits and watches, it’s no thanks to the 
leadership of this NDP government that’s paralyzing the whole 
health care system. 
 
Today, we are witnessing health care professionals struggling to 
cope with a workplace that is becoming increasingly a danger to 
not only the patients but also is becoming a health hazard to the 
workers themselves. High burnout rates. High workers’ 
compensation claims. These are the issues that lead to the 
nurses’ strike in 1999 and they haven’t changed since. 
 
The bottom line is that Saskatchewan is suffering from a 
shortage of health care professionals and those who are 



1692 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

struggling under unbearable working conditions are the only 
ones left. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of his own record, what can this Premier 
say to health care workers that will have them believe that his 
NDP government will understand their issues any more today 
than he did in 1998 in the health care nurses strike? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there were many things that 
this government did in the early ’90s that have paid off in some 
very good things that happened in our health care system. 
They’ve actually been emulated across the country. 
 
We know that for example Saskatoon was number two after 
Edmonton as the health district and health area that, in the latest 
Maclean’s poll, that were providing very good care. One of the 
reasons for that is that both of those places are organized along 
the lines of what was first proposed in Saskatchewan with 
integrated care. 
 
What we need to do is continue to work with and support those 
workers who are part of the system. Right now we have a 
labour dispute. We encourage the parties to get back to the 
table, so that they can resolve their issues so they can go back to 
being a team that provides the care for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Job Losses in 2000-01 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thanks to NDP mismanagement we now have a 
full-blown health care crisis in Saskatchewan. And also thanks 
to NDP mismanagement, we have a full-blown economic crisis. 
 
Over the past 12 months, NDP mismanagement has killed 
21,000 jobs — 21,000 jobs. That’s the worse one-year job loss 
in Saskatchewan history. Mr. Speaker, thanks to the NDP 
government, Saskatchewan is in an economic death spiral with 
no plan for recovery. 
 
My question to the Premier: what is the Premier doing to pull 
Saskatchewan out of this economic death spiral? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, the member opposite is quite convinced that there is a 
death spiral, as he refers to it. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there’s no secret that we have a 
difficult situation here in Saskatchewan with respect to 
agriculture, which is where the bulk of the job losses have been. 
That member opposite knows that our farming community has 
been competing on a niche international market, where 
subsidies are the order of the day, with no support from our 
national government. This has been a trend that’s been growing 
and we knew it was coming — Mr. Speaker, it’s here. 

So what we need to do and what we are attempting to do is 
work to diversify this economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say to that member, the fact that we lost some 
16,800 jobs, year over year, in Saskatchewan, is not unique to 
this province. The neighbouring community of Alberta lost 
14,800 . . . or 400 jobs in that same time period. But I think it’s 
important to realize that agriculture is a larger percentage of our 
economy here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. How sad that the 
minister would make excuses rather than offer to roll up his 
sleeves and go to work on behalf of our people. 
 
Saskatchewan’s economy has experienced tough times in the 
past, but no government ever in Saskatchewan has killed 21,000 
jobs in a year. And now jobs are even being lost outside of the 
agriculture sector. The Blakeney government never did that, the 
Devine government didn’t, and nor did the Romanow 
government lose 21,000 jobs in a year. 
 
It’s this Premier and his government that has the record of a 
shameful disaster of 21,000 jobs lost. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan people have lost all confidence in this NDP 
government to create jobs and to grow our economy. 
 
Will the Premier admit that his economic policies are failing 
and will the Premier admit that his policies are killing jobs all 
across Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to just use a 
demonstration and illustration as to how the members use 
numbers. This month over last month there were 10,000 more 
people employed in this province. The Saskatchewan Party’s 
spin the other day was that 15,000 jobs were lost between the 
election of 1999 and now. Now if you use those same numbers, 
which are not seasonally adjusted, the province gained nearly 
10,000 jobs last month compared to the month before. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, numbers are numbers. We know 
the areas of our economy where we have difficulty. There were 
60,000 jobs lost in Canada in agriculture in the time frame 
where we lost 16,800. Now, Mr. Speaker, other . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, there was an increase 
in non-agricultural jobs of nearly 11,000. Now I want to say to 
members opposite, we’re working with the business 
community, with the working people of this province to grow 
and to diversify this economy. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it’ll 
never know growth based on the gloom and doom from those 
folks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
painful to listen to the minister try to argue with Statistics 
Canada on the numbers that speak volumes about what this 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1693 

 

government is doing. 
 
Why isn’t the minister asking, why are we losing so many jobs? 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, it’s because this Premier believes in big 
government, this Premier believes in Crown corporations 
competing with the private sector, and now these policies are 
killing business confidence and killing jobs all over 
Saskatchewan. As I said, 21,000 jobs lost in the past year — 
gone because of NDP mismanagement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s now painfully clear that the Premier’s policies 
are failing the province of Saskatchewan. It’s painfully clear 
that the NDP’s policies of big government is killing jobs in our 
province. 
 
My question is: what specific steps, what concrete things are the 
Premier doing to pull Saskatchewan out of this economic death 
spiral that he’s placed us in? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, last week in this city I was 
in the presence of approximately 300 community and business 
leaders as we together, Mr. Speaker, unveiled the Partnership 
for Prosperity — an economic plan with targets, with action 
steps, to accomplish exactly what the Leader of the Opposition 
calls upon us to do. 
 
But we’re doing this, Mr. Speaker, in partnership — in 
partnership with Saskatchewan business people, in partnership 
with Saskatchewan co-operatives, in partnership with 
Saskatchewan Aboriginal people. 
 
The only people, Mr. Speaker, who do not want to seem to be 
part of the partnership in making this province grow and 
prosper, are the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
attendees at these meetings who are not employees of the 
Government of Saskatchewan tell me how disappointed and 
skeptical they are with the Premier’s so-called plan, because the 
facts speak differently. 
 
Housing starts in Saskatchewan are down 50 per cent, and why? 
Well CMHC (Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation) says 
it’s a direct result of weak job creation in the province. And 
now just this morning we learned that Regina Revelstoke . . . 
Regina Revelstoke is closing the doors for good and laying off 
40 more people. 
 
So fewer jobs mean fewer housing starts; fewer housing starts 
means Revelstoke has to close; Revelstoke having to close 
means more jobs lost again. That’s the cycle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s the cycle, 
the death spiral we’re talking about, that has been created by 
this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Premier’s mismanagement of the economy 

has plunged Saskatchewan into an economic death spiral. One 
tragedy after the other. How is he going to change his ways to 
get us out of this mess? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, year over year, this year 
compared to last year: department store sales in this province up 
8.2 per cent; the value of building permits up in this province, 
year over year, 33.2 per cent; new vehicle motor sales up 4.9 
per cent; oil production up 3.6 per cent; mineral production up 
15.2 per cent; new business incorporations 4.7 per cent; the 
value of manufacturing shipments up 3.8 per cent. 
 
Retail sales are up, the help wanted index is up, the social 
assistance caseloads are down. I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the 
only thing in a death spiral is the popularity of that party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Nations Fund 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
On Friday, Chief Perry Bellegarde of the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) dismissed the Provincial 
Auditor’s concerns about the $34 million in the First Nations 
Fund was spent . . . that was spent over the last four years. 
 
He said the money in the fund is not public money and it’s not 
the auditor’s business how that money is spent. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the Provincial Auditor disagrees. In fact so does the 
provincial legislation that establishes the First Nations Fund. 
That Act specifies that the proceeds of gambling are to be spent 
specifically on the economic and social development of First 
Nations people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does this minister support the Provincial Auditor 
that the proceeds of gaming directed to the First Nations Fund is 
public money? Or does the minister agree with Chief 
Bellegarde that the money is not public and doesn’t fall under 
the Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 
said in the House on Thursday, as I repeated again on Friday, 
and I will say again today; this government, and my department 
specifically, accept the findings of the Provincial Auditor. We 
will be working with the FSIN, with the First Nations Fund, to 
ensure that the money is accounted for. 
 
That, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, is the germane question. 
Will this money be accounted for? And we will ensure that the 
money is properly accounted for. 



1694 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor said that there were 
inadequate rules and procedures in place. We accept that 
finding. We are working with the First Nations Fund to ensure 
that adequate accountability procedures are put in place. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister told the media on Friday that she thought the debate 
over whether or not the money in the First Nations Fund is 
public wasn’t relevant. But it is very relevant because if she 
doesn’t think it’s public money what confidence does this 
legislature have that the minister will comply with the Act? 
How can we in this legislature believe that the minister will 
ensure accountability and that this money will be spent as 
directed in the legislation? 
 
There is already $34 million unaccounted for because the NDP 
government didn’t allow for the Provincial Auditor to look at 
funds for four years. Mr. Speaker, $34 million can’t be 
accounted for and the minister is refusing to take this issue 
seriously. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, will the Premier, will the Premier answer to 
the taxpayers and to First Nations people? Will the Premier 
stand today and take responsibility for determining if the 
proceeds from the First Nations Fund have been spent 
according to the Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, as the minister responsible I 
will once again reiterate — if that’s not a redundant phrase in 
the English language — I’m going to say again, this 
government is on the side of accountability. This government 
accepts the findings of the Provincial Auditor and this 
government is acting on the findings of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
We will be meeting very shortly with Chief Perry Bellegarde. 
As a matter of fact I have in my hand here a letter dated June 11 
from Chief Perry Bellegarde . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, 
the member opposite asks what year? Have we descended to 
that kind of silliness here in the House? Of course you know the 
year is 2001. 
 
I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I should be addressing my comments 
through you. The letter is dated today. And Chief Bellegarde is 
asking for an early and immediate meeting with me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, this morning we’ve heard about how 
this Premier’s involvement in the health care system has led to 
massive labour unrest. We’ve heard about this Premier’s bleak 
economic record — 21,000 jobs lost in the last year. 
 
And now we find that this Premier — this Premier — who once 
led protest against legalized gambling but now endorses it, will 
not stand up and take responsibility for an act of this legislature, 
an Act that his government put in place. The Premier will not 
take responsibility for his minister and he won’t take 
responsibility for the loss of $34 million that should be going to 

helping First Nations people in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is spineless. Will the Premier — 
will this Premier get some backbone and deal with these issues? 
Will this Premier immediately call for a public inquiry into the 
management of the First Nations Fund to clear up this issue 
once and for all? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 
said, and again I repeat, this government is on the side of 
accountability. Look at our record for the last nine years, Mr. 
Speaker. We believe in public accountability, unlike the 
members opposite. We’re cleaning up the mess left by the $15 
billion debt that they created. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, we have received the 
Provincial Auditor’s report and we intend to act on it. We will 
be holding meetings this week with the FSIN, with the First 
Nations Fund. We will be acting on the Provincial Auditor’s 
report. 
 
We are on the side of accountability, Mr. Speaker, and that, I 
think, is the important issue in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Page 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I just wish to 
inform the Assembly that Graham Condo who is a staff person 
with the Legislative Library, will be assisting with page duties 
as required today. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand and table the response on behalf of the 
government to written question 223. 
 
The Speaker: — The response to 223 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Regulatory Reform) Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to move second reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Regulatory Reform) Act, 2001. 
 
The purpose of this Act is to repeal seven statutes that are not 
longer required. Mr. Speaker, I’ll briefly describe each of the 
statutes being repealed. 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1695 

 

First, The Estate Tax Rebate Act, 1969 provided a rebate of 
estate taxes which were levied by the federal government and 
then transferred to the province. These federal estate taxes were 
eliminated in the early 1970s. Since estate taxes are no longer 
levied, rebates are no longer necessary, and this Act may be 
repealed. 
 
Second, The Estate Tax Rebates Reciprocal Arrangements Act, 
1970 allowed the province to enter into an arrangement with 
Alberta under which each province reimbursed the other for 
estate tax rebates paid to their residents in respect of property 
situated in the other province. Since estate taxes are no longer 
levied, and rebates are therefore no longer provided, Mr. 
Speaker, the arrangement with Alberta is defunct, and this Act 
may also be repealed. 
 
Third, The Industrial Towns Act applied special provisions to 
towns, villages, and northern villages, that were designated as 
industrial towns. Under the Act, the physical development of an 
industrial town was to be regulated. Mr. Speaker, this Act has 
not been used for many years. 
 
Fourth, Mr. Speaker, since 1997 Wascana Energy has been a 
wholly owned subsidiary of Nexen Inc. formerly Canadian 
Occidental Petroleum. The Wascana Energy Inc. Act contains 
provisions that do not apply to other oil and gas exploration 
companies, and make Wascana Energy less competitive with 
such companies. Now that the Saskatchewan government has 
no ownership of the company, it’s appropriate to repeal this Act 
also. 
 
Fifth, Mr. Speaker, we have The Crown Foundation for District 
Health Boards Act. This Act was passed in 1996 to address 
discrepancies between the tax credits donors could be given if 
donations were made to non-profit charitable organizations 
versus Crown foundations. 
 
However, after the Act received assent, changes to the Federal 
Income Tax Act made the legislation unnecessary. The Act 
became redundant, was never proclaimed, therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, the repeal of this Act is now recommended. 
 
Sixth, Mr. Speaker, The Rural Telephone Act will be repealed. 
This Act, passed in 1908, was the legislation by which rural 
telephone companies were set up in rural Saskatchewan. As 
technology advanced, these companies began to be assimilated 
by SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last rural telephone company was assimilated 
in 1990. Therefore, The Rural Telephone Act is no longer used 
and may be repealed. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, The Ancillary Dental Personnel 
Education Act will be repealed. This Act was passed in 1972 to 
respond to a shortage of qualified dental assistants. The Act 
allows the Minister of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training to make arrangements to provide for education of 
these personnel. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, dental assistants are now governed 
under their own Act, The Dental Disciplines Act and the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology, 
SIAST, currently provides accredited programming to meet the 

need for education of dental assistants. The legislation is 
therefore no longer required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to repeal 
miscellaneous obsolete statutes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On a point of 
order, please. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
during question period, the minister for Indian gaming, 
Aboriginal Affairs, Mr. Speaker, quoted from a letter. I wonder 
if she would table that please as per House procedures? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — To the member’s point of order, I can 
advise the House that the member did not quote directly from a 
letter. She referred to a letter, the date in the letter, but she did 
not quote directly from the letter and therefore I don’t think it 
has to be entered into the House. And there has been a previous 
ruling on these kinds of matters. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member for his point of order and 
I thank the Government House Leader for her response. 
 
I will check the record to see if the member did quote 
specifically. If the member did quote, she will be asked to bring 
in the letter. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, on the Bill, on 
Bill No. 55, Mr. Speaker, this is a wide-ranging omnibus Bill 
designed to repeal a number of Acts that this government has 
either found to be not needed or are trying to bury by passing 
this in a omnibus Bill, Mr. Speaker. And I can certainly 
understand why they would do that with some of these 
particular Bills. 
 
One that strikes me, Mr. Speaker, as being very interested . . . 
interesting and that they would try to bury would be the district 
health foundations Act. This was an Act that was very 
unpopular, Mr. Speaker, across this province when the 
government brought it in, in 1996. They knew that it was 
controversial, but they were bound and determined, Mr. 
Speaker, to get their hands on the money that had been donated 
across this province to the various union hospitals and district 
hospitals. 
 
There was money put in place, Mr. Speaker, by the 
communities through fundraising of various sorts — potluck 
suppers, Christmas tree light, buy a brick at your local facility 
— various kind of situations, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 
the communities felt were very important to be able to deal with 
to provide health care services in their own communities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They donated bequeaths from estates. People would simply 
make a donation in the case where someone in their family had 
been ill and had recovered in the hospital, because they 



1696 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

understood and knew what was important for their communities 
— and that was to have health care services available. 
 
Over time, Mr. Speaker, these donations, these foundations that 
had been set up collected considerable amounts of money, Mr. 
Speaker. There was hundreds of thousands of dollars in 
communities across Saskatchewan set aside for health care 
services in those areas, Mr. Speaker. This government saw that 
that money was sitting there and they were bound and 
determined to get it. Not to provide health care, Mr. Speaker, in 
the district where the money had been collected, but rather, Mr. 
Speaker, to spread it someplace else across the province. 
 
So I can certainly understand, Mr. Speaker, why this 
government would want to include that in the provision of this 
Bill, the repeal of miscellaneous obsolete statutes and enacted 
consequential amendments with respect to a statute being 
repealed. 
 
It’s certainly in here. I know that the members opposite — what 
is that member talking about; why is he dealing with this 
particular Act? Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m dealing with it because 
clause 3 of this Bill says, repealed: 
 

The Crown Foundation for District Health Boards Act is 
repealed. 

 
Now perhaps the former minister of Health doesn’t remember 
that Act. I’m not sure if it came in when she was the minister of 
Health or if it was when the Premier was the minister of Health. 
But either way, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan did 
not wish to support this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why the 
government is sliding it out the door so that nobody knows that 
they are actually admitting that they were wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It really goes, Mr. Speaker, to the whole essence of this 
government: don’t admit responsibility; even when you know 
you’ve made a mistake, bury it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — There’s a number of other areas, Mr. 
Speaker, where this very Bill does similar types of things. You 
know, you look at clause 4: 
 

The Estate Tax Rebate Act, 1969 is repealed. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the previous implications of this 
government, when Allan Blakeney was in charge, they were 
bound and determined, just like this government, to get money 
wherever they could to run their pie in the sky programs, Mr. 
Speaker. Allan Blakeney was just about as bad as these guys, 
Mr. Speaker, when it came to buying up things for new Crown 
corporations. So they put in place, Mr. Speaker, a death tax. 
That’s what it was, a death tax. 
 
Well they could be taxing themselves now, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re going down so fast. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, that’s another one that 
they want to bury. Well first they wanted to tax people for being 

buried; now they’re just simply burying the Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can certainly see, Mr. Speaker, why the members would 
want to repeal this Act, clause no. 6. It’s certainly 
understandable in light of the economic development strategies 
of this government. It says, repealed, The Industrial Towns Act. 
I can certainly understand that, Mr. Speaker. These people have 
never developed an industrial town, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
why they’re getting rid of the Act. There are none in 
Saskatchewan and they have no hope of ever developing one 
with these people in charge. 
 
Now if they were to have a Bill for deindustrialization, that 
would apply, Mr. Speaker. With the number of people that are 
leaving this province, the number of businesses that are leaving 
this province, we should have a deindustrialization program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a large part of this Bill deals with the telephone 
Act in Saskatchewan. And I heard the member . . . the minister 
speak about there were no rural telephones left, Mr. Speaker. 
And he is coming close to the truth there. With people leaving 
this province, with businesses leaving this province, there will 
be no need for rural telephones. We need to turn this whole 
province around, Mr. Speaker, and be putting more 
communications into rural Saskatchewan, not doing away with 
the rural telephone system, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, that was the 1969 barbed wire phone Act, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of other issues that are taking 
place here; a number of other Acts that are being repealed, 
various and sundry ones. They’re obviously of no further use. 
In all likelihood a good many of them should never have been 
put on the books in the first place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we need to take a look and just see how these are going to 
be affecting the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; just what 
are the long-term implications. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would 
move adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 54 – The Education Amendment Act, 2001/ 
Loi de 2001 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased to outline the substance and purpose of these 
amendments to The Education Act, 1995. The amendments all 
deal with one specific topic and are required as a result of new 
provisions negotiated in the current provincial collective 
bargaining agreement for teachers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for many years the legislation has included 
provisions for what is called a board of reference. If a teacher’s 
contract of employment is terminated by the employing board 
of education, the teacher is entitled to apply for the 
establishment of a board of reference to investigate the 
termination and to make a ruling as to whether the termination 
is legitimate. 
 
The board of reference is an arbitration board consisting of one 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1697 

 

member nominated by the teacher, one member nominated by 
the board of education, and a chairperson jointly nominated by 
the other two members. The legislation sets out all the 
necessary details with respect to the appointment of the board 
of reference, the board’s jurisdiction, procedural matters, and 
avenues for appeal to the courts from a decision of the board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while teachers have access to a board of reference 
in cases where their contract of employment is terminated, they 
do not have access to any comparable process in cases where a 
teacher is the subject of significant disciplinary action by the 
employing board. To address this situation the parties to the 
collective agreement have agreed to the following new 
provision. And I quote: 
 

Where a dispute arises between a board of education and a 
teacher with respect to disciplinary action involving 
suspension or formal reprimand of a teacher, the dispute 
may be submitted to a board of reference in accordance 
with the procedures that are set out in The Education Act, 
1995. 

 
The parties further agreed that any necessary amendments to the 
legislation required to implement this new provision would be 
introduced as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sole purpose of the amendments in this Bill is 
to make the changes required to implement the new provisions 
of the collective agreement that I have just outlined. 
 
In essence, the existing sections of the Act that deal with boards 
of reference are broadened. Boards of reference now have clear, 
legal authority to investigate and rule on suspensions and 
formal reprimands in a similar manner to the way in which they 
currently deal with contract terminations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the specific amendments were drafted in close 
consultation with both the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
and the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association and have 
the full support of both organizations. 
 
I am therefore pleased to move, Mr. Speaker, that Bill No. 54, 
An Act to amend The Education Act, 1995 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise today and debate Bill No. 54, the 
amendments to The Education Act. 
 
As outlined by the minister, The Education Act has been in 
force since 1995, and at various times over the last six years 
there has been a need to address specific clauses to bring the 
Act up to date; to bring it into a position where it can 
accommodate changes made by the collective bargaining 
process, and to ensure that it is an Act that is there for, most 
importantly, the teachers, but also the students of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that the minister made reference a number 
of times to a phrase which he entitled formal reprimand. And I 
guess that’s the most serious question that the opposition has, 
Mr. Speaker. While this Bill has only been introduced for the 

first time to this Legislative Assembly on June 6, we have not 
had the opportunity to contact the various stakeholders for that 
interpretation. 
 
Because when you look at the definition of formal reprimand — 
and I don’t know that the minister has actually outlined that — 
I’m sure there are many teachers that are very concerned about 
that definition. In fact probably of greater concern to what is the 
definition of formal reprimand might be that to principals, to 
directors of education, and then finally the board of education. 
 
Because I know, Mr. Speaker, having been in the education area 
yourself, formal reprimand . . . I’m sure you could imagine, Mr. 
Speaker, as I did, that there were times when the principal 
discusses with a teacher what kinds of things have gone on in a 
classroom, and I don’t know whether they would be referred to 
as formal reprimands. They’re not reprimands in a sense, but 
the interpretation of what is a reprimand might be there for 
question. 
 
I’m sure the director of education has had numerous times to 
discuss with teachers their teaching patterns, their classroom 
management, and outline in a written form . . . Every teacher 
looks forward to a written evaluation. There are times when the 
director will point out things that the teacher should do 
differently. Mr. Speaker, is that a formal reprimand? 
 
Now where I . . . Very clearly the definition of suspension is 
there. And the minister has indicated that teachers should have 
the right to a board of reference if there is a suspension, and of 
course we support that. We need to have greater clarification 
from the minister, Mr. Speaker, as to what is meant by formal 
reprimand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also note that in the existing sections, there 
was a period of appeal that was outlined as being 15 days. And 
now we note that the date . . . that number has changed to 15, 
and there seems to be no explanation in the explanatory notes as 
to why we’re moving from 15 to 20 days. Now I know the 
minister has made reference to the fact that these were 
negotiated conditions and that’s why the Act is being changed 
and that’s some explanation that we will eventually receive, I 
hope, from the Minister of Education. 
 
The final point that the minister made was that both the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association have been consulted and indeed 
they are supportive of all of the concerns and all of the clauses 
of this Bill. And I know in speaking with the critic for the 
opposition party, the member from Kelvington-Wadena, she in 
fact has ensured me . . . assured me that she will be meeting 
with the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) 
tomorrow and will be speaking with the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation to indeed obtain their responses directly to 
Bill No. 54. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve raised a number of small concerns about 
the Bill. Concerns that I think principals, directors, and 
probably even teachers have about whether or not this is indeed 
stating what they thought it would state. And we have to do 
proper diligence and ensure that the Teachers’ Federation and 
the School Trustees Association are supportive of the Bill in its 
entirety. 



1698 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

So before I can say that the opposition is in favour of this Bill, 
we need to do some further consulting. And with that I will 
move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(14:45) 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Highways and Transportation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of a Bill to amend The Highways and 
Transportation Act, 1997. This Bill contains amendments that 
will help manage our roads in partnerships to provide better 
service to the travelling public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new provisions allow for a system of truck 
route management. There’s a public perception that road bans 
or haul restrictions are applied only in the spring. However, 
there needs to be weight restrictions at other times than in the 
spring. Weight restrictions should apply to different roads 
depending on different circumstances including the type of 
highway, frequency and weight of commodities being hauled, 
as well as road condition. 
 
This amendment seeks to mitigate road damages by seeking 
partnerships with rural municipalities to re-route heavy trucks 
off of our thin-membraned highways onto gravel roads that can 
better accommodate that type of traffic. Our department in turn 
will be able to better sustain an acceptable level of service for 
light trucks and cars, including ambulances and school buses, 
on these thin-membraned surfaces. 
 
I’d also like to emphasize that this is done in partnership with 
local governments. We only use the truck routes if the local 
municipalities agree that this is the best available solution for 
their transportation needs. This amendment demonstrates our 
province’s commitment to maintaining a sustainable 
transportation system. 
 
In these amendments we have also eliminated the need for 
shippers to maintain records relating to the shipping and 
receiving of goods. This is in response to concerns expressed by 
stakeholders during our consultative process. Our province 
believes these requirements are unnecessary and would have 
caused an undue hardship to small shippers such as agricultural 
producers. 
 
As I’ve already stated, Mr. Speaker, our primary concern 
continues to be the protection of our transportation 
infrastructure. 
 
We’ve added a number of minor changes to ensure that our 
citizens who are shipping goods do not knowingly overlook the 
weight of a vehicle and cause damage to our roads. After the 
legislation has changed, our officials will carry out information 
activities advising shippers that these changes are forthcoming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, the addition of the term, wrecker, has 
been included in the amendments. In 1997 the legislative 
provisions respecting the licensing of auto wreckers was 
removed from The Highway Traffic Act to The Highways and 

Transportation Act, 1997. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, as a result of legislative amendments 
brought forward in The Land Titles Act, 2000, there was a 
consequential amendment. The Act also includes other 
consequential amendments to The Highways and 
Transportation Act, 1997. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased to answer any of the opposition’s 
questions during the Committee of the Whole stage. 
 
I therefore move second reading of a Bill to amend The 
Highways and Transportation Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
quite interested in this Bill here because I think it affects RMs 
(rural municipality) municipalities, all over the province. 
 
And I’d like to read into the record for the municipal people 
that happen to be out there watching, or have the opportunity to 
see this, I’d like to read into the record some of the explanatory 
notes, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

Under the department’s strategic management plan, the 
department is proposing a better system of truck route 
management, including more use of trucking partnerships. 
This new section demonstrates the government’s 
commitment to effective truck route management by 
eliminating the perception that roads only suffer damage in 
the spring. It also provides for the province and rural 
municipalities the opportunity to work together when 
designating truck routes. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to stop there a minute because it 
talks about highways and the government and the RMs working 
together. But I think what we’re seeing here is the government 
passing the buck onto the local municipality to pick up the cost 
of providing roads for heavy truck traffic. Unless the minister 
can explain at a later time here when we get the opportunity to 
question the minister that that’s not what they’re doing here, 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure that’s exactly what these explanatory 
notes are saying. 
 
I’ll go on further here, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

However, in cases where the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation needs to reroute traffic or designate a truck 
route off a provincial highway in an emergency situation, 
subsection 35.1(4) provides that the minister with the 
ability to supersede an RM’s refusal to approve an access to 
RM roads. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what we’re seeing here is once again 
the government’s saying that we know better and we will have 
the authority — no matter what you think about what we’re 
doing, we have the authority to do it anyway. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve said this many times before — that this 
government, this session especially, has shown where they feel 
that they’re above the law. Well here what we’re doing is 
bringing in a new law to say in essence, we will do what we 
want, it doesn’t matter what you think. 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1699 

 

I go on and I quote further, Mr. Speaker: 
 

When rerouting traffic or designating truck routes, the 
maximum weight allowed would be what is permitted for 
primary highways. 

 
Well now think about that, Mr. Speaker. These weights, 
according to the government and the Department of Highways, 
are too heavy for our secondary, thin membrane highways but 
they’re not too heavy or too expensive for an RM to maintain 
when we pass the buck and push that truck traffic over to the 
RMs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another note that I thought of here too. Some 
small towns actually probably don’t have a heavy-haul RM road 
into the town where they may only have a secondary highway 
in one end and out the other. So that old saying, you can’t get 
there from here, may end up being true. You maybe can’t get 
there from here because the RM road isn’t big enough or heavy 
enough for your truck traffic, so you’re going to have to bring 
in half-ton truckloads of groceries, fuel, and everything else, 
which could cause a wee bit of confusion and problems for 
people in small-town Saskatchewan. Just thought I might add 
that, Mr. Speaker. It was one that probably many people out 
there wouldn’t have thought of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think what we’re seeing here is, and I talked 
about it before, Mr. Speaker, is possibly we’re seeing the 
government and the Department of Highways passing the buck. 
And I would hope, and I would certainly hope, Mr. Speaker, 
that municipalities out there — reeves, councillors, and for that 
matter actually towns, villages, and that out there — that would 
be affected by these laws would really pay attention to this. 
Because I think once this Bill is passed, and if we can’t get the 
opposition to this part of this Bill that I think needs to be 
addressed and changes made, they’re going to be stuck with it 
out there. 
 
And what I can see, Mr. Speaker, we saw from 1991-92, where 
downloading on to all forms of municipalities out there has 
gone on, even to the point where this year once again when 
government revenues have increased — in fact to a stage of 
windfall dollars —we saw no more money being put back into 
revenue sharing. 
 
Now we’re seeing where RMs are going to be asked to pick up 
a large portion, if not just in the building, Mr. Speaker — that 
may be cost-shared on these truck routes that are going to be 
passed over to the RM — but I guess where my worry comes in 
and from experience with this government, Mr. Speaker, who 
will look after these roads once they are built, put in place, and 
designated as heavy-haul roads? Who is going to be asked to 
look after the upkeep of these roads, the maintenance of these 
roads? I think I know as well as you do, Mr. Speaker, that it will 
be the local municipality, and therefore the cost will be passed 
on to the local taxpayer. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would caution RMs out there to take a good 
look at this legislation when they have the opportunity, and 
really do not get fooled by what the government is trying to do 
here and the soft-soap job that may be given to them by this 
government saying, oh we will share in the cost and we’ll be 
here for you down the road, because we saw many times too 

often, Mr. Speaker, that that just doesn’t happen. We get sucked 
into something like this, believing that the credibility of the 
government is there and they will be there for us, and when the 
time comes, we’re left out there to pick up the tab all by 
ourselves. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think we’re going to have a number of 
questions on this Bill. I think this Bill may be somewhat 
controversial for a number of reasons, so at this point I would 
like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
to rise and move second reading of the Bill that amends The 
Income Tax Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year this government began the process to 
reform Saskatchewan’s personal income tax system. Our 
objective was to achieve a simple, fair, and more competitive 
tax system that would be more responsive to the needs of 
Saskatchewan people and strengthen Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
To meet this objective our government introduced a multi-year 
tax reform initiative as part of our long-term vision for growth 
and opportunity in Saskatchewan. And so this year, Mr. 
Speaker, on January 1 the Saskatchewan personal income tax 
system was simplified. The flat tax, the debt reduction surtax, 
and the high income surtax were all eliminated. These have now 
been replaced with a simple, three-rate tax structure and 
provincial tax credits, including a dependent child tax credit and 
a seniors tax credit. 
 
And I might, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan is the only 
province in Canada that has a child tax credit for people with 
dependent children. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, for each of the 2002 and 2003 taxation years, 
provincial income taxes will be further reduced as the new tax 
structure is phased in. Tax rates will come down in each of the 
next two years and the new credits for seniors and dependent 
children will go up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our multi-year personal tax reform initiative 
delivers meaningful tax relief to Saskatchewan residents. The 
introduction of higher personal tax credit amounts is removing 
about 55,000 people from the income tax roles altogether. And 
the new dependent child tax credit is providing significant 
income tax reductions for families with children. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it is part of our plan to reduce poverty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the best record in Canada in 
reducing child poverty. We have much more to do, but these 
measures, as part of tax reform, certainly help and we will 
continue along that road, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Bill introduces amendments which will implement the 
income tax initiatives announced in this year’s budget. It also 
includes technical amendments that were requested by the 
Canada Customs and Revenue Agency, commonly referred to 
as Revenue Canada. 



1700 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to describe the budget initiatives that are 
being implemented through the income tax amendments 
contained in this Bill. As a way of ensuring continued access to 
post-secondary education and training, the income tax system 
provides tax assistance to post-secondary students through the 
tuition and education tax credits. 
 
The tuition tax credit recognizes the actual post-secondary 
tuition costs incurred by students. The education tax credit 
helps to defray the non-tuition costs of post-secondary 
education and training, such as living expenses, textbooks, and 
other supplies. In recognition of rising non-tuition costs, our 
government is doubling Saskatchewan’s education tax credit 
amounts to $400 per month for full-time study and $120 per 
month for part-time study. That, Mr. Speaker, is in addition to 
the tuition tax credit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is also enhancing the income tax 
system’s recognition of caregivers and persons with disabilities 
through increases to the related income tax credit amounts. For 
example, the disability tax credit amount is being increased 
from $4,400 to $6,000, and the caregiver and infirm dependant 
amounts are being increased from $2,446 to $3,500. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government’s tax reform initiative included a 
commitment that the personal income tax system would be fully 
indexed to inflation once the phase-in of the new tax structure 
was complete. I announced in the budget speech on March 30 
full indexation of Saskatchewan’s personal income tax system 
to the national inflation rate will begin immediately. This means 
that all of the provincial income tax credits which parallel 
federal tax credits will be determined from the same base 
amounts that are used for federal tax purposes. 
 
(15:00) 
 
For those portions of the income tax system that are still being 
phased in, indexation will begin once they are fully phased in. 
I’m referring to the income tax brackets, the basic and spousal 
tax credit amounts, and the dependent child and seniors 
supplement amounts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, small businesses have traditionally provided the 
largest share of new jobs created in this province. Our 
government is committed to encouraging growth in small 
business development by improving the general climate for 
business investment. 
 
Last year the business community emphasized the need for 
personal income tax reductions, and we responded as I’ve 
described. This year we’re introducing initiatives to build on 
personal tax reform and improve the competitiveness of 
Saskatchewan’s small businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this income tax Bill reduces the corporate income 
tax rate on small businesses from 8 per cent to 6 per cent as of 
July 1 of this year. That is a 25 per cent reduction, Mr. Speaker. 
The small business tax rate is now 40 per cent lower than it was 
in 1991. 
 
In addition, the amount of income to which the small business 
tax rate can be applied is being increased by 50 per cent, from 
200,000 to $300,000, commencing January 1, 2002. This will 

permit small businesses to retain higher after-tax income that 
can be reinvested to create jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan businesses also must pay federal 
tax of course. And the amount of income to which the federal 
small business rate applies remains at $200,000 compared to 
our $300,000. 
 
Our government, Mr. Speaker, joins private sector associations 
and other provinces in encouraging the federal government to 
harmonize the federal amount with the 300,000 provincial 
amount. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate that our personal 
tax reform and our small business tax initiatives are part of a 
long-term vision for growth and opportunity in Saskatchewan. 
A competitive tax regime is a central part of our plan to create 
the economic growth needed to secure our Saskatchewan 
quality of life. 
 
We believe we are doing what is right, what is fair, and what 
makes sense for our province and our people, and that we 
together will build a stronger, more prosperous Saskatchewan 
for all of us to enjoy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be very pleased to answer detailed questions 
concerning the amendments to The Income Tax Act 2000 when 
discussing this Bill at Committee of the Whole. 
 
And with that I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Income Tax Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It certainly is a 
big question about this particular Bill. You have to look at the 
. . . The minister is claiming that he’s lowering taxes, and yet 
the very first thing they did in that budget he was bragging 
about last year, Mr. Speaker, was raise the base of the PST 
(provincial sales tax), so they collected more money and then 
turned around and raised every possible fee in sight. So at the 
end of the day, Mr. Speaker, there was little to no savings on 
taxes. 
 
That’s the history, Mr. Speaker, of this government. They brag 
about lowering taxes but the problem is, Mr. Speaker, they 
raised them. They raised them first, then they come in and try to 
be heroes, Mr. Speaker, because we’re lowering your taxes. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they lowered them but they raised them up 
astronomically in the first place, and they haven’t lowered them 
back down to where they were, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having said that though, Mr. Speaker, there are certainly some 
benefits in this tax Act. If the government is going to raise the 
taxes, well it is a good thing that they’re also prepared to drop 
them, even if it is only a small amount. 
 
Mr. Speaker, caregivers and dependants are receiving an 
increased tax credit. That is a good thing, Mr. Speaker. I know 
for my own family, certainly the costs associated with 
providing that kind of care, and every other family across the 
province that is involved in supporting a loved one — a parent, 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1701 

 

a child, a spouse — knows and understands all of the costs 
involved. And most of those, Mr. Speaker, have no place to get 
any sort of deduction or tax credit. And raising the base is 
certainly of value. Even though it’s not a huge amount of 
money, Mr. Speaker, it is of benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the contributions to the charitable contributions 
tax credit though does cause me some concern on what the 
government is doing with it. The first $200 is calculated at the 
lowest tax level in Saskatchewan, even though the taxpayer 
would be paying in a higher tax bracket, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would almost think that it would be appropriate that the tax 
credits benefit the person who is giving the charitable donation 
at whatever tax level they are sitting at. That would encourage, 
Mr. Speaker, someone in a high tax bracket, if they could lower 
that incidental tax rate down on those contributions, it’s much 
more valuable to them and they are more apt, Mr. Speaker, to 
give an increased amount of donations rather than giving them 
credit at the lowest possible tax rate. Because you have there 
perhaps a spread of 25 per cent, Mr. Speaker, on what the 
lowest rate that they’re getting credit for and then the highest 
rate. 
 
I know the government is trying to take some of that into 
account for donations over the $200 mark. But there are people 
who perhaps could utilize it at the lower levels and have it taxed 
at whatever income tax bracket they’re in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the post-secondary tax credit is an interesting one. 
The government has doubled it. But in the last campaign, 
election campaign, they were going to give the first year for free 
— not just a tax credit, but the first year of post-secondary 
education for free, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I guess in negotiating with their Liberal colleagues, that 
was negotiated away, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, well you’re right. We’ll give the Liberals credit for 
this, for decreasing the contribution that the government was 
prepared to make to education and decreasing it downward. 
 
It shows just the power that the Liberal coalition members have, 
Mr. Speaker, in taking tax credits away from people, Mr. 
Speaker. And it also shows the weakness of the government in 
giving in to them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the government is also 
putting in place some restrictions here dealing with taxpayers 
that work both inside and outside of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
Now I guess the question has to be, where does that taxpayer 
pay their taxes at? 
 
If they’re paying their taxes in Saskatchewan, then why 
wouldn’t they receive the full benefit of any deductions that 
they have in Saskatchewan rather than it being apportioned out 
to any other jurisdiction that they may be receiving income 
from, Mr. Speaker? Because obviously if they’re living in 
Saskatchewan, they’re paying Saskatchewan’s high taxes, Mr. 
Speaker, and they should receive the benefit of any deductions 
that are available to them under those circumstances. 
 

The minister says that he’s putting in place a provision to deal 
with the bracket creep in taxation. This is a big issue, Mr. 
Speaker, and certainly one that needs consideration and needs 
to be eliminated from our tax rates. 
 
That as a person’s salary increases, not because of higher wage 
settlements but rather simply because of COLA (cost-of-living 
adjustment) clauses and cost of living goes up a little bit and the 
brackets remain the same, a person doing the same job is 
earning virtually the same money, has lost perhaps purchasing 
power because of inflation, and yet they have been jumped up 
into a higher tax bracket, Mr. Speaker, because of the 
inflexibility of the tax Act. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is a good one to eliminate. 
 
The minister talked quite a bit . . . bragged indeed about 
lowering the small business tax, Mr. Speaker. It comes into 
effect next January. Looking at the last job statistics, Mr. 
Speaker, he should have brought that in a lot quicker and a lot 
harder. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It comes into effect on July 1. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, he says it comes into effect 
on July 1 at 1 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 1 per cent drop in the small 
business tax after losing 21,000 jobs in the last year, is a drop in 
the bucket. The minister needs to make a dramatic move, Mr. 
Speaker. He needs to show that he’s serious about lowering 
taxes in this province and wanting business to stay here and 
wanting people to create jobs here and wanting people to live 
here. Mr. Speaker, 1 per cent is not a dramatic example of that. 
 
Eliminating the small business tax, Mr. Speaker, that would 
have sent the message. That would have sent the message to the 
people and the businesses not just in Saskatchewan, but across 
Canada, into the US (United States), that we want small 
businesses in this province and we’re prepared to help you put 
up a business and develop here. 
 
The minister in saying 1 per cent is well, I guess we have to. It 
just shows, Mr. Speaker, his heart is not in it. He really doesn’t 
want to do it, but if I’m forced to, I’ll drag my feet screaming 
and kicking all the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the change that takes place in January 1 of 
2002 is the increase in the minimum for small businesses. 
Again it’s a good move; it just comes many years too late. It 
should have happened a long time ago. It should have happened 
when the budget was announced, at the very latest, Mr. 
Speaker, not a year down the road. We’re suffering the ill 
effects of this government’s economic policies today, Mr. 
Speaker; it’s only going to be worse later on. 
 
This Bill also deals with a number of formula. It’s quite 
complicated, Mr. Speaker. The people of this province, the tax 
experts, need to have an opportunity to look over this Bill, look 
over the minister’s formulas to determine whether or not they’re 
doing what he says they are doing, how are they going to 
impact the people and the economy of this province. 
 
Up till now this minister and his government’s impact on the 
economy has been negative. We need to take a serious look and 



1702 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

see what this particular Bill is doing — exactly how it’s going 
to impact us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Therefore to give us time to look at that, I move adjournment of 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Trew that Bill No. 30 — The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bill No. 3 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Lorjé that Bill No. 3 — The Historic 
Properties Foundations Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Bill No. 3 deals with dealing with historic properties across this 
province. And we have a large number of them in place, Mr. 
Speaker, from one end of this province to the other — from my 
corner of the province, Mr. Speaker, from Cannington 
Provincial Park, the Cannington Manor area to Cumberland 
House in the North; to Cypress Hills and Fort Macleod and Fort 
Whoop-Up, Mr. Speaker; the North Battleford’s historic Land 
Titles Office and territorial office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All of these, Mr. Speaker, need to be dealt with, need to be 
recognized. But, Mr. Speaker, it takes a lot of effort both on the 
part of the communities to deal, it takes a lot of effort on behalf 
of the government to provide the kind of services and 
recognition to these historic sites that are necessary. 
 
One of the problems though that arises, Mr. Speaker, when you 
recognize historic properties, is that it becomes extremely 
difficult to work with them. If the historic property is owned by 
an individual or a corporation, they’re extremely restricted on 
how they deal with their property. Now that may be a good 
thing, Mr. Speaker, in recognition of the historical context of it. 
 
But if they’re going to be restricted, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 
important that some considerations be given to them to allow 
them to incorporate the historic nature of that building into the 
day-to-day operation that they have of that particular piece of 
property. 
 
(15:15) 
 
I know that, Mr. Speaker, in my area, the Cannington Manor, 
that there was a proposal at one time to fix that building up to 
restore it to its original splendour and to allow the public to see 

and understand what was taking place in southeast 
Saskatchewan, pre turn of the century, Mr. Speaker. That was 
turn of 20th century, not the 21st, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That settlement originally came into place about 1882-83, 
somewhere in that neighbourhood, Mr. Speaker. It was English 
gentlemen coming out to learn how to farm on the prairies, Mr. 
Speaker. Well that was the theory behind it at least, that wasn’t 
actually the case. They were more interested in horse racing and 
riding horses and dogs to the . . . chasing foxes, Mr. Speaker, 
than they were in actually learning how to farm on the prairies. 
 
But it certainly generated some interest down in our corner of 
the world, and brought in settlers, Mr. Speaker, while the 
original English gentlemen . . . I don’t know that very many of 
them actually remained in Saskatchewan. The people who came 
with them, the settlers that came with them, certainly did build 
up the communities down in our area — the communities of 
Carlyle, Manor, Wawota, Kennedy. And they certainly remain 
. . . continue to have an impact in that area, Mr. Speaker, just as 
the original settlers that built some of the historic communities 
and buildings say in the southwest. Their families still remain in 
that area and carry on in that area, Mr. Speaker, and have an 
impact today. 
 
So this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is important in the protection and 
preservation of our historic buildings. The one consideration I 
would ask, and that we will be questioning the minister on, is 
when an historic building is designated as a historic site, what 
impact does that have on the current owners of that particular 
property? How can they work and provide for themselves the 
day-to-day operation of whatever that building is for 
themselves, Mr. Speaker? So that is the case. 
 
Now I’m not sure if other members of my caucus wish to speak 
to this now. I would certainly like to give them that opportunity, 
Mr. Speaker, so thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me pleasure to stand and speak to this Bill. I had a quick look 
through it a little while ago, and while on first blush I thought 
that we as a caucus, we as the official opposition, might be able 
to move this Bill on rather quickly. 
 
I do have some issues that I’d like to raise that have come out of 
this particular preview of the Bill, and things that I think need to 
be spoken to this afternoon. 
 
The Act to establish Crown Foundations for Historic Properties 
sounds like a laudable goal. And I believe that there are some 
important objectives associated with this particular Act. But 
there are some issues that I believe will cause people to 
question where this Act is going with intent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister, when she introduced this particular piece of 
legislation on April 11, quoted at length from the Act and I’m 
going to quote her, if I may, as written up in Hansard. The 
minister said that: 
 

It makes it possible (through this Act) for individual 
foundations to be established to help support, preserve, 
enhance, and promote historic properties in our province. 
This gives us a terrific opportunity to support our historic 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1703 

 

properties. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think anybody would object to the 
terms of reference as she described it in that particular speech. 
 
Going on, and quoting again from Hansard: 
 

Mr. Speaker, this Act will make it possible to establish 
foundations that can receive corporate and individual gifts, 
bequests, donations, and grants. 
 
This Act specifically will allow the establishment of a 
foundation for Government House to focus on the 
Government House development plan. 
 
This Act will define the legal status of all foundations 
formed under the mandate of this Act and it will ensure 
appropriate administrative and financial procedures are in 
place for the foundation. 
 

I’d like to end my quote of the minister with this last paragraph: 
 

This Act moves the Government House development 
project one step closer to reality, because, Mr. Speaker, the 
first such foundation we intend to establish will be a 
foundation in support of Government House. 
 

I would say, Mr. Speaker, that that particular objective as part 
of this Act is quite laudable. 
 
I know little about the complete history of Government House 
but I have visited it on several occasions. It’s a beautiful, 
historic building. It deserves preservation. 
 
And frankly there is some work that needs to be done to achieve 
full preservation. Much effort and energy has gone into it to 
date. It is filled with the most wonderful antiques and replicas 
of old furniture and other artifacts, but there is some pressure on 
that building and a foundation to help generate funds to 
undertake the full preservation of Government House is, as I 
said, laudable. 
 
But if that was where this Act stopped, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t 
be nearly so concerned. I read the Act through carefully a little 
while ago and came up with some observations that do present 
problems for me and I believe will present problems for people 
generally throughout this province who are looking to form 
foundations — tax-free foundations —for the preservation of 
historic properties in this province. Because, Mr. Speaker, even 
though the intent of the legislation is laudable and desirable, the 
reality in this legislation is something else. 
 
I’d like to refer to section 5(2) where it says: 
 

All property of a foundation, all money acquired, 
administered, possessed or received from any source and 
all profits earned by a foundation are the property of the 
Crown and are, for all purposes, including taxation of 
whatever nature or description, deemed to be the property 
of the Crown. 

 
You know, if you look at that superficially, that doesn’t appear 
to present much of a problem. But this is the same kind of 

language that has been used in other Acts representing Crown 
corporations as they have applied to other operations in the 
province. 
 
I’m thinking most specifically to the legislation that came into 
effect when hospital and health district consolidation happened, 
when we had closures of a number of hospitals in rural 
Saskatchewan, and we had consolidation of the local boards and 
their assets into the umbrella health district. 
 
What happened at that point, Mr. Speaker, is that monies 
donated to achieve certain purposes or to buy specific pieces of 
equipment for a particular health facility were lost to the control 
of the larger health district. And what happened is it 
undermined not just the efforts of the people locally, but it took 
away some of the pride and the goal of achievement that local 
residents felt in bringing together certain amounts of money, 
donations, and community efforts to pursue one specific goal 
that benefited their community. 
 
And having seen the impact of that historically, at least in the 
last decade, in the constituency that I represent and in other 
communities around this province, I’m concerned that this 
particular piece of legislation may in fact end up doing the same 
kind of thing to people who want to, on their own initiative, 
develop a foundation for the preservation of some historic 
property in their community. They could in fact lose the monies 
they have raised to a much larger entity that is controlled 
through this Crown, located at a great distance away. 
 
And so I think that there’s some reason to be concerned about 
what role local initiative and local individuals will be able to 
play and whether they will in fact want to play the game, 
whether they’ll want to be involved in the effort to preserve 
some local historic site if in fact the control is going to be lost 
to a Crown corporation which is headquartered probably in 
Regina. 
 
The constituency of Cypress Hills, Mr. Speaker, has a number 
of historic sites, as you know. And no doubt there are some that 
are well preserved already through initiatives of the federal 
government. There’s national historic sites — Fort Walsh, for 
instance, is one. 
 
We’ve had an interesting variety of historical site designations 
in the constituency from a small rural community church known 
as White Valley in the south of the constituency to I believe it’s 
called Smith’s barn in the area near Leader. And so many of the 
communities in Cypress Hills have their own specific and 
unique historical entity that they have taken great pride in 
restoring or preserving or upgrading. 
 
Under the existing legislation of historic properties though, 
once you have applied for status, once the property has been 
designated as a historic site . . . as an historic site, there is a loss 
of autonomy that that designation brings with it. 
 
The local people still have the fundraising opportunities, they 
still can provide labour and work bees to maintain the facilities 
to upgrade them, but there’s a certain loss of autonomy to the 
historical sites board. And almost everything that’s done has to 
be approved by an agency somewhere else. And it becomes an 
encumbrance, frankly, to the efforts of the local people. 



1704 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

 
This particular piece of legislation is even going to go further 
than the limitations that were placed on local organizations by 
the historic sites provisions that were previously in place. This 
actually indicates that a Crown corporation will establish a 
foundation to look after the historic site that has been chosen for 
renewal. 
 
And so the loss of local control and initiative could be very 
severe and very real. So I have some concerns about the 
implications of the historic sites scattered throughout the 
province, with this particular piece of legislation. 
 
There is one example I would like to bring to the attention of 
the House today in connection with this. When oil was 
discovered in Saskatchewan back in the early ’40s, I believe the 
Fosterton no. 1 well located in the general district of Cabri, 
which is to the northwest of Swift Current, that was one of the 
very first oil wells discovered. And one of the, I should say 
maybe the first producing oil well in that part of Saskatchewan. 
 
And Fosterton, as it turns out, has a unique role as part of our 
historical heritage when it comes to the oil industry. And yet the 
people in that area that want to see Fosterton developed as an 
historic site and designated an historic site, have had all kinds 
of frustrations in getting any kind of sympathy or support 
expressed for their project. So a few very dedicated local people 
keep working at that prospect. 
 
Interestingly enough, the Fosterton well is still producing oil. 
And the irony is that everybody in Canada knows about Leduc 
no. 1, the oil well that is said to be responsible for Alberta’s oil 
wealth and everybody is familiar with how the oil industry 
boomed in Alberta after that particular time. But Fosterton, the 
Fosterton well is actually older and is still producing, whereas 
Leduc no. 1 is younger and no longer producing. 
 
And the irony is there that the local people of that region around 
Fosterton have tried to bring the attention of the uniqueness of 
that well to the forefront. And they’ve been frustrated, frankly, 
by a lack of financial support, a lack of recognition, and a lack 
of care, frankly, about that particular issue. 
 
Now hypothetically the government could say through this 
Crown corporation, we’re going to designate that particular 
Fosterton well an historical site and we’re going to take control 
of the whole project there. Now that is a possibility and it’s 
hypothetical I admit. But the reality is that the control of that 
project, even though it’s been the dream of many people locally 
to see that come to fruition, the control of that particular site 
could be lost to a board that is under the control and jurisdiction 
of the Crown corporation that is set up in this particular piece of 
legislation. 
 
Let me just go back a little bit. I want to backtrack just a bit. I 
talked earlier about the loss of local control when health 
districts were expanded. I had a letter come to my office just 
this past weekend in fact, Mr. Speaker, concerning the loss of 
local participation and autonomy when it comes to those kinds 
of things. 
 
(15:30) 
A lady from Shaunavon says that a group of active volunteers in 

her community have spent a great deal of time and energy 
raising funds to purchase stress-testing equipment for the local 
hospital. And when they made the goal that they had set for 
themselves to make this purchase, they went to the provincial 
government and indicated that that was their intention. They 
had a doctor in the community who could oversee the 
administration of the stress tests and all they needed was a piece 
of equipment. 
 
But when they brought their desire to the provincial 
government, when they indicated that they had this money to 
make this purchase, the government said no, we will not allow 
you to buy that piece of equipment for the Shaunavon hospital. 
 
Now the rationale, I’m sure, is that they can use that money, the 
provincial government can use that money for different kinds of 
equipment and maybe more appropriate equipment elsewhere. 
The local people can use the money if they buy approved 
equipment for the hospital. 
 
But the reality is that the local people worked diligently to raise 
that money so that they could buy a specific piece of a 
equipment for their specific hospital. And it’s that loss of 
control, Mr. Speaker, that makes this type of legislation and this 
mentality so harmful, frankly, to the initiative and desires of the 
local people. 
 
I think that when this kind of legislation comes forward it 
really, not just undermines they’re determination and initiative 
and their willingness to help themselves and do something good 
for their own community, it approaches a mentality of Big 
Brother. It’s as though people at the local level just don’t know 
what’s good for them, and we’re going to have to take control 
and tell them what needs to be done in their community. 
 
As that kind of mentality applied to the health districts, when 
those situations were prominent and that was earlier in this 
decade, I think the same thing might happen with this particular 
piece of legislation as it applies to historical properties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you go to item no. 10, or part 10 of this 
particular Act, it deals with the board of trustees and it says, 
that: 
 

A foundation consists of a board of not more than 20 
trustees appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 
If there was ever an opportunity for the government to prove 
that it has control of the project, this would be it. The 
Lieutenant Governor in Council can appoint up to 20 trustees 
for any foundation on any given project associated with 
historical properties. 
 
And later on this particular section talks about a foundation 
paying any allowances for trustees and any other costs for 
administering the foundation from its own money. It talks about 
trustees holding office for a period not exceeding three years 
and until a successor is appointed. 
 
And the Lieutenant Governor in Council may appoint a person 
for the remainder of a term, or appoint a person for a term 
mentioned in subsection (2). The Lieutenant Governor in 
Council should designate a trustee as chairperson. They may 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1705 

 

designate another trustee as vice-chairperson to act in the 
absence of the chairperson. The Lieutenant Governor in Council 
may fix a quorum for the transaction of business at meetings of 
the board. The Lieutenant Governor in Council may determine 
the allowances for travelling and other expenses. The entire 
piece of legislation and that section in particular puts all 
authority, all power, in the hands of the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council. It never refers to any local participation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the strength of this province in the past and 
even today, the strength of this province has been derived from 
the ability and the willingness of people at the lowest level, at 
the grassroots, right at the site. It’s been derived from their 
desire and their willingness to work together to achieve good 
things. 
 
And what we have here, in my view, is an undermining of that 
spirit. It’s the government is going to tell you how to run this; 
the government is going to appoint these people; the 
government is going to do this, this, and this. And I think that in 
making this kind of legislation so specific in that regard it 
would, in my view, discourage people from getting involved. 
 
What it will provide frankly, Mr. Speaker, is a pretty effective 
employment opportunity for people who would be serving on 
this board. This may in fact be a government employee . . . 
employment program, as it’s turning out. 
 
The other thing that troubled me was the investments issue of 
this particular piece of legislation. It says here that: 
 

A foundation may: 
 
. . . invest any part of its money in any security or class of 
securities authorized for investment of money in the 
general revenue fund pursuant to The Financial 
Administration Act, 1993; and 
 
. . . dispose of the investments in any manner, on any terms, 
and in any amount . . . the foundation considers expedient. 

 
I think in some respects that that is too wide open, too 
open-ended, frankly, and I would like to see more control on 
that particular area of the foundation’s jurisdiction. 
 

The costs incurred pursuant to this section are a charge on 
and payable out of the money held by a foundation. 

 
You know I’ve worked in the sector of charitable organizations 
for some time. And I know that there are very stringent rules 
and regulations pertaining to the activities of charitable 
organizations and what they can and cannot do — what is 
incumbent on them as far as the law is concerned. 
 
And I’m fully aware that you just simply cannot abuse or 
misuse people’s money. When they give money to a charitable 
organization, I, as a board member, am fully accountable for 
how that money is expended. 
 
And while this particular provision that we’ve just discussed 
leaves the expenditure of money and the disposition of money 
in any manner whatsoever up to the board, the very next section 
talks about immunity from liability. And so we have provisions 

in this Act that says people in the foundation, the board 
members of this foundation can spend money in anyway they 
conceive or wish, but they’re not subject to liability. They are 
excused from liability in anything they do according to section 
15. 
 
And I think that that again leaves the door wide open for 
potential abuse. 
 

14 A foundation shall consider the directions of the persons 
who have made gifts, grants, bequests for donations to a 
foundation but the foundation is not bound by those 
directions. 

 
Now I understand with the experience I’ve had with charitable 
organizations that nobody has a right to say to a foundation or 
charitable organization, I’ll give you a donation but this is how 
you must use it. But on the other hand, this is open-ended to the 
point where somebody may want to make a donation to the 
foundation, but the foundation is not bound in any respect to 
pay attention to the requests or the suggestions of the donor. 
 
And I think that that again will not encourage people to 
participate financially in the underwriting or the funding of a 
project to restore a historical property. In fact, it will do very 
much the opposite. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a few other issues that we need to 
concern ourselves with. There’s one final one that I would like 
to talk about today and it has to do with the auditing of the 
books of any foundation that’s been set up to oversee an 
historical property’s operation. 
 
And here it says: 
 

17 The Provincial Auditor or any other auditor or firm of 
auditors that the Lieutenant Governor in Council may 
appoint shall audit the accounts and financial statements of 
a foundation: 
 
(a) annually; and 
 
(b) at any other times that the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council may require. 

 
Again we have a situation here where the government has the 
right — I suppose some would say the obligation, but I don’t 
see that here — it has the right to ask for an audit, not only from 
the Provincial Auditor but from any other auditor or firm of 
auditors. And again, I believe that that is non-specific enough to 
present possible problems in the operation and the auditing of a 
foundation that’s dealing with an historical property. 
 
I believe that this legislation could be much stronger if it said 
the Provincial Auditor would be responsible for the auditing of 
these foundations; that the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
didn’t have any option in that respect, and certainly couldn’t 
farm the work out to somebody of their own choosing if they 
had to hide or cover up some little scandal that would develop. 
 
I believe that that section of the legislation ought to be tightened 
up and made much more specific. 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that brings to a conclusion my 



1706 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

concerns about this particular piece of legislation. On the 
surface, at first blush, it looked pretty innocuous, frankly, and 
untroubling. But if you look at it more carefully, there’s too 
many unanswered questions that this particular piece of 
legislation brings to the forefront. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the best 
place to deal with some of these questions may be in the 
Committee of the Whole. And I would move that the legislation 
move to that stage. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 1 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 1 — The 
Partnership Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s my pleasure this afternoon to rise and participate again in 
the debate on The Partnership Amendment Act, Bill No. 1. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s one of the very few Bills that those of 
us on this side of the House have some agreement with. 
Although again, we always have concerns about Bills that this 
government brings forward and we have found the odd hole in 
it. But it’s important, I think, that we do give a little bit of credit 
where credit is due. 
 
It is something that the professionals in Saskatchewan have 
been looking forward for many, many years, and we’re glad to 
see that this NDP government is finally being able to join the 
20th century. Unfortunately, it’s the 21st century, but at least 
they’re starting to catch up a little bit. 
 
Now we know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that other provinces in this 
country have similar Acts on the book. Those provinces that are 
certainly a lot more progressive and aggressive than we are 
here, that bring about legislation such as this so that limited 
partnerships have an opportunity to be able to protect the 
individuals in the partnership, to some degree, in case one of the 
partners causes an error in the business. And that way, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the other partner is not totally liable also for 
the actions of his partner. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one thing we have done, of course, is to 
take this Bill out into the professional community, to the 
dentists and the lawyers and accountants and other such 
professionals who tend to set up shop as partners. And we have 
heard some response back from them; some of it had been 
positive. There are some concerns out there. 
 
And for a large part though, we’re still waiting to hear back 
from quite a few of them as they pour over the Bill and try to 
get a better handle of it. As they discuss it amongst their other 
different professionals, they are trying to come up with 
reasonable responses that we can use and debate and certainly 
use sometime off in the distant future when we move this into 
Committee of the Whole. 
And so, I think it’d be best at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that we wait until we hear some more further response and 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 17 — The 
Professional Corporations Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to speak to Bill 17, The Professional Corporations Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I understand it, this Bill extends 
provisions that were granted to doctors last year; namely, the 
right to incorporate. Professions such as accountants, lawyers, 
dentists, etc., have been lobbying the government for this right. 
For many, incorporating just as other businesses do comes with 
financial benefits in terms of taxation. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party is supportive of the direction of this 
piece of legislation as we were with the Bill last session 
granting the right of incorporation to our doctors. Anything we 
can do as a province to make Saskatchewan more attractive to 
important and vital professions that will help keep and attract 
them, we have to look at seriously. 
 
With professional incorporation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are 
certain advantages granted at last to these professionals. 
Advantages such as in the area of taxation, which has been a 
real point of contention for many and has made Saskatchewan 
uncompetitive for many professions. 
 
(15:45) 
 
For too long, this government has ignored the suggestions of 
important professionals and have instead watched as many have 
left Saskatchewan for greener pastures and lower tax rates 
elsewhere. 
 
So if a Bill of this type stems that tide in even a small way, it’s 
a valuable and important change. However, I would caution the 
members opposite that it’s important to recognize that this Bill 
in itself will not stop the outflow of people from this province. 
 
Last year we saw the incorporation of doctors, a move we 
wholeheartedly supported on this side of the floor. While 
certainly something doctors had lobbied for, for years and a 
positive step, this change in itself was not enough to keep many 
doctors from continuing to leave our province for many other 
reasons, mostly having to do with working conditions I suspect. 
 
In creating an economic atmosphere that puts our province on a 
competitive playing field that attracts more people here, this is 
certainly one piece of the puzzle, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but it’s 
only one piece. 
 
We have seen from this . . . We have seen this government 
continue down a road in other areas that continue to make 
business feel unwelcome in Saskatchewan. And unless this 
antagonistic atmosphere of suspicion and resentment against 
those people in this province who are employers, entrepreneurs, 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1707 

 

and professionals is abandoned by the far left-wing members of 
this government who seem to have more power these days than 
they used to, our economy will continue to falter against those 
of our neighbours who have been far friendlier to potential 
investors. 
 
So once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a small step in 
making our province more competitive with our neighbouring 
jurisdictions; in perhaps keeping a few more of these important 
professionals here at home and contributing to our economy. 
 
It’s also important to point out, as the minister has done, that 
the rights of individuals seeking the services of professionals 
who opt for incorporation do not change with this Act. As 
section 16 points out, the relationship between a professional 
corporation and a person who receives services from a 
professional corporation is still subject to all of the applicable 
laws relating to the confidential, ethical, and fiduciary 
relationship remains. 
 
I think that’s important to point out. Too often, thanks in large 
part to the political philosophy of the members opposite, the 
very word corporation sets off unwarranted alarm bells and 
people immediately think of a great faceless entity with little 
regard for people. In reality, of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 
corporation is simply a legal description, but it’s still important 
for people to know that their rights do not change with this 
piece of legislation. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party strongly supports the nature and 
direction of this piece of legislation, and accordingly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I move that this Bill proceed to Committee of 
the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 16 — The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2001 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives 
me great pleasure to be able to rise and speak on Bill No. 16, 
The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this amendment changes very little in the 
Act. It’s really an extension extending the sunset clause in the 
Act for two more years, from 2001 to 2003. That in itself, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, raises some questions. This tax credit was 
initially instituted as a mentoring program for people in 
Saskatchewan, and presumably young people in Saskatchewan 
to get involved in the film industry. It would appear that this 
obviously did not work because now we’re extending the 
program. We’ll have some questions on that I’m sure when we 
get to the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the first things this government 
does when it comes to talking about any of their incentive 
programs such as this and this tax credit is they talk about how 
much money they have made and how much they hope to make 

on it. And we’re very experienced with the money aspects of 
anything the government talks about, not what they lose in 
Crowns but how much the Crowns have made for the province, 
over and over, each year. They don’t wish to look at the losses. 
 
But in the film tax credit, it’s really no different. Stated by the 
government in 1977, the value of the film and video production 
in the province was $26 million. One year later, in 1998, after 
the implementation of The Film Employment Tax Credit Act, 
the amount had more than doubled to 58 million. 
 
Last year, in 2000, the figure had climbed to 60 million. In fact 
the minister herself is saying the industry volume could reach 
100 million in production over the next few years. 
 
Now this is very impressive, but our concern, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that it’s only a small sector of the economy that’s 
getting a break. In this case, it’s the film industry. And the 
government again is insistent on picking winners and losers and 
the question is, is why. 
 
We’re not denying that the film and video industry is a valuable 
component of the economy but so much more could be done. 
Why do we stop just at the film industry? Why not other 
businesses? Why not other industries? 
 
This is a proof actually to the government that tax breaks work 
to stimulate the economy, and we hear on a continuing basis 
where we wish to lower taxes and it won’t work. And yet here 
the government is picking winners and losers, lowering the 
taxes in one little sector of the economy. And by their own 
figures it’s working well. 
 
The tax credit, film tax credit has contributed greatly to the 
overall growth of the province. Not only from a cultural aspect 
but also in terms of overall economic growth. So I believe that 
the NDP should look at what their own record is. You give a tax 
credit to one industry and it expands the economic growth of 
the province. 
 
However, however, they’re in the mode of picking winners and 
losers again. You pick who you want to grow in this province. 
You don’t want the province to grow. You just pick little 
winners and losers wherever you see fit on a given day. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the province has also seen a dramatic rise 
in the number of larger, more expensive film and video projects 
being produced. We’ve also attracted national and international 
attention in the film industry. This certainly speaks not only to 
our province’s many attractions, but also to the level of 
professionalism of the people working in the industry. 
 
But a closer look at what impact The Film Employment Tax 
Credit Act has had on the province reveals the following: tax 
credits, training, young people, more jobs, economic growth, 
and spinoffs. In fact we’re actually pleased that the members 
opposite have recognized what tax breaks can do for an 
economy because this is a message that we’ve been talking 
about for quite some time. 
 
But we’re wondering why this government doesn’t target the 
rest of Saskatchewan’s business and industries. Why not offer 
them the same incentives? We know that the rest of the 



1708 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

businesses and industries in this province certainly deserve it; 
and we all know that small businesses are the engines that drive 
a province’s economy, not the Crown corporations. 
 
But this Bill will most certainly not address that, not even when 
we hear on a regular basis of businesses closing down or 
relocating or just plain refusing to set up in the province. Why? 
Because too much bureaucracy, too many taxes, and not enough 
opportunity. 
 
There’s an argument, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that some put 
forward, saying that if you decrease taxes, you’re going to run 
into problems because that leads to deficit budgeting. How 
many times have we heard that from members opposite? When 
we talk about our tax program on this side of the House, we 
hear, you’re not going to get the money from taxes, therefore 
you’re going into deficit budgeting. 
 
Well really nothing could be further from the truth, and we 
know that because the numbers from The Film Employment 
Tax Credit Act tell us this. You give a tax credit, you create 
more jobs, you get more young people working, and you get 
more economic spinoffs. In other words, decreased taxes equals 
increased businesses equals increased economic growth. What 
could be plainer? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know that the government cut its small 
business tax by 2 per cent in this year’s budget, and the small 
business income tax rate claim threshold has increased to 
300,000 from $200,000. Those are encouraging to see, but so 
much more could be done. This Bill, however, does not make 
any advancement in other areas. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d just like to quote from the 
Canadian Taxpayers on the budget and the 2 per cent reduction 
in the business tax. And this article, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talks 
about “Unfocused spending spoils provincial budget.” And it 
says: 
 

A look at the budget reveals government spending that is 
unfocused, undisciplined, and unsustainable in the long 
term. So while our provincial government defends spending 
increases and fends off calls for more tax cuts by claiming 
that it is focusing on health, education, highways, and 
agriculture, the numbers suggest a different reality. It has 
not focused on strategic spending but unfocused and 
undisciplined spending that is draining resources from 
important programs, hampering debt reduction, and 
slowing tax relief. 

 
And I would just like to go back to part of what the Taxpayers 
Federation has said, this government “. . . is focusing on 
health.” Well I would suggest we look at the health care in this 
province today, and if that’s their focus, it’s quite a shoddy 
approach to health care — what we’re seeing right now. 
 
Highways, focus on highways. Let’s look at the highways. 
Agriculture. The same thing. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this just goes 
to show how unfocused spending of the budget is, and why, 
back to the film tax credit, it’s only one avenue that the 
government has focused and to pick a winner or loser. 
 
One thing this government seems to forget is that when 

someone from outside the province is working and training in 
Saskatchewan, there is some serious secondary expenditures 
taking place. People employed in the film and video industry 
have to be provided with accommodations, meals, travel, 
entertainment, and general necessities. 
 
These secondary expenditures will be spent wherever those 
people happen to be shooting on location in the province, be it a 
city, a town, or a remote area. This is where your economic 
spinoffs occur. Yet there’s no recognition for those companies 
that provide those services in this Bill. 
 
What’s even more troubling is that the business providing those 
services, those businesses where these secondary expenditures 
will take place, have overall been treated rather shabbily by this 
government. The last few months in particular have been very 
disappointing. For instance, the 2 per cent business tax cut will 
be literally swallowed up with huge utility rate hikes facing 
small businesses. 
 
SaskPower predicts it will have to raise its rates by another 10 
per cent before the end of the year. The SaskEnergy rate hike — 
we’ve gone through that ad nauseam in the last little while, 
debating the SaskEnergy rates and the prices of natural gas — 
but we know the effect that that will have on small businesses 
in this province. 
 
How does the government expect those businesses to realize 
any profit when they’re facing these skyrocketing operating 
costs? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I go back to these spinoff businesses, and 
again I talk about rural Saskatchewan. I’ll go talk a little bit 
about rural Saskatchewan. In my particular area, very historic 
areas where films have been done, they’ve been producing films 
in the area. And because of the policies of this government, 
which has caused businesses to close, we find now if film 
companies wish to come down into the Wood Mountain/Willow 
Bunch area, there’s very few places for them to stay because 
businesses have closed because of the policies of this 
government. 
 
And even to add to this burden, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we look 
this year at tax reassessment. We have places in my 
constituency where the reassessment, it’s going to cause the 
taxes to go up by 200 to 300 per cent. And I wish to repeat that 
— 200 to 300 per cent. We hear rhetoric from the other side 
about, yes, but the mill rate went down 1 mill, but the actual 
fact is dollars out of pockets, out of businesses is skyrocketing. 
 
(16:00) 
 
I recently talked to an individual who owns an inn, and I think it 
was two hundred and some per cent his reassessment taxes have 
gone up, which may in fact cause the place to close. We’ve 
already witnessed a couple or three hotels within my 
constituency that have closed because of the skyrocketing 
utility rates and the taxes that are going up. How this relates 
into the film industry — I do not expect people from the film 
industry will want to use tents when they go out into some of 
these rural areas to do filming. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while this Bill seeks to extend the 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1709 

 

waiver of residency provision, we can’t help but note that it is 
to be used when no qualified Saskatchewan resident is available 
for employment. Well it makes you wonder why there is no 
Saskatchewan resident available for employment. We know that 
our young people leave this province on a regular basis, and 
enter into any kind of debate we wish on it, what causes the 
young people to leave is no jobs. No jobs are created by an 
economy that is flat or declining. As we heard today it’s in a 
death spiral, and I believe that’s a very accurate assessment of 
the economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d just like to read one quote from the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix, and it says: 
 

The provincial economy seems to be right now in a crisis of 
confidence; both from the employer’s side in terms of 
capital investment and from the consumer’s side, 
confidence matters. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is why our young people are 
leaving the province and that’s why I believe that this tax credit 
has to be extended because our mentoring program did not 
work. And so we have to extend it, trying to get some young 
people to work in the film industry. 
 
So in essence, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the film industry is facing a 
labour shortage much like so many other parts of the province, 
because we are chasing our young people out of the province. 
And I might add it’s not only the young people that are being 
chased out of the province, it’s people from all ages with 
businesses that are closing down and starting up in other 
jurisdictions. 
 
Two troubling issues emerge here: one is that this government 
is addressing the labour shortage in a small, confined sector of 
the economy by extending a waiver of residency provision. The 
other is that, as with every other sector of the economy, it seems 
once a young person has received training in the province they 
pick up and leave. There’s simply not enough reasons to keep 
them here. And the film and video industry is no different. 
Again why we’re extending this mentoring program. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have serious labour issues in this 
province. We lost over 12,000 people last year — 12,000. 
According to StatsCanada, in the last decade the number of jobs 
in Saskatchewan has grown by just 3.5 per cent — less than 
one-quarter of the national average of 14.3 per cent job growth. 
 
On top of that, a recent survey indicates that fully 40 per cent of 
young people aged 18 to 24 anticipate moving out of the 
province within the next five years. That’s almost double the 
West as a region. 
 
These 18- to 24-year-olds make up a large portion of the film 
and video industry’s core group of workers but they’re planning 
on leaving. They won’t be here in five years. No wonder the 
film and video industry needed some extra time. 
 
I guess I have question: will we be seeing this tax credit 
incentive go on and on and on because we’re not filling the 
positions? 
 
So while this Bill does provide for a time extension that will 

allow tax credits for out-of-province residents, it does not even 
begin to address the many issues and concerns facing economic 
growth and related labour issues in the province. 
 
And it also doesn’t address the many barriers facing the 
province’s other businesses and industries. 
 
And it most certainly does not contain any vision or plan for 
long-term economic growth that should be provided for all 
sectors of the economy and not just a select few. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that I would like to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 
Subvote (PE01) 
 
The Chair: — The last time we considered these estimates was 
on April 30. I’ll ask the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m happy to 
reintroduce officials. They’ve all been before committee before. 
To my left, the deputy minister, Neil Yeates; to my right, 
assistant deputy minister, Wayne McElree; behind the deputy 
minister is Mae Boa, executive director of finance and 
operations; directly behind myself is Lily Stonehouse, assistant 
deputy minister; to her right is John Janzen, acting executive 
director of student financial assistance; and behind the bar is 
Jim Benning, president and CEO (chief executive officer) of 
SCN (Sask. Communications Network Corporation). 
 
In addition, Mr. Chair, I just wanted to correct a statement I’d 
made on April 30, just as we were wrapping up. 
 
I had, in response to a question raised by the hon. member for 
Cypress Hills, if I remember correctly, about movement of 
graduates, had indicated that the most recent study pointed to a 
net 4.5 per cent gain in Saskatchewan of post-secondary 
graduates. In error I had referred to the study — which, Mr. 
Chair, is done jointly by StatsCan and the Council of Ministers 
of Education, Canada — I referred to that having been done 
looking at ’86 grads two years later in 1988. 
 
I was in error in saying that. The years actually were 1995 grads 
in 1997. The previous study had in fact been ’86 grads in ’88. 
And at that time in the ’80s, Mr. Chair, Saskatchewan was 
experiencing a net outflow of graduates in the amount of 7 per 
cent. And in the ’90s then, from the study there, it was a net 
inflow of 4.5 per cent graduates. 
 
So there was significant difference in Saskatchewan in 
comparison of the two decades, and I just wanted to correct it 
for the record. I did note the look on the member’s face when I 
referred to the date, and I now recognize why — I unwittingly 
mentioned the dates of the previous decade. 
 



1710 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

So I’m happy to correct that, Mr. Chair, and I’m looking 
forward to the questions from the critic and continuing with 
estimates in Post-Secondary and Skills Training. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have quite a number of 
issues that I’d like to deal with. I don’t think we’re going to get 
to them all today, but I understand that the way things are 
progressing in the Assembly that we will have quite a bit of 
time during the summer to deal with them. So we’ll deal with 
them in a fair bit of detail, hopefully. So I’ll put some of these 
down and we’ll get to some of the main issues. 
 
Mr. Chair, I would like to start by discussing the funding to the 
universities by this government. The 3.5 per cent increase in 
operating grants certainly is not adequate as . . . if you talk to 
the folks over at our two universities, there’s a number of . . . 
After the budget was announced and since that time you can go 
through newspaper articles with headlines with things like 
“Tuition fee hike is the only recourse.” “U of S will seek a 
significant tuition fee increase.” “The budget is a let down at 
the U of S.” “The U of R says pressing needs not addressed in 
the provincial budget.” And so on. 
 
Numerous other articles and editorials indicating some of the 
impact of the less than required funding for operations at both 
universities. And I wonder. I know that the minister said in the 
past that his government is committed to post-secondary 
education and it ranks high in their priorities, but I wonder how 
the minister can justify only a 3.5 per cent increase in operation 
grants to the universities in lieu of the needs, and how does he 
justify that small increase with a large demand and in terms of 
post-secondary education being a high priority? 
 
It seems like, from those people who are looking in from the 
outside, that a 3.5 per cent increase in funding for operations 
certainly doesn’t indicate a high commitment to post-secondary 
education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I welcome the hon. 
member’s question. And I think of course the last thing he’ll 
want me to do is to compare the actual funding track record of 
the coalition government, Mr. Chair, with the financial 
commitments made to post-secondary by the hon. member and 
his party in the last election. Because unfortunately, Mr. Chair, 
the comparison does not look very favourably on the 
commitments of the Sask Party. 
 
Probably to put things into perspective, Mr. Chair, I’ll say 
several different things. First of all, there has been a 
commitment of three and a half per cent increase to the base 
operating grants of both of our universities. There still remains 
an additional $3 million in addition to that to be allocated to our 
universities through the funding formula. 
 
(16:15) 
 
To put things into a broader context, since 1999, the funding to 
our universities has increased by in excess of 15 per cent, 15.3 
per cent in that time, increases granted through the Treasury 
Board and estimates process of government. And that would be 
compared, Mr. Chair, to an inflationary experience during that 
period, of slightly less than 6 per cent, which was the most that 
in the last election, Mr. Chair, that you could get anyone from 

the Saskatchewan Party to make a commitment to 
post-secondary education. 
 
What’s the difference of that, Mr. Chair? When you put the 
pencil to the paper, what it tells you is that there is $17 million 
more being funded in this budget to our university sector than 
would be if you applied the policy of the Sask Party. 
 
In addition to that though, Mr. Speaker — because it doesn’t 
stop there, Mr. Chair — in addition there is an additional two 
and a half million dollars in this budget that is dedicated to 
develop the virtual campus, Campus Saskatchewan. A 
significant part of that is being received by the universities. 
Also a one and a half million dollar expansion in computer 
sciences programs, the bulk of that at our universities. 
 
For the centennial scholarships, merit-based scholarships for 
first-year students coming into our post-secondary institutions, 
$500,000, a half a million dollars, most of that to our 
universities. And also, Mr. Chair, a half a million dollars going 
to support the centennial summer employment program . . . 
Sorry, that’d be $5 million in total going to support the 
centennial summer employment program; but a half a million 
dollars of that money going to post-secondary institutions, and 
the bulk of that will also flow through to our universities. 
 
So as the hon. member can see, Mr. Chair, the funding has been 
substantial. It is certainly very attractive when compared to the 
alternative put forward by the Sask Party in the last election. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, it’s interesting to hear the minister 
explain as best he can the underfunding that has been chronic in 
the last decade by this government. All you have to do is look at 
some of the information coming out of both universities and 
talk to some of the people over there and they’ll soon tell you 
that they were able to cope with the cutback in funding. They 
made the sacrifice, I guess, in a difficult time along with 
everyone else, but they said they can no longer do that. 
 
And as a result we’ve seen some very significant tuition fee 
increases from both our universities: the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) increasing their tuition fees an average of 15 per 
cent; the U of R (University of Regina), 9 per cent. It’s 
interesting to note that both of those increases in tuition fees 
will bring in more new dollars to both universities than new 
dollars that’ll be coming from the provincial government. 
 
So in other words, Mr. Chair, there’s more money coming from 
the students . . . more new money coming from the students 
than there is from this government. 
 
Also when you look at the Maclean’s ratings of universities 
across this country, our two universities in Saskatchewan here 
haven’t even maintained their position — they are actually been 
dropping. And I realize that there . . . we may have some 
questions as to the criteria used and so on and some of those 
differences in criteria I do agree with, but I don’t agree that 
they’re not significant. 
 
I know talking to some folks on both campuses, they tell me 
that there is a reason why our universities’ ratings are dropping 
and in fact, that is . . . it distresses me but it has to do with the 
quality of education that’s being offered at these two 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1711 

 

universities. 
 
Now the minister talked about what the Saskatchewan Party’s 
policy was in the last election as far as post-secondary 
education and . . . but he fails to recognize some of the 
developments in policy that we’ve made in recent months. The 
Leader of the Opposition, my colleague from Rosetown-Biggar 
has indicated recently that our . . . the Saskatchewan Party are 
fully supportive of the U of S’s integrated health science 
facility, that we feel it’s a very necessary facility on that 
campus, and we would be fully supportive. 
 
We look at post-secondary . . . funding to post-secondary 
education not as an expenditure, Mr. Chair, but as an 
investment in the future, and we feel it’s an integral part of the 
. . . will play in integral part of the recovery of this province. 
And therefore we feel that of any area that should not be 
underfunded, this is one area that certainly should not be 
underfunded — particularly when the government is sitting on 
some fairly significant reserves, if you want to call them. 
 
There’s 500 million in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund; there’s 150 
to $200 million Crown dividend that wasn’t tapped into. And it 
seems somewhat ironic that at a time when our universities are 
struggling to maintain quality — and particularly from a 
coalition government who made access and quality such a key 
issue in the last election — that university funding would be 
less than adequate at this point in time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, there are a number of organizations that have 
expressed some real concern about the funding level, and at this 
time I would just like to discuss some of those concerns that 
were raised by some of the groups associated with the 
universities with the minister. 
 
The first is . . . and I’m sure the minister has seen this letter that 
was sent, I believe, to all members of this Assembly dated April 
20 from the University of Saskatchewan Council raising some 
concerns, and in fact, a copy of a motion that was passed 
unanimously at their April 19 meeting. And there are a number 
of issues in here that the minister and myself discussed very 
briefly, I believe. I think maybe we should spend a little bit 
more time on some of these things. 
 
The preamble to the resolution that the council passed says in 
part that the university can provide quality and relevant 
university . . . they have a plan: 
 

. . . to provide quality and relevant university education 
that’s required by Saskatchewan students and contribute 
through enhancing economic and social well-being of the 
citizens of this province. 
 

And that’s . . . I’m just quoting in part. They’re talking about 
the operations forecast, and I suppose maybe I should have 
started at the beginning, but I’ll carry on. 
 

These operation forecasts have shown that human 
resources, both faculty and non-faculty, have been eroded 
to the breaking point. The university is not able to replace 
equipment on anything close to and accepted by 
conservative service life estimates. 
 

The deficit in capital maintenance continues to mount. The 
accumulated underfunding over the last 10 years has 
created a sequence of crisis situations with regards to 
buildings and programs. 

 
I wonder if the minister would like to respond to these folks and 
their concerns. As their resolution indicates there’s been an 
accumulation of underfunding, and as such, I guess to put it in 
simple terms that we use out in the farm country, the chickens 
have come home to roost. 
 
I wonder how the minister plans to deal with the crisis situation 
that we have. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — With leave to introduce visitors? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Chair, I would like to introduce to the 
members a visitor up on the Speaker’s gallery, and we have Mr. 
Louis Gardiner who is sitting with “Tex” Bouvier. 
 
And Louis Gardiner has been working in the field of education 
for many years chairing the local board as well as being on 
other boards of northern development. As well, Louis has been 
involved in the field of recreation. He’s been one of the better 
off hockey players from northern Saskatchewan. They say that 
he is better than the member from Athabasca, Mr. Chair. 
 
So I’d like to have our members please welcome Mr. Louis 
Gardiner, and again, Mr. Bouvier. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 
Subvote (PE01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And I 
join with the Minister for Northern Affairs in recognizing the 
guests in the gallery. 
 
Mr. Chair, the hon. member raises several questions in concert, 
and it will require a bit of time in responding to him to do it in 
all fairness. 
 
I think what needs to be noted first of all, Mr. Chair, is the 
realities. And I hear the hon. member using the word crisis, 
which is a word that seems to emanate from that side of the 
House on a regular basis. 
 
A friend of mine the other day, Mr. Chair, suggested that if we 
were to consider every time that the opposition says the sky is 
falling, to actually believe that to be the case, if we wandered 
outside and cast our glance skyward, there would be nothing 



1712 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

there because surely by now the entire sky has fallen. 
 
But I don’t think that . . . I think the hon. member just engages 
in excessive rhetoric. And I quite understand that he doesn’t 
believe this to be a crisis — an important issue, for sure, but a 
crisis, I think, is a bit of an overstatement of the issue as he 
describes. 
 
First of all to put things into context, as I just said a few 
moments ago, if we were to follow the funding policy of the 
party opposite, there would be $17 million less in operating 
grants this year than in fact there are. But it’s not sufficient just 
to rest there. 
 
It should be noted, Mr. Chair, that the concerns related to the 
capital infrastructures of our universities are important — I will 
come back to that in just a moment — but that the response of 
this coalition government has not been minor by any stretch of 
the imagination. 
 
As we’ve said earlier in these estimates, if I remember 
correctly, the capital commitments and funding transferred to 
the University of Saskatchewan over the last three years, some 
$80 million; to the university sector over the last three years, in 
excess of $100 million, Mr. Chair, just in the last three years 
alone. That’s above and beyond the operating funds that are 
going to the universities, assisting with things like the 
Thorvaldson, the Kinesiology buildings, the U of S; the 
Education Building, U of R. 
 
Through the Centenary Capital Fund being used as well, we 
understand the request of the U of S for the College Building, 
waiting for the federal government to come through with some 
kind of commitment in support of that building which has now 
been declared a national heritage site but has for some reason 
not been able to attract any national funds. The province has 
said we’re there, with the university there. 
 
And the university is now talking about the importance of the 
Health Sciences Building, and we’re talking with the university 
about that. 
 
The hon. member says that he believes his leader has made a 
commitment. I don’t know to what kind of dollar figure he 
would have in mind. He may want to put that into the record, if 
they know. 
 
But also it is important, Mr. Chair, to note that the government 
is prepared to work together with the University of 
Saskatchewan, the Health Sciences Council, to look at the 
importance of the health sciences training in our province. 
 
The Fyke report has come forward. Saskatchewan is in these 
days looking to the future of health care. And Mr. Fyke, in 
bringing his report, has pointed to the importance of training 
and research. We acknowledge that. It is important to move 
forward in a planned and dedicated kind of way, with a clear 
picture about what it is that we’re doing in service of health 
training, research for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s not the kind of thing that anybody realistically 
expects to have specific commitment made at this point in time 
without working through just what are the requirements and 

how do you then build in the necessary infrastructure to support 
the outcomes that you’re seeking in both the area of teaching 
and research, which are a very important part of that total 
picture for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(16:30) 
 
This is not about ego. This is about taking the resources 
provided by the people of Saskatchewan through their good, 
hard-earned tax dollars that they’re paying, and using it in a 
planned and concerted way, Mr. Chair, so that we have some 
confidence that the outcomes that are realized will benefit 
citizens of Saskatchewan not just today but well into the future. 
 
I see us at an important time in the review of the health care in 
our province. I’m pleased that the opposition has agreed to 
participate in the Health Standing Committee of the legislature 
to receive comments from the people of Saskatchewan, the 
stakeholders in the health sector. And so that in a progressive 
and a constructive kind of way, that this legislature and those of 
us on both sides of the House can find ourselves looking at the 
realities and building for the future, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the minister accuses this side of the 
House of using the word crisis, while in fact crisis is exactly the 
word that is used in this resolution that was sent to all, as I said 
earlier, to all MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) by 
the University of Saskatchewan Council. And for the record, the 
University of Saskatchewan Council is an elected body 
representative of faculty and students, and they’re responsible 
for academic programs at the university. 
 
So these are folks who are hands-on and see on a day-to-day 
basis what is happening at that university. And they are the 
people that use the word crisis. Just to repeat for the minister’s 
benefit, the accumulated underfunding over the last 10 years 
has created a sequence of crisis situations with regards to 
buildings and programs. 
 
I might just, for the record, read the resolution: 
 

Be it resolved that the University Council convey to the 
legislature of Saskatchewan that the teaching, research, and 
public service obligations of the university to the people of 
Saskatchewan cannot be met at current levels of public 
funding. 

 
These are not my words, Mr. Chair, they are the words of this 
University of Saskatchewan Council. 
 
But they’re not the only ones that are concerned. And before I 
raise some concerns on behalf of another group, I would 
perhaps like to maybe address this crisis situation that the 
minister suggests is not a crisis and takes rather lightly. 
 
All one has to do is look at the situation at the College of 
Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan. I believe there’s a 
number of people up there who have used the word crisis. 
 
Students I think would perhaps be using the word crisis when 
they’re looking at the projected increases in tuition fees of, as I 
said earlier, 15 per cent at the University of Saskatchewan and 9 
per cent at the University of Regina. And that’s over and above 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1713 

 

an average of 7 per cent or 7.7 per cent increase last year. And 
they’re being told that in the academic year starting in the fall of 
2002, that there will be some fairly significant increases unless 
we have an increase in funding to the universities. 
 
So it’s not this side of the House that’s seeing the crisis. I think 
there are a lot of people that are seeing the crisis. 
 
All one has to do is look at what’s happening out on the streets 
of Regina and other cities around the province where we have 
CUPE members out on strike because they say there aren’t 
enough people to do the work there, that we have a shortage of 
health care workers. 
 
Only this morning I met with representatives from the College 
of Dental Surgeons and they’re telling us that there’s a real 
shortage coming down the road. And they have some real 
concerns about the school of dentistry up at the U of S. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, I think there are some crises in 
post-secondary education that need to be addressed. 
 
Now another group that has expressed some real concerns about 
funding to universities is the student union, the University of 
Saskatchewan Students’ Union. They sent a position paper. And 
I’m sure the minister, I would think, received a copy and I 
would hope that he has looked at it. And they identify basically 
three issues which they are very concerned about. And I read 
this about a week ago so I’m not sure, they too may have used 
the word crisis, Mr. Chair. 
 
They talk about core funding, something that we’ve been 
talking about here. And their recommendation as far as core 
funding is, is that this province increase the core funding or the 
operating grants to bring them in line with the national average. 
According to their information, our funding is somewhat lower, 
and we’ll perhaps discuss that a bit in a few minutes time. 
 
They also talk about scholarships and bursaries. And again, 
Saskatchewan ranks fairly low in that area according to the 
students at the U of S. And they recommend that a 
residency-based scholarship and bursary mechanism needs to be 
developed, perhaps on a matching grant basis, to retain the best 
and brightest students within the province and to maintain their 
financial accessibility. 
 
And the third area they talk about is the students’ experience, as 
they call it. And what they are saying there is that besides 
offering programming and that sort of thing to students, there 
needs to be other services. And there in fact are other services 
that are offered to students, but again according to their 
information, Saskatchewan is below the mean, as far as the 
national average in that area. 
 
And their recommendation, and I’ll simply read it for the 
record: 
 

Saskatchewan needs to take a proactive role in enhancing 
the student experience through increased and targeted 
funding for services that contribute to the success of 
students within the PSE realm. 

 
So that’s another group that is concerned about the level of 

funding and the impact of the underfunding, as some of these 
groups will call it. 
 
Another group, the University of Regina Students’ Union also 
issued a news release dated May 22, in which they’re very 
concerned about the 9 per cent increase in tuition fees. 
 
They quote a study by Statistics Canada which indicates that the 
higher the tuition fees, the greater the restrictions to access to 
post-secondary institutions. And they quote some statistics that 
young people from low- and middle-income socio-economic 
status, that that gap is widening and will continue to widen as 
far as those children from those families being able to access 
universities, SIAST, and those sorts . . . receive post-secondary 
education. And so they have some real concerns. 
 
And near the end of their news release, and I’ll quote them: 
 

The Government of Saskatchewan must make a stronger 
commitment to the development of our educational 
institutions and ensure that education remains accessible to 
all people. 
 

So, Mr. Minister, there are some very serious concerns being 
raised by many people about the level of funding . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The member from Regina South is asking 
whether they’re using crisis, the word crisis, and in fact I think 
some of them are. 
 
I think at this time I would like to get into some specifics on 
funding to the universities, Mr. Chair. The total budgeted figure 
for operational grants to the universities this year is $212 
million. I wonder if the minister could . . . last year the 
budgeted figure was about 201 million. I guess I have a couple 
of questions at this point. 
 
First of all, does the minister have the forecasted number for the 
last fiscal year for the total operating budget to the universities? 
And secondly, can he provide the numbers, the operating grant 
numbers to both universities in the past fiscal year and the 
estimated dollars for this current fiscal year for both the 
University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, that was a rather lengthy 
question and will probably deserve an equal amount of time in 
the answer, I’m afraid. But the question ended on a specific 
question and I assure the hon. member that the answer will end 
on a specific answer as well. 
 
But I think what the hon. member describes as context . . . and I 
just would like to reflect for a moment on the significance of 
the observation, Mr. Chair, of the Minister of Education from 
Zimbabwe. 
 
Last November I had the opportunity to chair the triennial 
conference of Commonwealth ministers of Education. And I 
will long remember, Mr. Chair, the Education minister from 
Zimbabwe informing the ministers gathered that last year, if I 
remember the numbers correctly, in his country they graduated 
some 1,800 new teachers. And last year in his country they lost 
some 1,200 teachers who died of AIDS (acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome). Mr. Chair, that’s a crisis. That’s a crisis. 
 



1714 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

We’ve got problems; we’ve got challenges. And when you have 
challenges, what you do is you make plans, you set goals, you 
understand your criteria, and you move forward. Mr. Chair, we 
have challenges. 
 
When the hon. member talks about funding to universities, in 
addition to the $17 million less there would be if his party were 
to implement their policies, Mr. Chair, in referring to the 
support for students from the people of Saskatchewan through 
their provincial government programs. And in his criticism 
about shortfall, I think is the word he used or something to that 
effect, in the area of scholarships and bursaries, I would want to 
point out, Mr. Chair, that most if not all informed students in 
Canada would say quite readily that Saskatchewan has, at this 
point in time, one of the best student loan programs in the 
nation. 
 
And I say that, Mr. Chair, because it’s not well known, that here 
in Saskatchewan through the student loan program . . . let me 
just give you a couple of quick numbers to point out the 
commitment of the people of Saskatchewan through their 
student loan program in this province to support students. 
 
Last year in the student loan program, some $62 million were 
lent in Saskatchewan student loans. And, Mr. Chair, last year 
some $32 million in Saskatchewan student loans were forgiven. 
Mr. Chair, that is not too shabby a commitment to bursaries in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And many informed students 
would say it is the best in the nation. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Chair, as I pointed out just a few 
minutes ago, in this budget there is additional 500,000 new 
dollars for scholarships, for merit scholarships. 
 
And in the budget it has been pointed out when the committee’s 
met previously, and as the Minister of Finance has pointed out, 
in this budget the tax credit for students has doubled. For a 
full-time student has a tax credit of 400 . . . now has a tax credit 
of $400 per month — full-time student. And what that means, 
Mr. Chair, is when you put together the new tax system and you 
implement that additional deduction for students, a full-time 
student in Saskatchewan can make over $11,000 in income 
before they pay a single penny in Saskatchewan income tax. 
Not too shabby in support of the financial needs of students I 
would suggest. 
 
The hon. member talks about the universities setting tuition fees 
and they have the right to do that, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
government, which respects the autonomous privilege of the 
boards of governors to set their operations, including their 
budget, and in that mix also the setting of tuition fees. And, Mr. 
Chair, I respect their right to do that and the fact that, in concert 
with some other decisions related to access and quality that are 
their ongoing concern, that they have made the decisions that 
they’ve made this year. 
 
And I know that the students understand those things as well 
because I have talked with the students as well. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Everyone would wish that no matter what the tuition rate was, 
that it would be lower. That’s a natural thing to wish for. 

Mr. Speaker, the universities have the right to determine what 
the tuition should ought to be set at. University of 
Saskatchewan has made a policy decision, as I understand it, to 
connect in a scale within the nation, and that led them to a 
conclusion this year. And I know that the students there 
understand that. 
 
Now all of this, Mr. Chair, cannot be talked about without 
putting into context the funding of post-secondary education in 
the nation. Because here in Saskatchewan, as we’ve said in this 
House before, there have been challenges in the funding area 
that have been faced by our post-secondary institutions, 
including our universities. 
 
Some of that came out of this province having to deal with the 
devastation, the financial devastation that it inherited in 1991, 
the government, when it inherited from the financial 
circumstances of the previous Conservative government, of 
which some of those members sat in that caucus, some of those 
members on the other side. 
 
And so, Mr. Chair, that led to some decisions that had restraint 
in this province in a whole host of areas, including in our 
post-secondary institutions. And Saskatchewan people 
understand that. 
 
In addition, Mr. Chair, we will all recognize across the nation 
— Saskatchewan not being unique or singled out in anyway — 
but there were reductions in the CHST, the Canada Health and 
Social Transfer fund, from the federal government to the 
provinces that impacted on this province and every other single 
province across the nation. 
 
And so we have a point today, Mr. Chair, where the funding 
from federal government for the support of post-secondary 
education in 2001 in fact is less than it was in 1992. And that’s 
true in our province as it is in every other province in the 
nation. And it is impossible, Mr. Chair, for anybody to look 
forward to significant, sufficient funding, sustainable funding 
for post-secondary institutions without looking at the important 
responsibility for the federal government to participate. 
 
First ministers have said that. Our premiers have said that. Our 
ministers of Finance have said that. Ministers of Education have 
said that. When the Western premiers met in this province just a 
couple of weeks ago, again, they said that, that we need in this 
country a commitment — a larger commitment — from the 
federal government in support of Post-Secondary Education and 
Skills Training in this nation. 
 
And I point out as well that over the last decade while the 
funding has been going . . . is still at a lower rate, the demands, 
the legitimate demands, for training have been rising across the 
nation as we live in a world of lifelong learning, Mr. Chair, in 
which the demands of our universities but other post-secondary 
institutions have been increasing and Canadians expect all of 
us, collectively, to work together to respond. And we must. 
 
And in that, I would ask for the hon. member and his party to 
join with us in a collaborative kind of effort to send a single 
united voice together with the students across the nation in 
calling on the federal government to step to the plate and 
become a greater player in the funding of post-secondary 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1715 

 

education, including our universities. 
 
Now coming to the question, the specific question upon which 
the hon. member concluded and asked about funding for 
universities. And the hon. member asked, what is the projected 
funds going to the universities. 
 
The answer . . . the budget is the budget. The way the system 
works is that the budget is determined within the balance of all 
the provincial spending, and then that’s allocated to the 
universities and then they receive that and within the university 
operations allocate it as they see fit. So the budget that is 
provided for them is what’s there. 
 
Specifically, the University of Regina, in the previous fiscal 
year there was $50,935,600 in provincial funding to the base 
operating grant, which has now increased in this budget to 
$52,583,000. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan in the previous fiscal year, the 
provincial funding from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, 
$135,663,200, which in this fiscal year rises to $145,784,600 — 
yes, $145,784,600. I want to make sure we say that clearly. My 
apologies if I was incorrect. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Chair, as I’ve said a little earlier, there’s 
$3 million additional dollars to be allocated through the 
university funding formula in addition to those amounts. That 
will be determined shortly. 
 
As well, Mr. Chair, there is seven . . . if you want the specifics I 
can give them to you, but there is an additional increase in 
funding to the federated colleges in total, from $7,096,300 last 
year, to $7,681,900 this year. And as well to . . . and the 
affiliated colleges then, Mr. Chair, increase in their funding 
from 448,000 last year, to 463,700 this year. 
 
There is also, Mr. Chair, I should point out, some research 
funds that flow to the universities that don’t flow through the 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. 
The matching research fund itself is $10 million. But that 
doesn’t include some of the health funding and so it would be 
some figure in excess of that — I don’t have the specifics here 
— that would flow to the universities for research. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I trust that answers the hon. member’s question. 
I look forward to his next question. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the minister when he indicated his 
government’s reasons for less than adequate funding to the 
universities, I was not surprised when he embarked . . . First of 
all he basically, if I interpreted his comments correctly, he said, 
basically said to the university, well this is all the money you’re 
going to get and you guys go out there and do what you have to. 
 
And they did — they raised their tuition fees. And plus, you 
know, they’re making do with whatever fund . . . whatever they 
can do to cut corners. And I’m afraid that perhaps — I certainly 
hope that isn’t the case — but my fear is that there could be a 
loss in quality. 
 
But it didn’t surprise me then the minister went on to sing the 
1980s blues that the public . . . we hear so often from that side 

of the House — but no one’s really listening to that song any 
more; it’s been off the hit parade for four or five years — and 
went on to blame the federal government for the lack of 
funding. 
 
And in the meantime his government is sitting on the $500 
million in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund and another $200 
million in the Crown dividend fund or tucked away in the 
Crowns, that they could very easily tap into some of that money 
and make a significant . . . make a statement in post-secondary 
education. 
 
But oh no, the members say no, we’re not going to spend; that’s 
the message we’re getting from this government — we’re not 
going to spend on post-secondary education. So I’m sure the 
people in Saskatchewan are listening to that message and will 
certainly make note of that. 
 
However we should perhaps get on. The hour’s getting late and 
I would like to perhaps ask the minister a question as far as the 
adjustment funding that Mr. DesRosiers proposed. I believe his 
last report was last June. And I would . . . I understand that the 
minister makes those calculations as to — I think he said that 
there was $3 million in that adjustment funding — and I 
understand his department makes those calculations. 
 
Two questions. How much additional funding under that 
adjustment funding did the U of S get? And when will they 
know what figure they will be getting for this next coming 
academic year? 
 
The Chair: — Order. Would members please come to order so 
that the questions can be asked and the answers can be heard. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — The hon. member for Cannington is 
waving the white flag, Mr. Chair, but I insist on the opportunity 
to answer the question, Mr. Chair. 
 
In response to the hon. member’s question, the university 
funding formula has available some . . . has available $3 
million. The data has now been — the final data — has just 
been received now from the universities. And it is, I expect, that 
the allocations will be next week. They’re very, very shortly. 
 
The data is looking as though it points pretty clearly to the 
distribution of funds being similar to what it was last year, with 
the funding appearing to be directed to the University of 
Saskatchewan and a couple of the federated colleges. That’s 
what the case was last year. I can’t be specific because the final 
calculations haven’t yet been done. 
 
The Chair: — It now being near 5 o’clock, this House now 
stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 
 
 


