















































Hansard: May 30, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1425 
 May 30, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: —Mr. Speaker, I have a petition today again from 
citizens of the Wadena area. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena health care 
centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available, as well as laboratory, public 
health, home care, and long-term care services for users 
from our district and beyond. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Wadena. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise to present a 
petition concerning the water crisis in North Battleford. The 
prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

We pray that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to call 
on the provincial and federal governments to provide 
immediate financial assistance to the city of North 
Battleford in order to facilitate necessary improvements to 
the North Battleford water treatment plant. 

 
Your petitioners come from the communities of Battleford and 
North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of WECADA, the Weyburn Council on Alcohol and 
Drug Abuse in Weyburn who believe there’s a need for an 
in-patient treatment centre in the city of Weyburn. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
support this in-patient treatment centre and provide funding 
for the same. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to present 
regarding the EMS (emergency medical service). The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people from the 
Antler-Redvers area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition dealing with the Redvers Health Centre. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency care, 
doctoral services available, as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to the users from our district, 
southeast Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and 
beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the good people of the 
Bellegarde; Redvers; Sinclair, Manitoba; Fairlight; and 
Storthoaks-Maryfield-Fertile area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
I’m pleased to rise to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who expressed an interest in the 
maintaining and upgrading of the Saskatchewan road network. 
And the prayer goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ask the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue with its foresight and vision of 
increasing the funding to $900 million over the next three 
years to maintain and upgrade our thoroughfares of 
commerce. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
the city of Regina. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have petitions by those who are concerned with tobacco smoke 
and second-hand tobacco smoke, and all the harm that that 
causes. And they petition to us: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places and workplaces, and to control youth access 
to tobacco products. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



1426 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2001 

 

And this is signed by people from Weyburn, Radville, and 
Ceylon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
for improving cellular telephone coverage. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in districts of Rabbit 
Lake, Hafford, Blaine Lake, Leask, Radisson, Borden, 
Perdue, Maymont, Mistawasis, and Muskeg Lake. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

From the citizens of Rabbit Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to rise and present a petition in support of 
comprehensive tobacco control legislation. And it’s signed by 
individuals concerned about the financial and human costs of 
tobacco in the province. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to protect children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places and workplaces, and to control youth access 
to tobacco products. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this petition is signed predominantly by young people in 
Weyburn. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition opposed to the possible reduction of health 
services in Kamsack. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that health care services in the 
Kamsack Hospital be maintained at its current level of 
service at minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency 
and doctoral services available. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from Kamsack, Regina, and 
Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed 
by citizens from the Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency in 
regards to the health care services in the area: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce current levels of available 
acute care, emergency, and doctor services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Spiritwood and Shell Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure this afternoon to present petitions on behalf of a 
number of Saskatchewan residents who are very concerned 
about the harmful effects of tobacco smoke. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban on smoking in enclosed public places 
and workplaces and on school property within the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by residents of 
Weyakwin, Candle Lake, Paddockwood, Shellbrook, and Prince 
Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise with a petition from concerned citizens with reference to 
the cellular telephone coverage in rural Saskatchewan. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cell coverage to all communities 
throughout the Wood River constituency. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed in total by the good 
citizens of Rockglen. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

A petition asking the government to provide reliable 
cellular service in the Wood River constituency. 

 
And 14 other petitions that are addendums to previously tabled 
petitions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege this afternoon to introduce to you and through you to 
the members of this Assembly, 48 grade 8 and 9 students from 
the community of Kipling. And they’re accompanied by their 
teachers Mr. Rod Holowaty and Nancey McCarthy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague the member from Cannington as 



May 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1427 

 

well is represented in this group as the two constituencies meet. 
The boundary is just a few miles south of Kipling. So we’re 
going to be pleased to meet with the group later on. 
 
I’d like to also acknowledge the work that Mr. Holowaty was 
involved in in the establishment of the Social Sciences Teachers 
Institute that this Legislative Assembly sponsors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’d invite all members to extend a welcome to the students, 
the chaperones, and the teachers from Kipling that have joined 
us today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with my colleague, the member from Moosomin, in 
welcoming the school group from Kipling and Corning, Mr. 
Speaker, and those students from south Kipling who are . . . 
reside in my constituency, as well as the teachers, Mr. 
Holowaty and Nancey McCarthy, who taught at the Corning 
School. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask members to welcome them 
here again to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I am indeed very, very 
pleased today to introduce a special group of people from 
Cumberland House; more particularly, Mr. Speaker, they’re 18 
grade 5 students from Charlebois School. Along with them is 
teacher, Bev Cheechoo; chaperones, Doug Nabess, Sheila 
Settee, Wilma McKay, and Aaron Fosseneuve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned to them that His Highness Prince 
Charles was here to talk about the . . . not only the province but 
also the official opening of the Cumberland Gallery, which is 
named after Cumberland Lake and Cumberland House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also say in our language in 
Cumberland, Ta wow, which means, you’re welcome. And I’d 
like all members to welcome our special guests from 
Cumberland House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and to my colleagues in the 
legislature, 29 grade 4 students from St. Josaphat in my 
constituency, and seated in the west gallery. Mr. Speaker, 
they’re accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Pack, and their 
chaperone, Mrs. Dore. 
 
And I’m looking forward to meeting with these students, I think 
a little after two o’clock. And I’d just like to ask all members to 
join me in welcoming these grade 4 students from the school of 
St. Josaphat in my constituency. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Through you and to you I want to join my colleague from 
Cumberland to welcome the guests from Cumberland House. 

And I know that the amount of travel and the amount of work 
that goes into organizing a trip all the way to visit the 
Assembly, it’s a tremendous amount of work. And I want to 
thank the students for taking the opportunity for travelling the 
many miles to come and see how the Assembly works. 
 
And I will also point out, Mr. Speaker, that there is good 
competition between Cumberland House, the hometown of the 
member from Cumberland, and my hometown of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. And we usually beat them in hockey. And they 
are an older community than Ile-a-la-Crosse. There is a 
Cumberland Gallery, but the Athabasca Gallery is much older. 
 
And I want to point out that I’m certainly glad that they’re here, 
and they’re most certainly welcome here and I hope they learn a 
lot from the proceedings today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Restoration of Old Government House 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 1876, Battleford 
was declared the capital of the then North-West Territories. 
Two-thirds of present-day Canada was governed from the 
building that still stands on a hill overlooking the forks of the 
Battle and Saskatchewan rivers. 
 
Monday I participated in a news conference at Old Government 
House to launch a new initiative. At the request of the town of 
Battleford, we are circulating a petition asking for the 
restoration of Old Government House. I can think of no more 
important project for our province’s centennial than its 
restoration. 
 
I congratulate the efforts of people like Mayor Gail Sack, Len 
Taylor, Chair of the Friends of Government House, and Father 
Mann of the Oblates of Mary Immaculate. 
 
Together with the member for Battleford-Cut Knife, I will be 
presenting a petition to this House asking that Old Government 
House receive the recognition it is due. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was such a pity when Governor Dewdney 
bought up a bunch of land in the pile of bones area and then 
moved the capital there. We should not compound that error by 
allowing the most historic building in this province to be lost 
through neglect and decay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Library Services for Aboriginal People 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the past couple of 
weeks, there have been two very encouraging announcements 
on programs designed to address the needs of First Nations and 
Metis people as they move towards full participation in the 
social and economic life of our province. 
 
The first was the launch of the framework for co-operation, a 
program which brings together three levels of government, 
Metis and First Nations organizations, and the private sector to 



1428 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2001 

 

achieve the goal of full participation in the social, economic life 
of this province by all of our people. 
 
A second related announcement is aimed at improving access 
by all Aboriginal people to public library services through a 
Minister’s Advisory Committee on Library Services for 
Aboriginal People. The committee has been established to 
identify ways to encourage and enable all Aboriginal people to 
use the educational, cultural, and entertainment library services 
available to most, but not all, of us. 
 
The committee consists of librarians from all areas of the 
province. It will make its recommendations this fall after 
holding meetings, also in all areas of the province to enable full 
participation by Aboriginal people. 
 
(13:45) 
 
This committee will do good work, and I congratulate the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs for establishing it. It is my hope 
that the opposition will join with us in working to ensure every 
success for these very important endeavours. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wesmor Community High School Wins McKercher Cup 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
with a distinct pleasure I rise this afternoon to bring further 
recognition to the Prince Albert area. On April 28, Mr. Speaker, 
the legal firm of McKercher, McKercher & Whitmore presented 
the McKercher Cup at the second annual Canadian Bar 
Association’s provincial high school mock trial competition. 
 
This prestigious award, Mr. Speaker, went to Wesmor 
Community High School from the city of Prince Albert, a 
school that I had a direct hand in helping to create. Wesmor 
defeated teams from Regina and Saskatoon in the final 
competitions. 
 
The team was coached by Dipak Dookum, a social science 
teacher at Wesmor, with legal advice of the help of Jocelyn 
Putland and Mark Hillenbrand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the team consisted of Hayley Kinash, Dan 
Dulmer, Jennifer Andrews, Jasmine Wolfe, Terra Lennox Zepp, 
Mandy Ethier, and Lauren Buness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
these talented young people on this remarkable achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Interprovincial Association on Native Employment 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to 
attend the Interprovincial Association on Native Employment 
conference this morning. 
 
The IANE (Interprovincial Association on Native Employment 
Inc.) organization has been in existence for 25 years. Its main 

responsibility is to serve individuals that are concerned with 
issues related to Aboriginal employment and adjoining matters 
like training, management, science and technology, and 
entrepreneurship. 
 
IANE has contributed to the development of an increased 
awareness and action in employment oriented aspirations and 
capabilities of Aboriginal people. When they first started in 
mining, Mr. Speaker, they wanted a lot of tremendous goals. 
They were pleased when I reported that the employment at the 
mines today rose from the early 1990s, from 500 people to 
1,000 people — over 80 per cent Aboriginal employment, over 
50 people in supervision. 
 
They were also very pleased when I reported that there were 
$20 million worth of contracts for northern entrepreneurs, and 
now 200 million. 
 
They also wanted Mr. Bill Hanson who last year got the 
Saskatchewan Award of Merit. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
tremendous individual who not only practised the goals in 
getting a lot of people employed in all the systems, but he was 
also there in dealing with the theory and the practice. He wrote 
a handbook called “Dual Realities and Dual Strategies.” 
 
So today was a special day for IANE and Bill Hanson. I’ll have 
all members please acknowledge that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Archerwill Resident Receives National Volunteer Award 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, today it gives me great pleasure 
to honour constituent Doris Dewhurst of Archerwill, 
Saskatchewan who was recently presented with the Governor 
General’s Caring Canadian Award at a ceremony at Rideau 
Hall. 
 
The Governor General’s Caring Canadian Award is presented 
to individuals and groups whose unpaid voluntary contributions 
provide extraordinary help or care to people in the community. 
The award is given to recipients that have served over a number 
of years and normally have not been recognized by another 
national or provincial honour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the news release announcing this award states of 
Mrs. Dewhurst: in the early ’80s Doris Dewhurst was a member 
of a volunteer board responsible for establishing home care 
services for seniors. Herself a senior living alone, she 
single-handedly organized and prepared one dinner a month at a 
local seniors’ centre for others who lived by themselves. 
 
Although poor health recently forced her to turn responsibilities 
for the program over to a local church, she remains actively 
involved in the church and in the community. She makes quilts 
and baby blankets for the Canadian Lutheran World Relief, and 
for several years has sewn neckerchiefs for the local scout 
group. 
 
Of the 28 volunteers to receive the Governor General’s Caring 
Canadian Award, Mrs. Dewhurst was the only one from 
Saskatchewan. 
 



May 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1429 

 

It gives me great pleasure on behalf of the Kelvington-Wadena 
constituency to congratulate Mrs. Dewhurst on receiving this 
award for her work within her community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Community Projects Receive Funds 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
past weekend the Premier brought some good news for 
Saskatoon organizations with the presentation to seven 
organizations in my home city with program grants to assist in 
providing health, sports, and recreation programs for vulnerable 
children and families. 
 
The total amount of the grants received by the seven 
organizations equalled more than $160,000. The community 
groups that received the grants from the Associated Entities 
Fund are: 
 
The Saskatoon and District Labour Council for a project called, 
“Brush, Floss, and Smile,” a summer program for children who 
are at risk for dental disease; 
 
The Core Neighbourhood Youth Co-op for “Seeds of Strength”, 
a summer youth leadership program developing self-confidence 
and strengthening youth attachments to both school and 
community; 
 
The Westmount Community Association for providing social, 
recreational, cultural, and leisure opportunities for at-risk 
families; 
 
The King George Community School for a community-based 
youth initiative providing summer recreation for youth; 
 
“Roots and Wings”, a post-natal outreach service for selected 
first-time mothers; 
 
Joe Duquette High School for a Working Together project; 
 
And finally, the Absentee Assessment Team wraparound 
project to assess the issue of absentee youth from elementary 
schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all members will want to join me in 
congratulating these organizations on the receipt of their 
funding. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 

Former Star City Resident Competes in Judo 
Championships 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to congratulate 18-year-old Frazer Will, a former resident 
of Star City. 
 
In order to further improve his skills in judo he has recently 
been training at the national training centre in Montreal. This 
young man’s dedication and hard work have already earned him 
a long list of achievements in the sport of judo. His most recent 
achievement was when he competed as a member of the 

Saskatchewan team at the Junior National Judo Championships 
in Kelowna, BC. There he won four out of five of his matches, 
earning him a bronze medal in the 60-kilogram junior men’s 
division. He’ll be going on to compete at the Senior National 
Championships scheduled in Quebec and then on to a 
tournament in Italy. 
 
Will the Assembly join me today in congratulating Frazer Will 
and wishing him further success in his sport. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hemochromatosis Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week, the week of 
May 25 to 31, is Hemochromatosis Awareness Week. That very 
few of us know what hemochromatosis is speaks to the need of 
designating a week dedicated to promoting awareness about the 
disorder. 
 
Hemochromatosis is one of the most common genetic disorders 
and one in 300 Canadians are at risk of developing it. This 
disorder results in an overload of iron in the body. If this 
disorder goes undetected and is not diagnosed the iron build up 
can damage vital organs. Complications of this disorder include 
diabetes, liver disease, abdominal pain, and arthritis. 
 
Because this disorder is hereditary, siblings and offspring of 
individuals affected by hemochromatosis are carriers of the 
recessive gene that causes the disorder. The Canadian 
Hemochromatosis Society has made it their goal to identify the 
one in 300 Canadians at risk of developing hemochromatosis 
and the one in nine Canadians who are carriers. 
 
Awareness about hemochromatosis must be raised, more now 
than ever because we live in a day and age when systemic iron 
supplementation to one’s diet is an issue in many countries. 
 
Hemochromatosis is the only hereditary disorder in which all of 
its complications are entirely preventable by early diagnosis and 
treatment — another reason for raising public awareness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all the members of the Assembly, I 
want to thank the Canadian Hemochromatosis Society for the 
work they do to raise awareness about this very important 
health issue. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Investigation of Alleged Improprieties 
at the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister of Liquor and Gaming. 
 
Yesterday the Premier seemed a little confused, Mr. Speaker, 
about who would investigate the former minister of Liquor and 
Gaming’s fishing trip. Inside the House the Premier clearly 
stated he would not ask Justice Wakeling to investigate. Outside 
of the House, outside of the House, the Premier clearly said he 
would ask Justice Wakeling to investigate. 



1430 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, which one is it? Has Justice Wakeling been asked 
to investigate the minister’s fishing trip or not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite 
knows, in response to some of the allegations, a breach of 
section 133 of the liquor and gaming Act, the new process has 
been established that Justice Wakeling will look at these 
allegations and make a determination on them. 
 
The Premier stated that any member of this Assembly, members 
opposite included, could be deemed in conflict of interest. We 
have a Conflict of Interests Commissioner to look at that. And 
the Premier stated he will ask that to be done for our former 
minister of Liquor and Gaming Authority. That’s one process. 
 
But the allegation was also made against someone that was the 
former head of the Liquor and Gaming Authority as well. And 
Justice Wakeling will be looking at that and determining 
whether or not those allegations need to be looked at under 
section 133 of the liquor and gaming Act. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Just to quote from the Premier’s statement 
outside the House. And I quote: 
 

Let me make it clear. I will ask Justice Wakeling to include 
this (that’s the fishing trip) in his review. 

 
Mr. Speaker, a story in today’s paper suggests the problems at 
Liquor and Gaming may be a lot more widespread than the 
NDP is letting on. The story suggests that the senior officials 
were reluctant to investigate minor violations of their own Act, 
because those same officials were involved in more serious 
allegations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is aware new allegations 
are being brought to the attention of Justice Wakeling beyond 
those outlined by Bonnie Swan’s original harassment 
complaint. The problem is we don’t know if Justice Wakeling 
has a broad mandate to investigate them, or if he has a very 
narrow mandate only to investigate the allegations of the 
original complaints. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will Justice Wakeling be allowed to investigate 
other potential violations of The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Act that are brought to his attention? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This member 
opposite is trying to make it sound like there is many, many 
things that Justice Wakeling should be looking at. There was 
another incident three years ago where a member was 
disciplined and Justice Wakeling will look at the circumstances 
surrounding that. But I would not like to leave the impression as 
the member opposite is trying to leave here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now Justice Wakeling is going to look at the allegations 
because we take that responsibly — the responsibility of 
looking at allegations that are made that pertain to the Act, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

When you’re looking at conflict of interest guidelines that are in 
place for the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, he 
will look at those and make certain that they’re consistent with 
the Act, and look at all the incidences of things that how they 
could occur or should occur, and give some guidance to the 
Liquor and Gaming Authority as we review those conflict of 
interest guidelines, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister is 
correct. There’s a wide circle of difficulties out there and we 
hope that Justice Wakeling can check out all of those. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP (New Democratic Party) has been less 
than clear about Justice Wakeling’s mandate. There’s one way 
to clear the air. Will the minister table the documents outlining 
Justice Wakeling’s terms of reference, what matters he is 
allowed to investigate, and when he is required to complete his 
report? Will the minister table that information today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Justice 
Wakeling was employed to look at the allegations that fell 
outside of the harassment policy of the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority. 
 
When allegations like that are made, we have a responsibility to 
follow up. And in this instance we said even if there were not 
harassment policy that we were looking at, at the time, when 
such allegations are made we have a responsibility to follow up 
on that. 
 
Justice Wakeling will be looking at those, as he will be looking 
at the responsibility of the employee of the Authority in the 
fishing trip. If there were other allegations that are made while 
he is doing a review of these things, Mr. Speaker, it is again a 
responsibility to follow up on those, and he will look at those 
too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This member opposite is trying to turn this Assembly into some 
type of a show trial. Personally, I prefer Perry Mason. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that member 
prefers Perry Mason to myself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were four questions asked on specific 
information to which the minister said no, no, and no and no. 
We’re not getting any of that information that we just requested. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what role does a minister’s office play in 
awarding liquor franchises? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the 
member opposite’s former question, I responded and answered. 
Now we have headsets available. The response was the 



May 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1431 

 

allegations that were made that flowed from the harassment 
policy, the item mentioned by the Premier. If there are any other 
allegations that people know of, they should bring those 
forward. He would review those. These are not widespread as 
the member opposite would have us believe. 
 
So the answer to that question is I’ve already answered that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now in a franchise, there’s the liquor and gaming Act and we 
follow a process and procedure in order to award a franchise. 
There’s an advertisement that goes out. There’s the chance to 
compete through that advertisement process. Then employees 
within the Liquor and Gaming Authority that follow the 
guidelines of what a franchise should include . . . would weigh 
the merits of all those proposals and one would be awarded, Mr. 
Speaker. I would not play a role in that, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the minister wants to go back 
and answer that other question that we asked for way back then. 
The minister still isn’t giving it. We want the documents 
outlining those terms of reference. And we also want to know 
what the timeline is on that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming consult 
with the minister’s office regarding which business in a 
community is awarded a liquor franchise? Is it appropriate for 
the minister’s office to be involved in those types of decisions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will take 
under advisement the member opposite’s question and get to 
him on the investigation that’s underway. I think that would be 
more properly handled that way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on occasion there have been members opposite 
who have brought to me suggestions that their community is 
now large enough to have a franchise. And I would ask Liquor 
and Gaming Authority members to look at their guidelines and 
see if we can accommodate customers in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
On occasion, Mr. Speaker, people would contact me and say 
that a franchise is available in their community. What are the 
steps that could be taken that they could respond to that, Mr. 
Speaker? And if there were people in that community who have 
concerns about the operation of their franchise, yes generally 
those would come to my office. They phone and they would 
make those kinds of complaints. And we would work with the 
Vendors Association to follow up on those complaints, Mr. 
Speaker. I believe that’s the type of role I would play in a 
franchise, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority) regional managers review the 
applications for liquor franchises and make recommendations 
on who should get the franchise. In her original complaint 
Bonnie Swan was concerned that some of these 
recommendations were being overturned for no apparent 

reason. 
 
The response she got back from SLGA management was very 
interesting. The response said that in each and every case, the 
regional manager’s recommendation was overturned by the 
SLGA president, in consultation with the minister’s office — in 
consultation with her office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, could the minister explain why recommendations 
made by regional managers were overturned by her office? Mr. 
Speaker, what criteria does the minister’s office use in 
determining who gets a liquor franchise? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, in answering that 
question I would say within those allegations of harassment, 
many of them . . . all of them were found outside of harassment 
policy. 
 
But in concert with the deputy minister to the Premier, Mr. 
Perrins, there were management/competency issues that need to 
be reviewed and addressed. And I believe these fall into this 
area. I can’t speculate on what one person was saying to another 
person, as this member would want to do before this Assembly. 
I’m following up on the management/competency issues that 
he’s trying to address here, and when that review is complete, 
actions would be taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The minister is badly out of sync with the 
questions. The last set of questions dealt with her involvement 
in the granting of liquor franchises. She never addressed that in 
her last answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SLGA management freely admits that 
recommendations about liquor franchises made by regional 
managers have on occasion been overturned by SLGA 
president, following the consultation with the minister’s office. 
 
It is my understanding that the regional managers go through a 
very thorough evaluation process. I guess that means that the 
minister must have an even more thorough evaluation or 
process. 
 
Could the minister explain what is the exact process and criteria 
for the minister’s office in overturning the recommendation 
from her own regional managers in awarding liquor franchises? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker. The members opposite 
might be involved in micromanaging areas where they’re 
involved or when they’re government, to look at departments 
and hire and fire and be involved in the winners and losers of 
franchise, but we have processes in place that have to be 
followed. 
 
As I say, it’s an advertisement . . . publicly advertised tender 
process for a franchise in an area when there’s a population that 
warrants it and a customer base to support it. 
 



1432 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2001 

 

We work carefully with the Vendors Association. And the 
members of the Liquor and Gaming Authority would hear from 
the local community, they would evaluate that, and a franchise 
would be given on that basis. Not on the basis of whether this 
minister or a member of this Assembly or on that side of the 
Assembly feels their community should have one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The evidence from 
the last two questions clearly indicated that was exactly what 
that minister was doing, is micromanaging, overturning 
decisions of her department in the granting of liquor franchises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s another problem. Some of Bonnie Swan’s 
allegations dealt with the awarding of liquor franchises. By 
SLGA’s own admissions, some of those decisions were made 
by that minister’s office. Yet the minister is one of the two 
people who conducted the investigation of Bonnie Swan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s an obvious conflict of interest. How could 
the minister conduct a fair investigation of allegations 
concerning decisions made in her own office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, that member can say 
almost anything about anybody within the Assembly yet, bits of 
pieces and information and then act like he’s some trial lawyer 
and we’re all on trial if someone says something about 
anything. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are processes that are to be followed. Allow 
those processes to go underway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he would not understand perhaps that there are 
fair processes in awarding franchises. Some of his members 
might because I’ve talked to them about those. And I mentioned 
if they meet the customer base, if there’s not a franchise within 
another certain location and the mile radius — and all of those 
things are considered — Liquor and Gaming Authority would 
look at that, we would follow our processes. And a franchise 
would be awarded in concert with the Vendors Association and 
others in that community, being able to respond through the 
process of public advertising and awarded on that basis, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grants to the Third Party in the Legislative Assembly 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Education minister. In the 1999 election campaign, the Liberal 
leader pleaded with voters to elect him and send a strong 
Liberal opposition to Regina. Remember that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
But then immediately following the election, the three Liberals 
who survived the election joined the NDP. And now the NDP 
has introduced a new law to make the Liberal/NDP merger 
official. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only purpose of this new legislation is to 
consolidate the Liberals fully into the NDP government and pay 

off the Liberal MLAs (Member of Legislative Assembly) with 
another $65,000 of taxpayers’ money. 
 
Will the Education minister confirm the only purpose of this 
new legislation is to provide another $65,000 payoff to the 
Liberals for agreeing to join the NDP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I just want to remind members 
that the purpose of question period is for members of the 
opposition, or indeed any private member, to be able to ask 
questions of ministers in their area of competence and in where 
a minister is responsible . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order, 
order, order. Order. Order. 
 
The minister is obliged to answer questions under his or her 
area of responsibility. The question that the member has asked 
itself is in order if it is asked of the minister that is responsible 
for that area but not for anybody that is responsible for a . . . as 
a leader of a party — second or third party. I just want to bring 
that to members’ attention. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that this Act that’s being introduced into the 
House — the Executive Council amendment Act, 2001 — deals 
with an issue that has not been faced by this legislature before 
because we haven’t had a coalition government. 
 
What this does, Mr. Speaker, is provide to the Liberal caucus 
nothing more or nothing less than what they should be allowed 
to have. Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that thinking people will 
recognize that there are three political caucuses represented in 
this legislature — one of them being the Liberal Party. 
 
There is an agreement — a coalition agreement — between the 
Liberal caucus and between the NDP caucus which forms this 
government. What this does is bring to the year 2001 an update 
to the circumstances with respect to caucus funding where a 
Liberal . . . where a third party sits in a coalition position with 
the government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they may not like it but that’s the 
appropriate and the proper thing to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, how much further can the 
hypocrisy of this NDP government go? Bill No. 33 specifically 
refers to the Leader of the Third Party. Mr. Speaker, the Leader 
of the Third Party is the Minister of Education. I am directing 
my responses to the Leader of the Third Party in reference to 
Bill No. 33. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I just want to bring to the attention of 
the member that the Leader of the Third Party is not obligated 
in question period to answer questions, except as . . . Order! 
Order, order. Order. Order . . . except as a member of a cabinet 
with a collective responsibility, but not as the leader of a third 
party. Carry on. 
 



May 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1433 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, in the 1999 provincial election 
the Liberals made dozens of promises that they obviously have 
no intention of keeping. Even worse, in almost two years since 
the Liberals joined the NDP government, the Liberals haven’t 
even had a sniff of input on NDP government decisions. 
 
The Liberals have a caucus of zero MLAs, and they already 
have a caucus budget of $160,000 that is being used to support 
failing NDP policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, will the Government House 
Leader direct the Minister of Education to do the right thing and 
say no to Bill No. 33, legislation that does nothing more than 
deposit another $65,000 in the Liberal bank account as a 
payment for joining the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, speaking about 
commitments by Liberals, the member from Canora-Pelly as 
leader of the Liberal Party made a commitment that he was 
elected as a Liberal, he would stay as a Liberal. And now he sits 
with a bunch of Tories, Mr. Speaker. So he shouldn’t be talking 
about promises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, he also referred to this 
money going to the Liberal Party. And I say that is totally, 
absolutely out of order. It’s incorrect and he knows it. That is 
no more correct than saying money that goes to the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus goes into the pockets of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I ask him to withdraw that statement. It’s 
inaccurate; it’s untrue. That member knows it and he should be 
honest with the people of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I do want to thank the people of 
Canora-Pelly for electing me as the Saskatchewan Party . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, a lot of people have been trying 
to figure out just what the Liberal caucus staffers have been 
doing. Well, Mr. Speaker, finally we’ve discovered what the 
Liberal caucus research staff has been up to for the past two 
years. They’ve been trying to figure out just how to get the 
NDP to funnel the Liberal caucus even more taxpayers’ dollars, 
and to do absolutely nothing but prop up a tired and dying NDP 
government. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only purpose of the NDP legislation 
introduced on Monday by the NDP is to funnel another $65,000 
payoff to the Liberal leader’s office for joining the NDP. 
 
Will the Minister of Education do the right thing? Will he 

refuse the NDP’s $65,000 payoff by opposing this pathetic 
excuse for legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, speaking of research 
staff, I want that member to explain whether or not the research 
money that they’re using comes from the PC (Progressive 
Conservative) metro fund. 
 
And I also want that member to explain whether the 
Saskatchewan . . . the Canadian Taxpayers Federation is a front 
for caucus, for political donations. The former leader of the staff 
. . . or the Leader of the Opposition who sits over there taking 
swipes and half swipes . . . And I want to just, while I’m on my 
feet, Mr. Speaker, mention the increase in travel that that person 
refused to forward. These guys have increased their air travel in 
a year by over 300 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it is truly amazing. We have an 
NDP government that mismanaged the province’s drinking 
water to the point where hundreds of people are sick, and yet 
the doctor continues to support them. 
 
We have an NDP government that fires ex-RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) officers for doing their duty and yet 
the ex-RCMP officer from Melville still supports them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — And now we know why, Mr. Speaker. It’s all 
about the money. Money for the Liberal MLAs who sell their 
support to the NDP for $100,000 cabinet jobs. And now for 
money, the money for another $65,000 Liberal payoff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Municipal Affairs: if the 
Minister of Education refuses to do the right thing, will the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs stand up and vote against this 
latest $65,000 payoff? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this 
government will support this legislation because it brings this 
legislation into the 21st century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all this does is allows the Liberal third party to 
have the same caucus funding that they would have had there 
not been a coalition government. They have the same 
responsibilities to contact people. They have the same 
responsibilities to answer phones. They have the same 
responsibilities to do research that members of the 
Saskatchewan Party hire their caucus staff to do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, speaking of being sick to the stomach, 
Stockwell Day, the member from Rosthern, credibility — all on 
the same level, Mr. Speaker. And I would suggest to you that 
those folks should stick to their . . . (inaudible) . . . deal with 
legislation and deal with real issues before this House. 
 
We’ve got an agriculture community that’s concerned about 



1434 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2001 

 

drought, about prices, and not a question, not a day, nothing, 
Mr. Speaker. They focus on nothing issues. And that’s all 
they’re about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, we have to look at the answers 
that we’ve been just given. We have Bill No. 33 that was 
proposed this week. We look at its creation and we wonder . . . 
the people of Saskatchewan are wondering why. 
 
We have an NDP/Liberal coalition that has basically assumed 
the responsibility for the two members opposite. That caucus 
has the ability to funnel their correct moneys to do the research. 
They have constituency allowances that will allow those 
members to do the research. 
 
The question then to the leader . . . to the House Leader 
opposite: what is the real reason for the introduction of Bill No. 
33? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Listen to what he says. He says that 
they argue the legislation regarding the third party is worded the 
way it is because the additional grants are intended for parties 
who actively criticize government policy. That’s what they said. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would argue that the rules regarding tax 
credits on political donations are what they are — to prevent 
political parties from simply changing their name in a pathetic 
attempt to try and bring some credibility to themselves. 
 
The members opposite, Mr. Speaker, could issue tax credits 
today if they were concerned about the old history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Domestic Relations) Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill No. 47, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Domestic 
Relations) Amendment Act, 2001 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Domestic Relations) Amendment Act, 2001 (No. 2)/ 
Loi corrective (relations domestiques) de 2001 (no 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 48, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Domestic Relations) 
Amendment Act, 2001 (No. 2) be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to table, on behalf of the government responses, to 
written questions no. 208 and 209. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 208 and 209 have 
been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
introduce, sitting on my left, Dr. Paul Boothe, who is the deputy 
minister of Finance, and on my right is Mr. Kirk McGregor, 
who is the director of the taxation and intergovernmental affairs 
branch of the Department of Finance. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, I would like to move motion no. 2 for interim 
supply, and I would like to move resolution no. 1 which reads: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $479,635,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 2002. 

 
And I so move. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and 
welcome to your officials, Mr. Boothe and Mr. McGregor, this 
afternoon. 
 
Just a few questions, Mr. Minister, on the second interim supply 
Bill that we’re seeing in this legislative session. Could you 
explain to the people of Saskatchewan the need for an interim 
supply Bill at this particular date, May 30? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I would be pleased to explain that, 
Mr. Chair. Technically speaking the government should not be 
spending any money until it’s authorized by the Legislative 
Assembly. And that authorization occurs by the Legislative 
Assembly voting off all of the estimates for each department 
and agency, and ultimately passing the budget, in effect. 
 
But that doesn’t happen usually until the very end of the 
Legislative Assembly which may be in June or July or August 
or September — we don’t know. But the fiscal year begins on 
April 1, and you can see therefore that the fiscal year begins on 
April 1 but the opposition and the government may choose to 
pass the budget in June or July, August, September, or even 
October, or later. 
 
And in the meantime, while the legislature debates the budget, 
which is important . . . Because that’s the right of the members 
of the Legislative Assembly, the opposition, and the 
government members to debate the budget as long as they want 
and ask as many questions as they like. And that’s part of the 
democratic process. 
 



May 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1435 

 

But as we do that, people still need to be paid. The money has 
to go to the hospital so that the nurse can be paid, the doctor can 
be paid, the operations can continue. The schools have to be 
funded; the road crews have to be out on the highways; the 
community groups have to be funded; the foster parents have to 
be paid in April, whether or not the budget is passed. 
 
So earlier the opposition and the government passed an interim 
supply Bill that said that even though we haven’t passed the 
budget yet, the government was authorized to spend money in 
April and in May so that people could have the money they’re 
entitled to and need for the system to function, while we 
continue to debate the budget and other matters in the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now we’re approaching the end of May and we’re about to start 
the month of June. We need permission from the Legislative 
Assembly to spend money in June, whether or not the budget is 
passed. So today I’m asking the House for that permission, and 
that is what we call interim supply. 
 
And if we don’t have interim supply, then we could not spend 
any money in June, which would mean that the people that rely 
upon the government for the money of the taxpayers to be given 
to them would not get that money. Which would mean that the 
hospitals would shut down, the schools would shut down, the 
foster parents wouldn’t be paid, and so on and so on. And so we 
have interim supply today to allow the government to function. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, for that 
explanation. And one question still related to today’s date and 
the need for a further one-twelfth interim supply. 
 
Could you indicate to the people of Saskatchewan whether the 
majority of that sum of money which you are requesting, which 
is about $479 million, is the majority of that money expensed at 
the very beginning of the month to, as you have mentioned, 
health districts, municipalities, school boards, and the like? I 
know today is May 30 and we’re only two days away from June 
1, but is there a need for this to be put in place in the month of 
May? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer, Mr. Chair, is yes. The 
majority is grants that would be paid out toward the beginning 
of the month, although some of it would be paid out toward the 
end of the month. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, there are 
two I guess exceptions to the requests, as your document has 
highlighted by the asterisks that you have placed near the sector 
of Energy and Mines. 
 
I note that Energy and Mines is not just requesting a further 
one-twelfth on top of the two-twelfths already granted by way 
of the first interim supply, but there’s an additional 7.5 million 
being requested for Energy and Mines. And I know this is 
Energy and Mines Week and the like, but could you explain to 
the people of Saskatchewan what the additional 7.5 million is 
beyond the three-twelfths that they will already have received 
for the months of April, May, and June. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, the $7.5 million is owed to SaskPower 
for sending out the energy rebate which is being paid out all at 
once or over a short period of time as opposed to throughout the 
fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, will 
that rebate be actually paid out by SaskPower or will it involve 
another department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It actually won’t be paid out as such, for 
the most part, in the sense that it’s mainly a credit on 
SaskPower bills. It will be credited against customers’ bills by 
SaskPower. In other words, if my bill would otherwise be $50, 
then my bill would be $25, and I would receive a credit for the 
other $25. 
 
But we will reimburse SaskPower the full amount of those 
credits. But there are some instances where individuals will 
have to be sent out a cheque for $25. And that will be certain 
instances where they are not SaskPower customers but they’re 
entitled to a rebate nevertheless. 
 
In some cases by the way, it will be the city of Saskatoon and 
the city of Swift Current that would give the credit and would 
be reimbursed because they have their own electrical utilities. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
of the other departments that will be receiving more than the 
three-twelfths to end of June will be the actual legislative 
branch. And in fact, people will receive 100 per cent of its 
funding by the end of June. Is there a reason for why the 
legislative branch requires all of its funding up front in the first 
part of June? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — My understanding is that their estimates 
are dealt with separately from the other estimates and that they 
have already been voted off, so that they’re already entitled to 
receive their money. 
 
That’s what I’m advised by officials, and I’ll confirm whether 
or not that is the case. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
move a second motion for interim supply. The resolution no. 2 
reads: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2002, the sum of $479,635,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I should, before I 
make another motion, I want to point out that two other officials 
have joined me. They are Mr. Terry Paton, the Provincial 
Comptroller, who’s sitting to the left of Dr. Boothe. And behind 
me is Mr. Glen Veikle, who is the director of the Treasury 
Board branch of the Department of Finance. 
 



1436 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2001 

 

And I would like to thank the official opposition for their 
co-operation in terms of granting interim supply to the 
government, and also thank the officials. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolutions be 
now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 46, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year ending on March 31, 2002 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly and 
under rule 55(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and 
third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Occupational Health and Safety 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise in support of The Occupational Health and Safety 
Amendment Act, 2001. This legislation will be good for miners 
and good for the mining industry in Saskatchewan. Miners 
support it. The Saskatchewan Mining Association supports it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to understand what this Bill does and why it is 
being put forward at this time, a little background is necessary. 
In 1997, the Tripartite Mines Regulations Review Committee, 
with representation from business, labour, and government, was 
struck to review the mines’ regulations and to recommend 
changes. 
 
This was the first comprehensive review of the regulations since 
1978. The review committee is proposing that the regulations 
be amended to carry forward and update many existing 
requirements to reflect modern mining practices, correct 
impracticalities, and improve health and safety requirements. 
 
After completing its work last July, the committee asked the 
industry and unions to review and comment on its proposals. It 
was in this context that questions related to the authority of the 
chief mines inspector arose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan a chief mines inspector has 
traditionally exercised a good deal of discretionary authority. 

That’s because Saskatchewan has many kinds of mines and 
mining operations. We have gold, uranium, potash, coal, and 
diamond mines, to name a few. Some mines are hardrock, 
others are open pit, and in the case of McLean Lake uranium 
deposit, which is the richest known uranium ore body in the 
world, we’re going to have a mine where the mining is done by 
remote control. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, given the great diversity of mining 
operations in the province, it is not possible to write a set of 
mining regulations that can definitively answer every question 
about every situation. So someone must have some discretion 
when the regulations are applied at an individual mine site. And 
that someone is the chief mines inspector. 
 
However The Occupational Health and Safety Act as it is 
currently written does not make any provision for the exercise 
of that authority. And that brings us to the amendment before 
us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Occupational Health and Safety Amendment 
Act, 2001 defines the traditional positions of the chief mines 
inspector and provides the legal basis for the exercise of this 
traditional authority. I hasten to add that both the mining 
industry and labour wish to retain the traditional authority 
exercised by the chief inspector. 
 
In November 2000, the Saskatchewan Mining Association 
wrote to the Minister of Labour asking that legislative 
amendments be introduced to address the authority of the chief 
inspector of mines. The Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 
wrote a similar letter in March of 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to accommodate the expressed wishes of the SMA 
(Saskatchewan Mining Association Inc.) and the SFL 
(Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) in this matter, 
amendments to The Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993 
are required. This Act then provides the legal basis or 
framework for the work Saskatchewan’s chief mines inspectors 
have been doing for decades. 
 
(14:45) 
 
The Act before us also takes steps to ensure the chief mines 
inspector is qualified to occupy the position. It says the minister 
shall appoint to the job someone who is, and I quote: 
 

. . . a professional engineer or a professional geoscientist 
who holds a valid licence pursuant to The Engineering and 
Geoscience Professions Act, or who is eligible for a licence 
pursuant to that Act, and who has training or experience in 
the mining industry. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this point is important and I want to stress it. To 
do the job effectively, the chief inspector must be qualified in 
the engineering or geoscience professions. This Act ensures that 
only a professional engineer or geoscientist occupies the 
position of chief mines inspector. 
 
Like the legislation itself, the rationale for it is straightforward. 
As I mentioned a moment ago, in 1997 the Tripartite Mines 
Regulations Review Committee was struck to review the mines 
regulations and recommended changes. 



May 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1437 

 

This amendment Bill is critical to the successful enactment of 
new mines regulations anticipated later this year. It is critical 
because it provides the legal authority for the chief mines 
inspector to do the job. And as I also mentioned, both the 
Saskatchewan Mining Association and the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour have asked for the legislative changes 
necessary to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Act is not amended in this legislative 
session, new mines regulations will be delayed another year. I 
don’t want to see that happen. The Saskatchewan Mining 
Association doesn’t want to see that happen. The Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour doesn’t want to see that happen. And 
quite frankly I hope that members opposite don’t want to see it 
happen either. 
 
Mining is important to Saskatchewan. The new regulations will 
update existing mine requirements, improve health safety, and 
correct impracticalities. 
 
The stakeholders that will be directly affected by this legislation 
have specifically asked for it. It provides the legal foundation 
for Saskatchewan’s chief mines inspector to do work everyone 
agrees needs to be done. It is needed to ensure the new mines 
regulations anticipated later this year can work to the benefit of 
everyone involved in this important industry. And for all the 
reasons I’ve gone through this afternoon, it’s good for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second reading of Bill 
No. 39, The Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 
2001, and to invite all hon. members to support it. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to speak to Bill 
No. 39, an Act to amend The Occupational Health and Safety 
Act, 1993. 
 
As I understand it, Mr. Speaker, this amendment sets out the 
responsibilities and duties of a chief mines inspector, and 
specifies that the chief mines inspector must be a professional 
geoscientist who holds a valid licence pursuant to The 
Engineering and Geoscience Professions Act or who is eligible 
for a licence pursuant to that Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, mining is extremely important to this province, 
and it’s important that we take our time with this and do the 
research and make certain that the industry’s on side with this 
Act. 
 
And at first blush, I don’t see much wrong with it, to be frank. 
But you know, mining . . . the total value of mineral sales in 
2000 was $2.4 billion, extremely important to the economy of 
this province. And we shouldn’t rush into any kind of 
legislation that may or . . . jeopardize that in any manner. 
 
Saskatchewan’s mining industry spends more than 2 billion 
annually on wages, and goods and services. Saskatchewan’s 
mining industry paid well in excess of 200 million in royalties 
and taxes to the provincial government in 2000. Roughly 

equivalent to the total highway’s budget. 
 
Mining is Saskatchewan’s third largest industry, Mr. Speaker, 
after oil and gas with annual sales of 6 billion. Saskatchewan 
ranks fourth in Canada, after Ontario, Quebec, and British 
Columbia in terms of total value of mineral production. 
 
Saskatchewan’s mining industry creates direct and indirect 
employment for approximately 20,000 people in this province, 
Mr. Speaker — 20,000 people that stay here and earn 
substantial salaries, averaging more than $55,000 a year, 
annually, including benefits. 
 
Saskatchewan has the largest reserves in the world of potash 
and uranium. Saskatchewan coal produces approximately 70 
per cent of the province’s electrical power. In addition to 
potash, uranium, and coal, Saskatchewan has many other 
mineral resources, including base and precious metals, sodium, 
potassium sulphate, clays, and promising potential for 
diamonds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has excellent potential for future 
resource development, and mineral resource development and 
will continue to be one of the primary engines for economic 
growth in this province, assuming that we don’t make any big 
mistakes. 
 
Saskatchewan’s mining industry is very environmentally 
friendly and leaves a tiny footprint in comparison to the size 
and magnitude of the production and the contribution of the 
economy of this province. 
 
The mining industry has a strong social and environmental 
conscience in mining and work in harmony with the 
environment. Expenditures are in the areas of treatment, 
monitoring, research, and reclamation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, at first blush this Bill appears to be quite 
sensible and something that we can probably pass in this House. 
 
But we need some time, and I think the industry needs some 
time to discuss it. It’s relatively new. Some members of the 
industry aren’t aware of all the implications and we want time 
for feedback from them as well. And accordingly, Mr. Speaker, 
I move to adjourn debate on this matter. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Trew that Bill No. 30 — The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 32 is 
probably a Bill that’s got a lot of good stuff in it, but there are a 
few things that we need to discuss and a few things that we 
need to look at and we will do that this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1438 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2001 

 

Bill C-32 essentially tries to take our provincial legislation and 
put it in line with federal legislation. And what it deals with in 
specifics is looking at leaves for new parents and the amount of 
leave time that that can be, and what business has to do and 
who has to give certain amounts of leave, and ask permission or 
give notice that they’re going to take some leave, and also the 
time that they have to allow before they come back to work. 
 
It’s a piece of legislation that we looked at very closely and 
we’re going to look at fairly closely as we go through this, 
basically because, from our side of the House, we have a fairly 
strong commitment to families, and that’s what this one deals 
with; and we also have a strong commitment to business, and 
that’s what this one deals with. 
 
So any time that we get, from the people across the way, a Bill 
that involves those two things and we are never quite sure 
where they are on those issues, we need to look at those very 
closely. 
 
We look for example — and they’re already waking up over 
there and starting to comment. When we look at this 
government in business, and we look at some of their records 
— the kinds of things that this government loves to put money 
into business and by that, choosing winners and losers. 
 
And we have a member over there right away saying that that’s 
progress. Well I suggest to you that that’s not progress; it also 
isn’t always profitable. Most of the time it isn’t. Because when 
government chooses winners and losers by putting money into 
business, very often, very often it doesn’t work out that way. 
That in fact the taxpayer, through that, loses money. 
 
The other thing that happens is it happens to distort the 
marketplace. So that you take government money, and you add 
that taxpayers’ money into one particular aspect of business, 
and then the other ones that don’t get that particular help, 
they’re just not . . . they’re at a disadvantage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Bill C-32, Mr. Speaker, as I said, lines this up, the business 
aspect and family aspects, and it extends EI (employment 
insurance) benefits for new parents and provides provincial job 
protection that’s compatible, as I said, with federal laws. 
 
Most of the other provinces have already made this legislation 
and put it into place, so this isn’t something that’s new in 
Canada particularly, and I believe we’re also not the last ones in 
that. We’re basically just following along what many of the 
other provinces are doing. 
 
And when you try to mix the right interest of family and 
business, that’s always a very tough decision, Mr. Speaker. 
Because when we deal with families and the need for parents to 
be with their children, that’s a very emotional kind of a thing, 
and we need to address that. On the other hand, we also have to 
make sure that business isn’t left in a situation where they’re 
unnecessarily hurt or harmed by it. And so when we look at 
these pieces of legislation, we look at those issues very, very 
closely. 
 
We understand that many people in the business communities 
are concerned when this federal law changed because it 
increased cost to employers. At least that’s what they 

envisioned it would do, by increasing the amount of EI time for 
new parents. 
 
So when this legislation came down, there was a number of 
things that were involved in that, and one of them specifically 
was the amount of time that was allowed. This change will 
allow up to 89 weeks of parental and maternity leave between 
two parents — 52 weeks for the mother and 37 weeks for the 
father. 
 
So there are some definite changes that have taken place there. 
And many of the concerns raised by the business community 
are legitimate. However, we have to keep in mind that the 
federal government made these changes despite those 
reservations. They were told about them but it came along 
anyways. Those changes to EI are reality and it makes sense 
that the laws that are in place at our provincial level. 
 
Now we have to balance off and go through this and see very 
carefully what each one of these areas has to give. What 
benefits are being given to new families, to new parents? And 
what is the cost to business going to be? And how can some of 
the concerns that business have, how can those be 
accommodated? I mentioned a few of those and we’ll go 
through this particular piece of legislation and discuss those. 
 
I guess what we would like to see overall, and it’s been one of 
the emphases, Mr. Speaker, of the Saskatchewan Party is to try 
and set up tax rules that aren’t going to punish families where 
one family stays home . . . where one family member stays 
home to take care of their family instead of both of them 
working. If we had the proper tax structures in our province, 
there’d be a lot of parents who would say we can stay home. 
One of us can stay home. We don’t both have to work to go 
ahead and keep food on the table and keep our cars running and 
keep our taxes paid. That’s the kind of system we would like to 
see but it isn’t in place. 
 
It’s positive that the government has seen, Mr. Speaker, has 
seen fit to extend the provision for an employee to give notice 
to an employer of their intention to return to work prior to their 
52-week leave period. This is important to allow employers to 
make necessary arrangements, because if the employee can give 
only a week or so notice and say I’m coming back in seven days 
or I want time off in seven days, then suddenly it forces the 
employer into situations where they cannot hire the proper 
people, the best people, to fill in during that interim where the 
families are going to be at home with their new children. 
 
Similar at the other end. The employers have responsibilities to 
their employees and they need to know well ahead of time, Mr. 
Speaker, when these people who are filling in in the interim, 
when those people are going to have to be given notice and say 
that their time of employment is over as interim employees. 
 
(15:00) 
 
The business community has asked for notice at the other end as 
well, prior to leave commencing. And because of this, there is a 
window of up to 12 weeks prior to the birth of a child where a 
parent can begin leave. It would also seem reasonable that 
increased notification period prior to that leave to minimize 
disruption on the workplace which allows the employers the 



May 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1439 

 

proper time to get their replacements, to do the hiring, to do the 
training, and to do all those sorts of things. In Alberta, there’s a 
requirement of six weeks prior to the start of a leave. 
 
And as we know, you know, a pregnancy isn’t usually much of 
a surprise, at least not during the nine months. So people know 
quite well when they need to take that, need to take that time. 
And that means they do have the opportunity to give six weeks’ 
notice because they know in most cases very well when their 
time will be and when they’re due. So I think these sorts of 
things are there. 
 
Now as I said earlier on, this is an interesting Bill because it 
tries to balance off very carefully the interests and concerns of 
new parents, new moms and dads, and their new children, and 
the employer as well. 
 
And so we want to look at those sorts of things and make sure 
that these things work well. We want to make sure that parents 
get those times that they need off, that they get those times off. 
We also need to know that the employers are given the 
necessary leave that they need, the notification times. 
 
That I think if we can get this working correctly, Mr. Speaker, 
we can have a workplace that is very sympathetic and 
comfortable with having parents stay home with their new 
children, without being able to say, well, every time this 
happens, my employee runs out the door and then I’m left 
stranded. If we have enough time and notice given on both 
ends, that stranding won’t be taking place. 
 
So generally, Mr. Speaker, we support that Bill. There’s some 
sense and practicality in it. But there are a lot of issues that are 
in there and a number of people that we do want to contact, get 
some more feeling from business communities, from parents’ 
communities, family interest groups to see where they are. And 
for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move adjournment at 
this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 1 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 1 — The 
Partnership Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When this 
particular amendment was brought forward by the minister, I 
was really quite pleased to see it for a number of reasons. 
Primarily it’s a Bill that’s going in the right direction to give 
some of our professions the ability to compete directly with 
other professions in other parts of Canada. 
 
This Bill is modelled, I understand, after a couple of other Bills 
that are already in place — one in the province of Alberta, one 
in the province of Ontario. And I believe the intent and the 
focus of this Bill is going in the right direction. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party in fact supports this kind of a Bill 

because it’s the kind of Bill that was requested by the different 
professions. Generally speaking, the professional people and 
other people in business try to get themselves into a corporate 
situation for various reasons — either for tax reasons, for 
continuity reasons, for estate planning and so on. Here’s an 
opportunity that gives businesses and professions just another 
option that allows them the protection of a limited liability 
partnership. And so as I said, the intent I think is correct, and it 
is also demanded and asked for by those people involved. 
 
There are a couple of issues that I hope that will be clarified 
certainly when the regulations come along, but I would like to 
think that we need clarification on some of those things already. 
 
There’s many situations that the normal corporate structure 
doesn’t necessarily fit. And the limited liability partnership 
seems to fill in between those areas of the normal partnerships 
that we have now and the other corporate structure that has been 
in place for some time and will be dealing with in another Act. 
And so I think it’s important that we try to accommodate those 
people in our province that find this would be a real advantage 
to them, and an advantage to their business and their 
occupation. 
 
The Bill states that this would be particularly beneficial for 
eligible professions. And I have a problem trying to get an 
understanding of what eligible professions means in this 
particular Act. Does this apply only to the normal professions 
that we think about in terms of being doctors, lawyers, 
accountants, those kinds of professions? Or in fact does this 
open up the limited liability partnerships to other areas of 
business and economic endeavour such as business partnerships 
as well? That is not clear in the Act or anything that has been 
reported by the minister. That still is a bit of a concern. 
 
I think it’s important to have that clarified because there’s a lot 
of situations where business entrepreneurs may find the limited 
liability partnerships to be of particular advantage to them. 
 
Another concern that we have with this particular Bill would be 
some of the reporting requirements that they refer to under the 
amendments and in the Act. I would hope that this does not 
become an onerous task for issuing the reports. As you know, 
corporations and businesses try to be as efficient as they 
possibly can, not only for productivity reasons but for 
competitive reasons. So I would hope that the reporting 
requirements that are referred to here is not an impediment or 
impose unrealistic or uncompetitive requirements on these 
businesses or professionals. I think that is quite important. 
 
Another aspect of this Bill that is unclear is something that is 
referred to as the fees or the fees required for registration and 
also fees that are required for the annual renewal of this limited 
liability partnership. I understand the need for fees and why the 
fees are required. I would hate to see that the fees become 
another form of taxation because taxation adds to the cost of 
doing business and that is not the intent of this fee, and I hope 
it’s not intended to be that or I hope it will not develop into that 
kind of a money-grabbing tax . . . for tax reasons rather. 
 
When I read further into the legislature, Mr. Speaker . . . into 
the amendment, sorry, I found some confusion over the word, 
the cancellation of the . . . or the cancellation opportunities of 



1440 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2001 

 

this particular partnership. Now having the protection of the 
partnership I think is a real advantage under this limited liability 
partnership. Each of the partners in this arrangement is 
essentially protected for the indiscretions of other partners. So 
that kind of indiscretion doesn’t ruin the whole partnership 
completely. 
 
When it comes to the choice of cancellation of this partnership, 
it might be a little confusing, unless it’s stated very clearly in 
the regulations to this Act, what the actual intent is of this 
cancellation. And it should be noted that the cancellation of the 
limited liability partnership in no way restricts or brings to an 
end the business of the partnership. And I think that’s very, very 
important. 
 
Something else that I think is quite important when we are 
reviewing this Act, Mr. Speaker, is something in what is called 
the extra-provincial area of this Act where it’s referring to its 
comparability or compatibility with the limited liability 
partnerships that are presently in force in Alberta and in other 
parts of Canada, particularly Ontario. 
 
I would ask if there was compatibility as well with the limited 
liability partnerships that are presently in place in the United 
States as well. There’s a lot of states bordering Saskatchewan 
where business is conducted and there is ownership of 
businesses across border between Canada and those states. And 
I would hope that the legislation is compatible there as well. 
 
It particularly is a concern in places that are very close to the 
border, like for instance Lloydminster. If the two legislations 
are not compatible — Saskatchewan and Alberta — or if the 
extra-provincial registration will not allow business to be 
carried on in a like manner, then again there is a complication in 
the competitive aspect of these businesses. So I think that is a 
very important part. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of — as I mentioned before — a lot 
of good features in this particular amendment and it does bring 
the legislation in line with what is done and what is expected to 
be done in other parts of Canada and our neighbouring province 
particularly, and I want to make sure that this moves ahead. 
 
But the concerns that I have highlighted will have to be 
addressed and I would like to be able to contact some of the 
businesses or professions to get a little further input. I know the 
minister’s referred to some of the consultations and I think 
that’s important. I would like to pursue that. And I would like to 
ask a little more time so that we can clarify whether this will 
apply to businesses and operating businesses as well. And for 
that reason, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of this 
debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate of the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 19 — The 
Land Titles Amendment Act, 2001 be read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Bill No. 19. 
This one definitely creates some interest. The other one we 

basically talked about a little while back about — some good 
and bad sides to it. 
 
This one is The Land Titles Amendment Act. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the land titles situation, the Land Titles Office in 
Saskatchewan has been in the news for a long time. This is one 
of those tricks where the NDP thought that they’re the only 
ones that can invent a wheel. 
 
It’s lucky that this whole CCF-NDP (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic Party) mentality 
wasn’t around, you know, a thousand or two thousand years ago 
or they’d be huddled off in little caves someplace looking to 
invent the wheel as they see their neighbours going down the 
road in quad runners. Because on this particular one, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP in Saskatchewan thought they had to go 
ahead and invent a new land titles system. They couldn’t 
possibly phone up another province. They couldn’t possibly 
phone up a state in the US (United States) and say, can we buy 
your software? 
 
Well we do this for all sorts of things, in many areas with this 
whole computer age. You buy a little bit of software, you can 
put it in your back pocket, take it home, and it does a 
marvellous amount of work for you. But would the NDP 
government here ever think of doing that? No. They said they 
were going to go ahead. They were going to go ahead . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . There’s a few of my colleagues, Mr. 
Speaker, who are trying to knock me about my knowledge of 
computers. They’d be surprised to know what I can all do on a 
computer. 
 
However, I know enough about computers that if I don’t know 
how to do something, I get someone else to do it. I either pay 
them, ask them, beg them or do something else. The NDP had 
no idea how to do the land titles so did they go ahead and ask or 
beg or buy anything from somewhere else? No. They said we’re 
going to create this all on our own. 
 
Now, before we go into how well that worked, let’s spend a 
little bit of time, Mr. Speaker, and talk about the need for it. 
There definitely was a need for it. There is no question about 
that. I don’t think anyone in Saskatchewan would question the 
fact that there was a need to get our land titles system set up so 
that it was under the computer system. It worked fast; it worked 
efficiently. 
 
(15:15) 
 
I’m sure that all of us who ever bought a business or a house 
and were waiting for the lawyer to get this work done and we 
say, well we want possession of the house or we want 
possession of our money — we want possession of something 
— and the lawyer keeps saying, well it’s over at Land Titles. 
 
It’s just as good a story as the old thing about the cheque’s in 
the mail. The only difference is when the story is often used 
about the cheque being in the mail, it usually isn’t. However, 
when the lawyers told us that it’s over at Land Titles, that’s 
where it usually was. That wasn’t an excuse. And that’s because 
it took from four or five days to two to three and four weeks to 
get through Land Titles. If there was a whole rush of deals that 
were made, it would just stack up at Land Titles, and if you 



May 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1441 

 

were at the bottom of the list, you just had to wait till you got 
there. 
 
Now no question that needs to go a lot more quickly. To think 
that in this day and age we would have to wait two, three, and 
four weeks for Land Titles to do whatever they have to do to get 
this all organized just isn’t satisfactory. So when government 
decided they had to go ahead and streamline this system, they 
need full marks for that, Mr. Speaker — full marks. 
 
But let’s look at what they did. First of all they sat back and 
they said, what’s the cost on this going to be? Well they 
assumed it would be approximately $20 million. What they 
didn’t do is phone any other jurisdiction as already mentioned 
— another province or another state — and said what did it cost 
for you to do it? 
 
Furthermore, why don’t we just buy your system? Just send us 
your software, we’ll plug it in to our little machines, and we’ll 
be underway. No, but that isn’t how they worked. They huddled 
off in their little corner, like I said in that little cave some place, 
and they said, we have to invent something again. So they were 
going to invent this system for land titles. 
 
At the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, the cost didn’t end up being 
$20 million or 25 or 30 or 35 or 40 or 45 or 50. We’re looking 
at way over $50 million for a system they could have bought for 
a fraction of that cost from any number of jurisdictions because 
we’re one of the last ones in Canada to do that. Fact is we may 
even be the last one by the time ours starts working properly. 
 
So there’s a bit of the history of it. And I think that’s regrettable 
because it’s regrettable that it again showed when this NDP 
government decides it’s going to start messing with business, 
they mess up, without fail. To have this particular project, Mr. 
Speaker, to have an overrun of not 1 or 2 per cent or 5 per cent 
or 10 per cent, but double and triple the cost. And it’s a cost 
that, Mr. Speaker, is going to be borne by the taxpayer and is 
not going to be recouped. 
 
I have a newspaper article here and it says, “Money losing 
Crown casts doubt on future IT ventures.” And the statement 
underneath that, “No concrete opportunities for revenue growth 
in the land title system.” 
 
No concrete opportunities for revenue growth. And who said 
that, Mr. Speaker? One of the most astute NDP politicians that 
they’ve ever had in managing finances. No concrete 
opportunities for revenue growth, MacKinnon says. 
 
Be interesting to know where this MacKinnon is right now, Mr. 
Speaker. She’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would just remind the member that the use 
of members’ name in debate is not permitted. Only the use of 
members’ name when it’s quoted from some article. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I will try and 
correct my ways on that. 
 
So the particular article relating to this particular minister. The 
question is where is she now? Is she still in cabinet? No. She’s 
not in cabinet any more. She’s not in cabinet because she tried 

to get the front row over there to go ahead and mind their p’s 
and q’s when it comes to running business efficiently and well. 
 
She asked the information from the Crowns and said, we want 
to know why you’re doing and what you’re doing and how 
you’re going to do it and what guarantees you have that there’ll 
be some money made. And they said it’s not your business — 
it’s not your business. 
 
And where did the present cabinet put her? She’s turfed over 
way on the far side, outside of cabinet — way on the far side. 
She’s over there with the Social Services minister, Mr. Speaker. 
Nothing to do with cabinet. That’s how astute this NDP 
government and cabinet is when it comes to business. 
 
The one astute person who looked at how well this land title 
system would work and say it’s not a good idea at all. It’s not a 
good idea at all, but the NDP government ploughed ahead and 
said we’ll invent this thing all on our own. It has gone way 
awry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this system should have been working years ago, 
should have been working years ago. It still isn’t working 
properly. Still isn’t paid for. Costs are still going up. And it’s a 
shame that we had to lag behind other jurisdictions. 
 
It reminds me, Mr. Speaker, of a story I’ve told before but it 
bears retelling for the people who’ve forgotten it. When the 
Minister of Education of some, I think, four or five years ago, 
the Minister of Education had a plan. She says we have to bring 
Saskatchewan education up to a good quality level. Again, one 
of those noble statements that we all agree with. So she had 
some testing done on the students of Saskatchewan, found out, 
Mr. Speaker, that we weren’t doing very well in our math 
systems. 
 
Well, so then what could possibly be responsible for that, that 
Saskatchewan students were doing poorly in math. Well let’s 
look at all the possibilities, and she did, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think this is a good analogy; in fact, it isn’t just an analogy, it 
just shows exactly how this government works. 
 
She said well it could be that Saskatchewan students just aren’t 
smart enough to figure out math. But that wasn’t the case. 
Saskatchewan students are just as smart as anyone else, and I 
think in most cases smarter. 
 
Then she said well, it could be the teachers don’t know how to 
teach math very well. But that isn’t the case either, because 
Saskatchewan teachers, as Mr. Speaker will well know, are 
among the best in the province. 
 
Well then we have to look at something else. Well let’s look at 
class sizes. Our class sizes weren’t appreciably different. Maybe 
it happens to be the text and the curriculum. 
 
At the end of the day when all the possibilities were checked 
out, the only thing that could be addressed to say here’s where 
the flaw is was the curriculum. And the minister, very correctly 
and very astutely came to that conclusion. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s just like with the land titles problem. 
How are we going to solve the problem? What did the NDP 



1442 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2001 

 

Minister of Education do? Did she get out her handy, dandy, 
little phone and dial up and say okay, start with the Minister of 
Education from Newfoundland — how are your students doing 
in math? — and work her way across Canada, and then around 
the States until she’s found the two or three jurisdictions where 
the students are doing the best, and then say, that’s the 
curriculum I’m going to buy. 
 
And probably in about 10 hours, we could have had the best 
curriculum in North America and had our students doing very 
well. 
 
But what did the NDP do? Say, well we’ll go huddle off in our 
cave and we’ll try and invent this wheel again. So they got a 
whole group of people together and said now let’s try and 
invent a good curriculum . . . a good curriculum. 
 
So they worked years on it, and so now we have a new 
curriculum. Is it doing any better than any other curriculum in 
other jurisdictions where students are doing well? No. Is it 
doing about as well? Possibly. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly the logic that this government 
used when they came up with The Land Titles Amendment Act. 
They’re basically saying we have a problem with land titles. Do 
we go someplace else and find a solution? No, we have to 
create it all on our own. Budget overruns triple. Not 20,000 . . . 
or 20 million, pardon me. That number always rather amazes 
me, Mr. Speaker, that we actually spent $60 million to have a 
computer keep track of Land Titles. 
 
Why did it take that long? Why did it cost that much money? 
Those are questions that that administration must answer. They 
still haven’t; they still haven’t. 
 
The one they haven’t even come close to answering, Mr. 
Speaker, is what the difference in cost would have been if 
they’d have just bought the software from someone else and 
stuck it in their handy-dandy little Apple machine and away 
they went. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, user groups most affected by the new 
Land Titles system will no doubt be pleased that once it’s 
actually up and running . . . Realtors, surveyors, and lawyers 
have been forced to wait long periods of time. Hopefully that 
will be over with. 
 
In Alberta, BC (British Columbia), and Ontario where they 
have already done this, Mr. Speaker, their waiting time . . . And 
you remember what I said earlier on, in Saskatchewan it’s 
traditionally been five, six, seven days, up to three and four 
weeks. Alberta, BC, and Ontario, where they’ve done this, their 
waiting time, Mr. Speaker, is just one day. 
 
How great that would have been. And the Finance minister 
agrees with me. He said, how great that would have been. If we 
would have just gone up and bought the software from Alberta, 
BC, or Ontario, we could have purchased it years ago. The 
Minister of Finance could have stuck it in his handy-dandy 
Apple and in one day our Land Titles could have had the thing 
returned. 
 
But not over here, not when the NDP run the system. Hopefully 

these amendments that we’re dealing with today, Mr. Speaker, 
Bill No. 19, will significantly improve the waiting times for 
user groups here in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said earlier on, when we look at the way 
the NDP feels they have to invent everything, when we look at 
how they run their businesses, it gets a very frightening 
situation because now they’re going to try and run, now they’re 
going to try and run this Land Titles system, the one that the 
minister that I quoted earlier on said there was no opportunity 
for profit to be made. 
 
Now had we actually bought somebody else’s, maybe we could 
have this used by other individuals, maybe we could find an 
opportunity and market it, but not now. Overall, we’re 
encouraged by the fact that consultation did take place to some 
extent and that recommendations were put in place following 
this consultation. 
 
But as I’ve already raised, Mr. Speaker, there are numerous 
issues that are still out there dealing specifically with this Bill, 
Bill No. 19, and specifically government’s lack of planning and 
poor spending habits. 
 
I’ve just briefly introduced those problems. We’ll need to 
discuss those in more detail, to check out exactly if this 
government knows what it’s doing, or how badly they’re 
messing up this particular program as well. 
 
And so for that particular reason, Mr. Speaker, as we look 
through some more of that information, I will at the present 
time adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 20 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 20 — The 
Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
from my inquiries into what The Land Surveys Amendment 
Act, 2001 entails in it, it looks to me to be some very minor, 
minor amendment to the Bill that was brought forward last year, 
The Land Surveys Act, 2000. 
 
In looking through this, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve listened to the 
minister’s comments when he put this one forward, talked in a 
number of cases about reducing red tape. And I’m hoping that 
would include reducing the cost that it is for people of the 
province when they need to find markers and survey pegs and 
monuments out there when they’re doing something with either 
agriculture, land, or for that matter when they’re building 
houses or whatever, to find the cornerstones for when they . . . 
of their property. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister also said they were trying to make 
this Act easier to apply, and I would commend them for that if 
that’s what it really is. We talked about replacing the existing 



May 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1443 

 

sections regarding primary, secondary monuments with one 
section applying to all monuments. 
 
And I think really what it boils down to is it did need some 
amendments to make it simpler even though it was just brought 
in last year, and probably if it had of been done right last year 
we wouldn’t need the amendments. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we are still waiting on some feedback from 
surveyors and such in the province that will be dealing with this 
legislation. And we would like to get their feedback before 
letting this pass on. So at this time I would like to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(15:30) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — On my right is Ron Styles, the deputy 
minister . . . pardon me, on my left is Ron Styles, the deputy 
minister; and on my right is Barry Martin, the assistant deputy 
minister. Behind me is Don Wincherauk, who is the assistant 
deputy minister in charge of corporate services. And then 
behind Mr. Styles is Carl Neggers, the assistant deputy minister 
for policy and planning division. 
 
As well, I’m joined by two other people, Fred Antunes, the 
director of operations, planning, and business support; and 
Cathy Lynn Borbely, the leader of the budget development 
process in the department. 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon 
to the minister and her officials, once again. 
 
I’d like to begin today’s review of Highways and 
Transportation with some questions pertaining to the prairie 
grain roads program. I noticed with interest the headlines in the 
paper earlier this week, dated May 28, and I see that $220 
million has been dedicated to roads in the province as part of 
that particular program. 
 
And I do know also that the department wanted to announce 
this program considerably earlier because of the impact it would 
have on spring tendering. Now that we’ve got the details and 
the agreement signed, would you care to explain a little bit 
about what you intend to do with this money; the types of 
projects you plan to direct the money to specifically. And 
before maybe you go into that explanation, could you tell us 
what the delay was in getting this deal signed, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — My understanding is that they had to 
sign an order in council and they had to . . . that was delayed. 

The cabinet had to agree to the order in council, and that 
delayed the signing of the agreement. But as soon as the order 
in council was signed, we signed the agreement, and then we 
issued our spring tendering, which I’ve just given you a copy 
of. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — My understanding, Madam Minister, is that 
most of the money is going to go to TMS projects. Will it be 
patching of TMS; will it be replacement of TMS? What is your 
focus on that particular allotment of money? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It’s upgrading TMSs to structural 
pavement. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
apparently is quoted as being somewhat unhappy with the split 
of the money. They were hoping to get a 50/50 split for 
municipal roads and highways, and I believe the split actually 
ended up being 70/30. 
 
Can you tell me a little bit about the dynamics of that discussion 
and what happened? What lead you to decide to put more 
money into the highways as opposed to the municipal roads, in 
opposition to the position of SARM? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There were four parties to the 
negotiations — the federal government, the province of 
Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, and the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association. 
 
Saskatchewan took the position that we wanted to be able to 
invest the money strategically into those roads that were in 
critical condition. And as a result of the work that we did to 
advance our position, I believe SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) supported our position. SARM had 
a different position. The federal government, it was their 
decision in the end and they decided to support the 70/30 split 
when it came to the allocation of the funding. 
 
I should mention that all four groups will be involved in 
determining how we’re going to spend . . . or allocate that 
money. And I want you to know that our negotiating mandate 
was to make sure that the federal funding was strategically 
invested in those roads that were critical to the development of 
a sustainable road system in the province. 
 
Our view was that we needed to look at municipal and 
provincial roads in a more integrated regional road system and 
we wanted to ensure that there was local and regional 
participation in the program delivery through provincial 
consultation with our area transportation committees. 
 
So we know that the federal government funding will not 
resolve our challenges when it comes to our provincial and 
municipal highways. But we think that the money will certainly 
assist us in trying to transform our transportation system to one 
that deals with the significant changes that have occurred in the 
grain industry. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In presentations 
and responses to questions previously, you have referred to the 



1444 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2001 

 

tremendous transference of grain traffic and weight and volume 
to roads because of the rail-line abandonment issue. Your 
predecessor also alluded to that many times. 
 
But the reality is that it’s not just provincial highways that are 
negatively affected. Municipal roads take a great and 
tremendous beating because of the very factors that you’re 
saying of being deleterious to the municipal . . . I’m sorry, to 
the provincial roads. 
 
So is there any thinking, is there going to be any effort by the 
provincial government addressing the concerns specifically of 
the municipalities in this province as to how they are to come to 
grips with the real problems that they’re facing on roads that 
they are charged with building and maintaining? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to thank the member for the 
question because it’s a very good question and it’s a very 
important question. 
 
As you know, the western premiers and territorial leaders are 
meeting this evening and over the next two days in Moose Jaw. 
The Premier, along with the other premiers, have on the agenda 
the whole issue of transportation. It’s a critical issue for 
Western Canada, and for Northern Canada as well. 
 
As you know, we have escalated the twinning of two national 
highways in the province of Saskatchewan — No. 1 and No. 16. 
If the federal government . . . if the premiers are successful in 
getting this on to the national agenda when they meet with the 
premiers and the Prime Minister this summer, and if the federal 
government understands the need for the West in particular to 
have access to federal funds, given the transformation that’s 
taken place, and if the federal government were to increase 
funding in the whole area of transportation, it would allow us to 
redirect money that’s going into Highway No. 1 and Highway 
No. 16 to other parts of our province’s transportation network. 
 
I’m hopeful that if we can get out of the western premiers’ and 
territorial leaders’ conference a commitment to take this on to 
the national agenda, and if we can raise the profile of this issue 
from a western point of view, that perhaps there might be some 
interest on the federal government’s part to participate in not 
only highways, but that we have issues around ports and 
airports as well, in order to promote economic development in 
the West. So we’ll see what happens in terms of what comes out 
of the premiers’ conference. 
 
I’ve met with many municipalities and I’ve met with SARM, 
and I can certainly understand their frustration because they too 
have suffered the consequences of the dramatic changes that 
have taken place. 
 
I’ve been speaking to the press recently about what’s happened 
in grain haul in the province, and I find these numbers startling. 
From 1984 to 1999, grain haul in Saskatchewan has increased 
by 860 per cent and this is an increase from 245 million tonne 
kilometres in 1984 to 2.1 billion tonne kilometres. And we 
estimate — the department has a program that they use to 
estimate — that by 2005 that figure will increase to 3 billion 
tonne kilometres. 
 
These numbers project a trend, and it’s obvious that our 

highways are suffering that trend and it’s going to take a huge 
amount of fiscal resources to try and deal with that trend. I 
believe strongly that neither the municipalities or the province 
have the fiscal capacity to generate the kind of revenue that’s 
required to put into our physical infrastructure. 
 
I think what’s important for the — and I think we had this 
discussion before — what’s important for the federal 
government to understand . . . Now they like to talk about the 
new economy. Well we have a new economy emerging in 
Western Canada, particularly in this province, and our new 
economy is the diversification efforts of Saskatchewan farmers 
and also Saskatchewan business to add value to our agricultural 
products. That is our new economy. 
 
And our new economy is a . . . it’s still a bulk economy. We 
have to be able to transport it and export it out of the province, 
and we’re exporting it by truck. And we somehow have to get 
the federal government to understand that there is a significant 
link between economic development in this province and 
transportation, and if our farmers . . . And the federal 
government has made it very clear to us that they’re not 
prepared to compete with the US subsidies and the European 
subsidies, therefore we’re on our own. So we have to diversity 
our economy more than we have and there’s been a tremendous 
diversification in the last 10 years. But if we are to diversify it 
more — and this leads to the whole weight question — we need 
to have a physical infrastructure that can get our product to 
market, to export market. And therein is the challenge. 
 
And so my job, on behalf of the citizens of this province, is to 
clearly show that economic development, economic 
diversification, and rural revitalization is clearly linked to our 
capacity to have a physical infrastructure which includes 
highways and transportation, water, telephones, gas, and power. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister, that’s a fairly comprehensive 
answer. And I appreciate you drawing all of the disparate parts 
together in the puzzle. 
 
I’m going to throw caution to the wind right now and say that, 
in my view, the abdication of responsibility by the federal 
government in terms of transportation in Western Canada 
borders on criminal. You know, it’s not a Robin Hood scenario 
at all — it’s theft. 
 
And they’re taking millions and millions and millions of dollars 
out of our economy — this province — and out of other 
economies in the West and not returning anything approaching 
a respectable level. Well in fact, they’re not returning anything 
in large measure to this very important problem that we’re 
facing in Western Canada, and specifically in Saskatchewan. 
 
Given the complexities though, given the challenges that you’ve 
just alluded to, what are you as a minister doing, and what is 
your department doing to plan strategically for these challenges 
over the next decade? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well the member raises a very good 
question, you know. What is the plan from the department for 



May 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1445 

 

the next 10 years? 
 
I think that we were extremely pleased that we were the first 
government department that was given a mandate to have a 
three . . . a multi-year, a three-year multi-purpose plan in a 
sense, in that it helps us plan into the out years in terms of how 
we . . . and we have money for each of the next three years. And 
we can show communities where we’re going to be investing 
the province’s money in our physical infrastructure. 
 
As you know, we significantly increased this year’s budget. 
There will be a further increase next year and the year after. We 
are investing in strategic corridors where we see economic 
activity taking place and where we know that those roads have 
to be built to a particular standard. So we are moving to primary 
weight roads in those strategic corridors. 
 
In addition — and you and I talked about this last time and I 
was supposed to get you the history of weights in the province 
— but in addition, the province has hired a consultant to look at 
what do we need to do in terms of our physical infrastructure to 
promote and encourage economic development activity? 
 
And it’s become — and I think I spoke about this last time — 
it’s become clear to me in the last couple of months since I’ve 
been the minister that there are economic development 
initiatives that are taking place in certain parts of the province. 
And in order for those to go forward, you’re going to have to 
get product to market and people are wanting primary weight 
roads, or roads that are all-year-round roads. 
 
We are trying to increase, through this year’s budget, our TMS 
(thin membrane surface) surfaces to structural pavement, but 
structural pavement is not a primary road. There will still be a 
couple of months a year that they will not be . . . trucks will not 
be able to go with particular weights down those roads. 
 
So the trick is how do we, through our strategic investments, 
encourage economic development in rural Saskatchewan — 
what I call our new economy — and how do we create or have 
the physical infrastructure to support that economic 
development? Because you need both in order to revitalize rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So we have . . . I guess what I would say is we have a three-year 
rollout of our money. We’re investing in strategic corridors. But 
there are other parts of the province that aren’t necessarily in 
those strategic corridors that also have economic development 
ideas. And we need to figure out how we can promote 
economic development in various regions of the province. 
 
And what we don’t want to do is to — through our . . . how we 
develop our physical infrastructure — sort of predetermine 
where economic development might occur, because economic 
development needs to occur all over the province. So that’s one 
of the things that the consultant is going to help us try and 
figure out. 
 
What are the economic development opportunities into the 
future? And then how do we marry our physical infrastructure 
with those economic development opportunities? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister. I appreciate the 

inference of not imposing economic development limitations on 
some areas because of your choice of certain routes as opposed 
. . . or over and above other routes. 
 
But having said that, there must also be some consideration 
given, some criteria, some way of determining how much . . . or 
what activity is going to happen in any given area, how much 
it’s going to amount to, and can you justify building a road 
there. 
 
So can you give us some indication of how you plan to 
approach the problem with those particular issues in mind? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, I mean that’s why we’re working 
with our area transportation planning committees. That’s why I 
think the consultant is going to be very helpful in terms of . . . 
Because this is not only about transportation, this is about 
economic development as well. 
 
And we need to . . . We have regional economic development, 
REDAs (regional economic development authority) across the 
province that have done inventories of what might happen in 
various regions of the province. And there are communities 
with many good ideas. 
 
And I know you can’t have a physical infrastructure all over the 
place and you have to be strategic. 
 
On the other hand, what I’ve learned is that, particularly from 
south of the No. 1 where we have sparse populations, large 
geographic areas, and lots of TMS surfaces and not many 
primary weight roads, that people don’t want to be left out of 
economic development opportunities because of those 
particular factors. 
 
So how do we work with the economic development 
authorities, the regional area transportation agencies, business 
people and farmers that are trying to promote various economic 
development opportunities in their region in order to revitalize 
their region, when, if you look at some of the criteria that we’ve 
used in the past, they wouldn’t necessarily be on the list three or 
four or five years from now? 
 
So it’s a matter of how do we put fairness into the process, a 
transparency into the process so people can understand how we 
are making decisions when it comes to which roads we’re 
rebuilding, resurfacing, repaving or upgrading. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, surely you’re not going to 
leave that decision up to the best salesman though from the 
transportation planning area of north or south or east or west. 
 
Would you use a hard dollar figure if you had an economic 
group in the southeast who said if you rebuild this road we can 
anticipate $400 million worth of economic activity that would 
be stimulated or created because of this? Would that be 
something you would look at versus another area that said, well, 
we’re only going to be able to generate about $100 million over 
the next several years? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well we do that. We do that when the 
forestry industry is developing a certain part of the province, the 
mining industry or the intensive livestock industry or the grain 



1446 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2001 

 

industry. We do that. 
 
But we also have to look at the social side of things too, in that 
we have people in the province who need to have a surface that 
we can get an ambulance over or a school bus over or vehicles 
over. So you try and balance economic development with social 
development. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I forgot this isn’t a conversation. It’s a question 
and answer period and I’m sorry for almost jumping in there. 
But I take it that in part of your considerations you do use hard 
dollar figures when you’re deciding whether or not this road 
we’ll pave. And I appreciate the fact that I have access to that 
information. 
 
One of the earlier opportunities here to discuss these issues with 
you and members of your department, I alluded to a quote, I 
think that I had read someplace, attributed to the deputy 
minister and I couldn’t lay my hands on it at that time. But it 
came out of the Urban Voice, I think it was the February 2001 
publication. And it wasn’t actually a quote, it was a summary of 
something that the deputy minister had said at the meeting with 
SUMA at that time. 
 
And he was indicating that the department’s new approach is a 
long-term planning horizon in making budget and spending 
decisions. Some short-term repair will continue to be necessary, 
but looking at Highways as transportation routes requiring 
capital investment is the new planning approach. 
 
And I think that having . . . I guess I’m extrapolating or taking 
things from this. I’m assuming at face value that this is a 
definite change and probably something that will benefit both 
the department and the province over the long haul. So I want to 
express my gratitude for that change in emphasis in the 
department. 
 
There’s lots of other areas that we need to touch on in the 
remaining time. But I have offered to give some of today’s 
estimates to some of my colleagues. So if I may, I’d like to turn 
a few minutes now over to the MLA from Redberry Lake. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I just want to say this, that here’s what 
we’re going to try and do. We’re going to try and upgrade our 
primary pavements to a 20-year life cycle. We’re going to try 
and upgrade our regional pavements to a 25-year life cycle. And 
over the next three years, we’re going to upgrade to granular 
pavement or structural pavement 800 kilometres of TMS roads 
that are linked to economic development in the province. 
 
We’re going to improve our airports because we fly people in 
and out of the province. And we’re going to improve our 
signage in the province as a safety issue, and our roadside 
mowing. And we’re increasing the number of traffic officers 
that we have by five in order to deal with some of the weight 
issues on our roads. 
 
And the road builders, the money that we’re investing in our 
roads will mean jobs for our people, and it will also mean 
summer employment for students. And we’re going to have the 
No. 1 twinned by 2004. 
 
So in terms of the next three years, these are the objectives for 

our department. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome to the 
minister and her officials. 
 
Two or three points concerning items in Redberry Lake 
constituency. You and I had a conversation concerning some 
highway that was resurfaced near Biggar, and thank you for 
mentioning you were going to fix it. 
 
I’d just like to go in a bit more detail about what really 
happened to that part of the highway. How much of it will have 
to be redone? 
 
And my question also: in contracts with highway builders and 
this particular contract, I assume the taxpayer is not paying for 
the repairs. Could you just go into some detail on that aspect as 
well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I understand that the contractor was 
completing some of that work towards freeze-up last fall. Some 
of that work is in reject and repair, and the contractor is coming 
back to make the repairs or to deal with the rejected parts of that 
road and the taxpayers will not be paying for it. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Another 
highway in Redberry Lake constituency is Highway No. 376, 
running from Highway No. 6 at Maymont north to Highway 
No. 40. And I believe it was on the list of highways that was 
going to be turned back to gravel. 
 
Could you comment on that particular highway? Is it going to 
be turned back to gravel in its entirety? Or by any chance has 
that been changed and it will be resurfaced? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m told that we have no plans to 
convert that road to gravel. We’re putting more money into 
repair of TMSs in this year’s budget. 
 
I’m not talking about upgrading. This road is not going to be 
upgraded to a structural pavement. But more money is going 
into that road in the way of repair trying to deal with some of 
the failures and some of the dips and potholes that have 
occurred on that road. So that road will receive maintenance 
this year. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
recently I had a phone call from the reporter of The Riverbend 
Review, and he is also a farmer. He and his wife farm near 
Blaine Lake in the Hafford area. And he asked me to pass on a 
challenge to the Minister of Highways to come out to Hafford 
and Blaine Lake area and take a ride with him down Highway 
No. 40 to look at the condition of the highway. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Chair, this particular individual and a 
number of other people in that area have had a number of 
problems on Highway No. 40. Last year this individual received 
damage to his stock trailer and truck driving from Hafford to 
Blaine Lake because of the treacherous roads and potholes. This 
year, the same individual has had another mishap, this time on 
the other side of Hafford along Highway No. 40 from Hafford 



May 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1447 

 

to North Battleford. 
 
He would like me to express his concerns about the highway 
and issue that challenge to the minister again. Two points to the 
minister: will you take this individual up on his challenge to 
take a ride with him and his wife on Highway No. 40? 
 
And also what steps are taken or being taken to improve this 
stretch of the highway? It seems to me that it needs to be 
resurfaced in some areas and — both on the east and west side 
of Hafford — seriously needs some improvements. 
 
And I would like you to comment on that highway, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I’ve been on that road recently. 
So I understand why he would like me to be on the road and I 
have been on the road. 
 
What I can tell the member is there is more money that is going 
in to our highway repair budget this year — a significant 
amount of money. There’s been a 25 per cent increase and there 
will be work done on that road in this fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, welcome to your officials here today. 
 
As you know I represent Shellbrook-Spiritwood, or the 
constituency of Shellbrook-Spiritwood. But I have a few 
questions regarding my constituency just west of me, and it’s 
just outside Turtleford. 
 
On Friday of last week there was an accident that happened just 
north of Turtleford where the bridge went out. Now this bridge 
links a lot of the recreation centres going north up around St 
Walburg, Paradise Hill, and those areas there. I just phoned to 
see what was happening with the bridge today and it’s still in 
the same shape as it was before. Have you got any 
recommendations of what you plan on doing in the near future 
regarding that bridge? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is that 
we’re ready to reinstall the part that collapsed on Friday, but we 
have to go through this engineering investigation because we 
need to determine exactly what happened. So there’s some 
technical people that are there examining precisely what 
happened because we have other bridges in the province that 
were built at a similar time, similar structure. So we want to 
make sure that . . . and we’re doing inspections on those bridges 
now, and we just want to make sure that this does not repeat 
itself. 
 
So there’s an investigation going on and as soon as the 
investigation is over, we will reinstall the bridge. What I’m 
advised by the department is that that bridge should be back in 
operation by the second or third week of June. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You’re saying 
that you’re going to build another . . . rebuild the bridge in that 
area to accompany the traffic going north? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, the bridge is not going to be torn 
down and rebuilt. What we’re going to do is we’re putting in 
new piles, new pile caps, and then concrete. The concrete span 

will be reinstalled, and then obviously the bridge will have to be 
. . . the portion that was destroyed will have to be repaved and 
so on. 
 
And we expect that that work can be completed by the second 
to third week of June. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In regards to 
rebuilding that bridge, as you know building bridges, there’s a 
lot of cost. That river, quite a while ago, only obtained a little 
bit of water. And then you get the years where there’s lots more 
snow and the river comes up. The last number of years there’s 
been virtually no water going through there. 
 
And I’m wondering if maintaining a bridge there and putting all 
them dollars into maintaining a bridge is worthwhile or is it 
better to go with two or maybe three huge culverts — which has 
been recommended by people from there — to alleviate some of 
the cost and also serve the purpose just as well. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I’m told it’s cheaper to repair the 
bridge than to tear everything out and put a culvert in because 
the concrete spans are still okay. The thing that needs to be 
replaced are the piles and the pile caps. So from the 
department’s point of view it is less costly to the taxpayers to 
repair the bridge than to tear the bridge out and put in a culvert. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In regards to 
that I also have another concern regarding the RMs (rural 
municipality) around the area. Now with that bridge gone out 
there’s been extra traffic that’s been rerouted and it’s been 
going down RM roads. And now the RM roads are suffering a 
great deal of structure in their road network and it’s causing a 
great concern to the RMs. 
 
What do you have in plan to do, in regards to the RMs, in 
helping them compensate some of these problems that they’re 
contributed with right now in the next short time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well one thing about the Department 
of Highways, they are very frugal. What I can tell you, it comes 
from years of tight budgets, I can assure the members of that. 
 
What the department has done is they’ve rerouted the heavy 
trucks to other highways and it’s light cars that are going down 
the municipal roads. But if there is damage, the department 
would be quite prepared to go out and work with the 
municipalities to see what could be done. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m sure the 
RMs would love to hear that in regards to what you’ve just said. 
 
My last question is actually regarding my constituency and that 
is the highway going north of Spiritwood, up to Leoville, and 
on to Chitek Lake. It’s a thin membrane highway as you know. 
That highway is just atrocious. Last year at one time there was 
rumours — and I’m not going to get into rumours — but it was 
going to be turned into gravel. Being that the highway is mostly 
used for people going up to the lakes or whatever, what is your 
plan for that highway in the near future in regards to going to 
gravel or maintaining a thin membrane surface of pavement? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the people of Leoville is 



1448 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2001 

 

that it’s not going to be upgraded to a structural pavement. But 
we’ve had a significant increase in our budget and we plan on 
maintaining that TMS as a dust-free surface. 
 
And I know that there’s a lot of senior citizens in that Leoville 
area who are there all year round. We’re not just talking about 
tourists that come through once in a while, but there are people 
that live there, that need to be able to get out by ambulance or 
whatever and it’s our intention to maintain that road as a 
dust-free surface. But we don’t have any plans presently to 
upgrade that road to a structural pavement. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. In view of the 
bridge collapse that was suffered in the Turtleford area, can you 
tell me the inspection schedule for bridges of those types, and 
bridges generally around the province, and also liability. 
 
I understand there was damage to a heavy vehicle in that bridge 
collapse. What about the issue of liability? Does the provincial 
Department of Transportation and Highways assume liability 
for that truck? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — They’ve come loaded for bear so I’m 
going to give you the full detail. We have over 800 bridges in 
the province and most of those were built in the 1950s and the 
1960s. We have two bridge preservation engineers that do the 
detailed inspection. In addition there are two bridge 
superintendents and one bridge technician. And then we have 
80 maintenance crew supervisors that are trained for general 
inspections, looking for defects. 
 
(16:15) 
 
The province is separated into five areas so one area’s bridges 
are given a detailed bridge inspection every year. So each 
bridge has a complete, detailed inspection done once every five 
years. And the five-year review is a minimum. 
 
If a problem has been identified, the bridge is inspected more 
regularly. And this can be done every two years or every year. 
 
In addition, our local maintenance crews, supervisors, inspect 
all bridges twice per year — once in the spring and once in the 
fall. And in fact the Turtleford bridge was inspected last 
November. And it was identified at that time that we needed to 
replace some piling caps and some piles. And the piling caps 
were replaced in March and we couldn’t replace the piles — I 
think it was piles 5 to 9 — because there was still frost in the 
pavement on the base of the bridge, and then there was still 
frost in the ground. 
 
All inspections are reviewed by our professional engineers who 
either priorize repairs or file the inspection report if no repairs 
are required. And bridges are also inspected if an accident has 
occurred on that bridge. 
 
Bridges are selected for a replacement program based on a 
number of factors and those factors are primarily structural in 
nature. 
 
A condition rating number is assigned to each highway bridge 
in the province. And the rating is a numerical representation of 
the condition of the bridge. And the ratings are on a scale of 1 

to 10. So a 10 means it’s a new bridge and it’s prior to a first 
inspection; 9 means it’s excellent, there are no deficiencies; 8 
means very good, minor deficiencies; 7 means good; 6 means 
fair; 5 means a tolerable condition boundary, which means in an 
extreme event there could be a failure; 4 is poor; marginal is 3, 
and that’s where weight restrictions apply; and 2 is critical, so 
there’s major structural risk. 
 
And we know that we currently have 61 bridges that are past 
their design life and that’s why in this year’s budget we’ve got 
5 point . . . Well just a second. Last year’s budget we had $5.3 
million; and this year we increased it to 5.95. So we are going 
to be spending a lot more money on our bridges in the next 
three years. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister, for that detailed 
answer. Can you also tell me, having the data right in front of 
you, how many of our 800 bridges are ranked number 6 or 
lower? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What we do is we rank bridges in terms 
of replacement. We don’t have them all here, but we’ll get that 
for you so that you will understand how we do the ranking. And 
there are numbers that are assigned to the rankings. And it looks 
as though we have several bridges that need things like spruce 
piling replacements, or there might be a load restriction on it. 
 
And the department looks at replacements once they hit a 
ranking of 3 or less — so 3, 2, and 1. So once you hit a weight 
restriction, then they look at replacing the bridge. 
 
And I can also tell you, the other member talked about culverts. 
We will replace those short bridges with culverts once they 
reach the end of their service life. And if the bridge has had it, 
then we will replace it — for those short-span bridges — we’ll 
replace them with culverts. 
 
So I just thought I’d add that information as well. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The Deputy 
Chair was wondering if a no. 1 ranking meant a collapsed 
bridge. But I take it that it’s still serviceable, although at a 
weight-restricted regime. 
 
Madam Minister, I assume that the process of getting approval 
for a bridge construction is not exactly a simple situation. I 
assume that the department undertakes their studies; that you 
have to get some federal government involvement because of 
the fisheries issue. But I understand further that the Coast Guard 
plays a role in all of this. 
 
Can you detail for us, you know, what the regime is for coming 
up with approval for a bridge design? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well we’re talking about rivers or 
water bodies. There are three different processes that we have to 
go through when we want to construct a new bridge. One is in 
the environmental front, so you need to deal with provincial 
environmental regulations and federal environmental 
regulations because rivers tend to be under federal jurisdiction. 
Then we have to deal with the federal Fisheries department 
when we’re talking about rivers, and then we have to deal with 
the Coast Guard when you’re talking about rivers that are large 



May 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1449 

 

bodies of water. 
 
So it’s not an easy task to build a bridge in this province, or 
anywhere actually in the country. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, the member from 
Canora-Pelly was telling me a story just a little while ago about 
a low-level crossing that he is trying to have put in place in his 
constituency. It’s not a situation where there’s enough traffic to 
merit a bridge. But at low water, a low-level crossing would be 
appropriate to meet the needs of the local traffic and the farm 
traffic in the area. And yet apparently that low-level crossing is 
at a standstill because of the Coast Guard’s involvement. 
 
What interest does a Coast Guard have in a low-level crossing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well things don’t always make sense 
but . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I’m told this by the 
department. But when it comes to rivers and creeks, we have 
the federal jurisdiction. And so you may have a dry situation 
but it comes under the navigable waters. 
 
And so while someone . . . From a practical point of view it 
might make sense because the riverbed is dry to sort of put in 
some dirt and try and get over it; the argument is that someone 
may want to navigate down that dry riverbed. 
 
So we’re not defending this; we’re just saying that’s the reason. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That’s something 
I think we need to pursue at some point. There isn’t enough 
navigable rivers in this province. And with water levels being as 
low as they are now, there’s even fewer. 
 
We only have a few minutes left for Highways and 
Transportation estimates and there is so much material that I’d 
like to cover. Rather than get into anything too detailed or 
philosophical, I’m going to ask about some specific highways 
on behalf of some of my colleagues. 
 
First of all, I’d like to ask you, on behalf of the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, about Highway No. 38. And in reference 
to that highway, she handed me a letter to the editor where 
somebody talked about taking the drive north of Kelvington on 
Highway 38 to lovely Greenwater Provincial Park, but they 
were appalled by the deplorable condition of the highway to the 
park. 
 
Can you give us an indication if that is one of the roads that is 
scheduled for major repair work this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We did 5 kilometres last year and we 
have nothing major planned this year other than maintenance. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The second 
specific highway that I was asked to touch on today is No. 39 
from the American-Saskatchewan border as it proceeds to 
Estevan. 
 
I am told that the condition of the highway has discouraged 
quite a significant amount of truck traffic. Brokers in the area 
that handle freight brokerage between the two countries are 
complaining about a loss of business. Apparently a lot of the 

truck traffic is coming north into Manitoba and then 
proceedings west along the No. 1 Highway. 
 
So could you give us an indication what your plans are for No. 
39 Highway this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We are working on 39 this year, but it’s 
in the Weyburn area and not in the Estevan area. 
 
And we are working on No. 6, which is . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well the member says that there’s not a whole 
lot, but we’re not finished with the season yet. And No. 6, we 
are doing work on No. 6, which also goes into the US, which I 
believe is still in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — No. 8 Highway north of Swan Plain, is at the 
request of the Deputy Chair. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’re not doing anything on that road 
this year other than repair. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — And our final request for specific information 
is for Highway No. 2 south of Assiniboia toward the US border. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have a major project east of 
Assiniboia on 13, but we . . . but 7? 
 
An Hon. Member: — 2. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Oh okay. But we’re not doing anything 
on the road that you mentioned. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, just a 
couple quick questions regarding specific highways. And first 
of all let me mention that we’re pleased to see the completion of 
the No. 8 project between the Fairlight work that was done a 
couple of years ago and Moosomin the last couple of years. 
 
However a highway that continues to be a major problem in the 
area is 48. And just recently a constituent called. His wife 
happens to work. They live just outside of Maryfield, travels 48. 
And I’m not sure if they’re travelling that any more because 
they took the second oil pan out of their vehicle on 48 Highway. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And I’m wondering, earlier on, Madam Minister, you were 
talking about the fact that your department has been given the 
go ahead to kind of think long term rather than on an annual 
basis. 
 
And I would like to know what the department’s plans are for 
Highway 48 from the Manitoba border through to No. 9 
Highway, in view of the fact that it’s not just local traffic and 
grain but it’s also a fair bit of tourism with the parks in that 
area, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We are in discussions with the rural 
municipalities about an alternate truck route in that area. 
 
I would move that we rise and report progress and ask for leave 
to sit again. 
 



1450 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2001 

 

General Revenue Fund 
Rural Revitalization Office 

Vote 43 
 

(Subvote RR01) 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my left is 
Harvey Brooks, the deputy minister for Rural Revitalization. 
And immediately behind me is Dion McGrath, acting director 
of policy and planning, on secondment from Agriculture and 
Food. Pardon me, on secondment from Economic 
Development. My apologies. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I’m not sure 
why it has fallen to me to lead the questioning on Rural 
Revitalization today because I think it’s an issue that is very 
important to so many people. I would have thought they’d have 
been beating down the doors to participate in this particular 
session this afternoon. 
 
But I do recognize the absolute essential nature of revitalization 
for rural Saskatchewan. And I know when the initiative was 
announced earlier this spring many of us were skeptical about 
what this particular approach would be able to achieve with the 
limited budget and with the limited personnel. 
 
And I would ask the minister if she is satisfied that under those 
limited circumstances, this department is going to be adequately 
able to contribute to the overall objectives of rural 
revitalization? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I can say to the member I’m not 
satisfied yet. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I would like to ask the minister in view of her 
response then, what it will take to satisfy her. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Don’t go there. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, yes don’t go there. It will take a 
lot. And what do I mean by that, and I don’t mean to be 
facetious. 
 
When I say I’m not satisfied, when you think about the 
government departments, the public service, there is a particular 
culture, a particular way of doing things. And our job as the 
office of Rural Revitalization is to make sure that when 
government departments initiate things, do things, think about 
public policy, that we’re in the loop. And that we obviously 
have something to say about that from a rural economic 
development point of view. 
 
So when I say I’m not satisfied yet, it’s not a matter of how 
many employees we have in our department, it’s a matter of 
ensuring that when government departments are thinking about 
certain things, that we’re there to make sure that rural citizens 
and rural businesses and rural institutions’ views are 
acknowledged, respected, and taken into consideration. 
 
So we see ourselves as the lens for rural Saskatchewan to make 

sure that we can promote economic development activity and 
those kinds of endeavours that will assist in the revitalization of 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think it’s going to be a while. We’re only a couple of 
months old, but we’re making ourselves known. And we now 
have a deputies’ working group from the various government 
departments that have a lot to do with rural Saskatchewan, like 
Economic Development, Agriculture and Food, Highways and 
Transportation, obviously Rural Revitalization, and there’s one 
more that . . . and Executive Council, so the Premier’s shop. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, I 
was negligent earlier in not welcoming the officials to the 
session this afternoon and I apologize for that. 
 
In view of the response of the minister, can I assume then that 
the Department of Rural Revitalization is not proactive in 
developing initiatives for rural revitalization, but is rather a 
watchdog to make sure none of the other departments scuttle 
possible rural revitalization initiatives? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — No, I would say we’re both. We are a 
proactive department because there are lots of people coming to 
us because they see us as their entry into government. And then 
obviously the other role is to make sure that we’re there at the 
table moving things along from a public policy perspective. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, do you have some formalized 
procedure by which you impose yourself on the discussions? 
When you learn that SaskTel is going to do something or some 
government department is planning to do something, do you 
have a formal mandate to participate in the discussions, or is 
this something that is going to rely on the goodwill of the 
department you’re involved with? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What’s so good about the office is that 
rural Saskatchewan people are contacting us as their entry into 
government. And that has been extremely gratifying. I mean I 
was a bit worried that people would greet this with some 
skepticism but they’re not. 
 
So what I would say is two things: we’re formalizing a deputy 
minister’s working committee. Those deputies that are very . . . 
have key responsibility for various activities in rural 
Saskatchewan across government. And then secondly, it’s just 
making sure that people who are working in the various 
departments know that we have a mandate to initiate projects, 
evaluate projects. We work to alleviate obstacles to rural 
economic development. We’re assessing policy. 
 
I should also tell the member that we have two committees of 
cabinet — a cabinet committee on economic development and a 
cabinet Committee on Social Development. And I’m on both of 
those committees and our deputy is an official to both of those 
committees. So that’s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . pardon 
me, he’s just a deputy to economic development, but I’m on 
both of those committees. 
 
So my job and our deputy’s job is to attend the committee 
meetings, and when we’re dealing with . . . it doesn’t matter 
what public policy we’re dealing with, our job is to think about 
it from a rural perspective, whether it’s a rural social 



May 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1451 

 

development perspective or an economic development 
perspective. And I would say we have been quite helpful on 
many occasions in that process. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister. Help me if I’m 
making an incorrect assumption here, but when somebody 
comes to you and your department, you indicated that you serve 
as sort of an entry point for individuals with an idea. Do you try 
to develop the idea or do you just direct the individuals in the 
proper direction? Some place where they may get a more full 
hearing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It would depend upon what the idea is. 
If it’s an idea that doesn’t require cross-departmental working, 
then we would . . . and if it’s a well-developed idea, we would 
direct them to a particular department. 
 
And I’ll just give you one example — the Avonlea reservoir, 
which you may be familiar with. There’s a group of people in 
the Avonlea area that are wanting to increase the water capacity 
in the area in order to promote intensive livestock in the area. 
 
Now this will require Sask Water, Saskatchewan Ag and Food, 
SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management), and Economic Development to address the 
concerns of the community in terms of increasing the capacity 
of the reservoir. 
 
So what we’re doing is we’ve pulled everybody together and 
we’re working to see if there’s some way that we can work with 
the community to increase the capacity in order to promote 
economic development. 
 
So that would be one . . . that’s one example of many. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I’m glad you gave me that example, Madam 
Minister, because that brings to mind the issue of the Meridian 
dam proposal on the border. Is that another project that your 
department would be involved with? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It has not been brought to the office’s 
attention, but I’m Vice-Chair of Sask Water so I am familiar 
with that. And I can report to you that the Alberta government 
and the Saskatchewan government are jointly funding a study 
into that issue. And we have grave reservations about what is 
being proposed, but that’s why we want to be at the table in 
terms of the study, to make sure that our citizens’ interests are 
represent . . . or not represented, but discussed in that study. 
Because it has implications all across the province in terms of 
water. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, to you through the Chair, 
when your government first came to power back in the early 
’90s, one of the first things that was done was the elimination of 
the Department of Rural Affairs. And I’m wondering, can you 
tell us how the mandate of your office differs from the 
department that existed at that time, and would you say now in 
retrospect it was maybe a mistake to get rid of the department at 
that time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well someone raised this. It might have 
been you . . . or no, someone else. One of your members raised 
this. Maybe it was the member from Saltcoats . . . about rural 

development. And in 1992-93, the former Rural Development 
department had a budget of approximately 60 million, and they 
employed about 300 people. 
 
(16:45) 
 
They delivered transportation services to rural municipalities. 
That is now over in Municipal Affairs. They developed 
municipal services for RMs. So they had community planning 
and professional advisory services. That’s now in Municipal 
Affairs. They managed Crown lands, such as leases, community 
pastures, resource management programs, and abandoned rail 
lines. That’s now over in Ag and Food. And then they had 
community development services, which assisted in developing 
local community-based organizations. And that is in Economic 
Development. 
 
So most of these services that Rural Development delivered are 
now being delivered in other government departments and 
agencies. 
 
Our office won’t be programming. We’re not going to be a 
program department for rural areas because that programming 
already exists. What we’re going to try and do is to make sure 
that that programming is more integrated across government to 
support rural people. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister 
again. As she is aware, we’ve had a large and frequent 
discussion in this legislature about businesses in rural 
Saskatchewan, especially maybe rural Saskatchewan, who have 
successfully carved out a niche for themselves in a given area 
and frequently find themselves competing against their own 
government. 
 
And I’m wondering, in view of the dynamics of that tension, 
how is it that you’re able to resolve those problems for yourself 
from a philosophical point of view and especially in view of the 
mandate your department has to increase economic activity in 
rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well what I can say to the member is 
we know that we’re not going to solve every problem and there 
will be times when people are disappointed. But I think it’s fair 
to say . . . and we had our experience with the IRON Solutions 
situation in Outlook, which really was I think an important 
experience in this sense: that it provided some focus to the issue 
of Crown corporations in the province of Saskatchewan. How 
do we ensure that the Crowns continue to survive because they 
do provide services to our people, they provide head office jobs, 
they provide employment to our people. And we know with 
some of our previous experiences when certain government 
endeavours were privatized, those head office jobs moved 
elsewhere, and their better paying jobs, and so on. 
 
What we don’t want to do is to impede rural economic 
development. And I think as a result of our . . . We were invited 
to Outlook. We had an opportunity to meet with people in 
Outlook. They raised important public policy issues, from my 
perspective. The deputy minister was there. And as a result of 
hearing first-hand from people who were affected, it has caused 
the government to think about these things in a . . . from a wider 
perspective. And I think that’s important. 



1452 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2001 

 

And there are discussions going on between IRON Solutions 
and DirectWest Ag Dealer, and they seem to be proceeding 
very nicely. And I think we have an opportunity to grow a 
private business and to provide a kind of expertise right here in 
the province of Saskatchewan that we can take elsewhere. 
 
And so a bad situation, initially; I think there’s an opportunity 
for that situation to turn into a very positive situation for a 
private business in rural Saskatchewan and a Crown 
corporation. 
 
But I agree with the member, we are going to have to be very 
sensitive in terms of how we approach these things because we 
need to . . . we need two policy objectives. I think from our 
government’s perspective we want to maintain our Crowns 
because they provide head office jobs, service, and jobs to 
people in this province. 
 
But we also want to ensure we have a vibrant private sector 
business community. And I think that there are some 
partnerships where we can use large corporations, like Crowns, 
to be supportive of private industry, like small businesses and 
others. 
 
So it was a good learning perspective and I think we have an 
opportunity here. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I have no further 
questions. 
 
I just would like to comment though that I appreciate the fact 
that you’ve admitted it was a learning experience and that you 
have learned an important lesson from it. Because without 
commenting about the Crowns themselves, I think that that was 
one of the most frustrating elements rural businesses had to deal 
with when they looked at large Crown investments coming in 
and competing with local and maybe often very small business 
enterprises. So I appreciate your candour and your response. 
 
We have a few minutes left and I’d like to . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . If we have no time left, that’s all the questions 
for today. Thank you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 16:56 the Administrator entered the Chamber, took his seat 
upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 301 – The International Bible College Amendment 

Act, 2001 
Bill No. 302 – The Our Lady of the Prairies Foundation Act, 

2001 
Bill No. 303 – The Providence Hospital, Moose Jaw Repeal 

Act 
Bill No. 304 – The Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 305 – The St. Anthony’s Home Repeal Act 
Bill No. 306 – The St. Thomas More College Act, 2001 
 
The Administrator: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to 
these Bills. 

Bill No. 46 - The Appropriation Act, 2001 (No. 2) 
 
The Administrator: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the 
Legislative Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to 
this Bill. 
 
The Administrator retired from the Chamber at 16:59. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 


