















































Hansard: June 08, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1659 
 June 8, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition. 
The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to designate the 
restoration of old Government House in Battleford as a 
centenary project and provide the necessary funds to 
complete this project prior to the 2005 centennial 
celebrations. 
 

Your petitioners come from the town of Battleford. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition signed 
by citizens concerned with the condition of Highway 339. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Moose Jaw, Briercrest, and Drinkwater. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again on behalf of people 
from southwest Saskatchewan concerned about the state of the 
Swift Current hospital and requesting this government to do 
something about it. The prayer of the petition reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition today signed by residents of 
Rush Lake, Ponteix, Morse, and the city of Swift Current, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present but this one is regarding the EMS 
(emergency medical services) service in the province. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance service. 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people in the Redvers 
area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who are expressing interest in 
maintaining and upgrading of the Saskatchewan road network. 
And the prayer goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ask the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue with its foresight and its vision 
of increasing the funding to over $900 million over the next 
three years to maintain and upgrade our thoroughfares of 
commerce. 

 
And this petition is signed by the good folks from Saskatoon. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today on behalf of the Redvers area. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities of 
Redvers, Carievale, Maryfield, Fairlight, Moosomin, 
Storthoaks, Alida, Antler, and Manor. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise today to 
present a petition from citizens calling for immediate 
implementation of a province-wide 911 emergency service. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to fulfill its 
promise to the people of rural Saskatchewan by 
immediately implementing the 911 emergency telephone 
system province wide. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Marcelin and Blaine Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have petitions on behalf of those who are concerned with the 



1660 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2001 

 

harmful effects of tobacco smoke, primarily relating to youth. 
And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban on smoking in enclosed public places 
and workplaces, and on school property within the province 
of Saskatchewan. 

 
This petition is signed by people from Henribourg, Prince 
Albert, Canwood, Christopher Lake; and primarily by students, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to present today to do with the lack of funding to 
non-profit personal care homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Kamsack, Togo, and Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here signed by 
the citizens opposed to the possible reduction of services to 
Davidson and Craik health centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current levels of 
service at a minimum, for 24-hour acute care, emergency, 
doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, long-term care services available to the users 
from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Bladworth, 
Lumsden. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today on behalf of citizens concerned with the 
centralization of ambulance services. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition come from the community of 
Wynyard. 
 
I so present. 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to bring forth a petition in opposition to the reduction of 
health care services in the Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce current levels of available 
acute care, emergency, and doctor services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood, Mildred, Mayfair, and Chitek Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with a petition from citizens that are concerned about 
the lack of cellular telephone coverage in rural Saskatchewan. 
And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service to all communities 
throughout the Wood River constituency. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Coronach. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order a petition presented on June 7 
regarding increasing the foundation operating grant to school 
divisions has been reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) is found 
to be irregular and therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
The following petitions have been reviewed and pursuant to 
rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition calling on the government to repair Highway 43 
from Vanguard to Highway No. 4. 
 

And nine other petitions presented yesterday that are 
addendums to previously tabled petitions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my thrill this morning to be introducing 51 
students from the Saskatoon French School. The Saskatoon 
French School, Mr. Speaker, as the name will indicate, will tell 
the members that these students are studying in the French 
language and therefore they come not just from the constituency 
of Riversdale but in fact from across the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by: their teachers, 
Sylvie Fortier, Julie Vermette, and Lucien Deux; and 
chaperones and other guests with them, Suzanne Tosh, Lorraine 



June 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1661 

 

Grier, Doug Thorpe, Blake Rooks, Randy Kerney. 
 
I would ask all members to welcome this large group of 
students from the Saskatoon French School to the legislature. 
And I look forward to meeting with you about 11 o’clock. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
this Assembly, 24 grade 8 students seated in the east side of 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They’re accompanied by their 
teacher, Ms. Clare. They’re from St. Dominic Savio School in 
the constituency of Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
I’ve had a few occasions to be at St. Dominic School and was 
very warmly welcomed and spent many an hour watching ball 
games on their playground. 
 
So I’m very pleased to be able to welcome them here today and 
I would ask all members to join in greeting them. I’ll meet with 
them in the members’ dining room later for refreshments and 
the questions they have probably after question period, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I tried to convince some of them to sing around the circle in the 
rotunda because the sound travels so well, but I didn’t hear 
them break into song. But certainly I know that they’ll be full of 
questions after they’ve watched the proceedings. 
 
Please join in welcoming the St. Dominic Savio grade 8 class. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the legislature a 
number of people who are in your gallery who are people that I 
think you know from your previous work, working on the 
all-party legislative committee. 
 
And I’m going to list a number of people and I think some of 
them may still be coming because of some interviews that 
they’re doing. 
 
But I’ll start off with Shaine Peters, who is the coordinator of 
the Students Working Against Tobacco; Dawn Anaquod and 
Jen Marshall, who are from the Fly Higher Team at Riffel High 
School; Lynn Greaves, who’s the Chair of the advocacy 
committee for Saskatchewan Coalition for Tobacco Reduction 
and works as a health promotion consultant, Regina Health 
District; Roberta Cox, from the Heart Healthy Partners, Regina 
Health District; Joan Riemer, who is the president of the 
Saskatchewan Public Health Association; Mary Smillie, who is 
the president of the Saskatchewan Coalition for Tobacco 
Reduction; Keith Karasin, who is the executive director; 
Andrew Caswell, who is the director of communications; and 
Gary Semenchuk, who is the president, all of the Canadian 
Cancer Society, Saskatchewan Division; and Cliff Burnett, who 
is the tobacco enforcement officer with Health Canada; as well 
as Lynn Koehler, who is a tobacco enforcement officer with 
Health Canada; Rhae Ann Bromley, who is the director of 
communications for the Heart and Stroke Foundation; and Lisa 
Williams, who is a health promotion program coordinator, also 

with the Heart and Stroke Foundation; Loretta Eberts, who is a 
board member of the Heart and Stroke Foundation of 
Saskatchewan; Dr. Ross Findlater, who is the medical health 
officer for the Regina Health District. He’s also representing the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association. Marilyn Reddy, who’s the 
vice-president of the Volunteer Board of the Saskatchewan 
Lung Association; Sharon Kremeniuk, who’s a staff member of 
the Saskatchewan Lung Association. 
 
I would ask all members to welcome these people to the 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
Co-Chair of the Special Committee on Tobacco Control, I 
would like to join my colleague, the Hon. Minister of Health, in 
welcoming all those, and thank them for their input and their 
interest in the tobacco legislation that is going to be put forth 
today. 
 
So on behalf of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I welcome 
them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. All 
members will be aware that these days there are post-secondary 
students working all across Saskatchewan. Included in that are 
some who are in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker, who are, 
through the new centennial summer employment program, 
employed at the Department of Post-Secondary Education and 
Skills Training. 
 
They’re here today, accompanied by staff members Debby 
Smith and Shelley Ostafie. And these students, Mr. Speaker, are 
working in a variety of offices in Post-Secondary ranging from 
communications, finance and operations, regional services, 
policy and evaluation, deputy minister’s office, corporate 
information technology, and human resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join in saying 
welcome to the students that are here today; to wish them well 
in their work experience and in their academic studies in the 
fall, and in their careers here in our Saskatchewan. And I’ll look 
forward to the opportunity to meet with some of them later this 
afternoon. So welcome to them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to join 
with the Minister of Post-Secondary Education in welcoming 
the students here this morning. I wish them a productive and 
profitable summer and I hope they enjoy the proceedings this 
morning. And I’d ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With so many 
esteemed visitors in the gallery today, I would be remiss if I did 
not introduce two constituents of mine sitting in the back row of 
the Speaker’s gallery. 



1662 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2001 

 

(13:45) 
 
Doug Raynes is there, as well as Grant Halkyard. Both, as I 
understand, work for the Department of Justice, although I 
suspect their visit here today is entirely pleasure. And I’d like to 
welcome both of these people. Doug used to live in the Yorkton 
area and has only moved to Regina about a year ago, as I 
understand. So while this is clearly Yorkton’s loss, it is 
definitely Regina South’s gain. 
 
I also want to point out that Grant is the president of the 
Whitmore Park Community Association and as such is very 
involved in keeping the community I live in beautiful. And I’d 
like to thank him very much for that and welcome both 
members to the gallery. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Nelson Mandela Honourary Citizenship Denied 
by Action of Alliance Member of Parliament 

 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, on Wednesday I stood in this 
Assembly and expressed my pride and gratitude in the heroic 
and selfless achievements of our guests who were part of the 
D-Day invasion. I was very pleased that I could thank them for 
giving me a Canada based on understanding, decency, and 
freedom. 
 
The nation learned yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that at about the 
same time I was speaking in this legislature, a Member of 
Parliament was putting to shame the very qualities which I was 
extolling. I know that all members join me in being appalled as 
legislators and embarrassed as Canadians that Alberta MP 
(Member of Parliament), Rob Anders, denied a unanimous 
motion in parliament that would have given Nelson Mandela 
honourary Canadian citizenship. 
 
Why did Anders say no? Because as he explained and I quote: 
 

Mandela was a communist and a terrorist and a left-Liberal 
poster boy. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Nelson Mandela was in prison 27 years for 
opposing tyranny and apartheid. He was the first democratically 
elected president of South Africa, elected by all of the people of 
that country. And when he was in power, Mr. Speaker, he 
forgave his oppressors. And he was awarded the Nobel Peace 
Prize, perhaps the highest international award that can be given 
a world citizen. He embodies the principles of tolerance, 
compassion, and understanding — principles that those men 
who waited ashore at Normandy died for. 
 
When he comes to Canada in September, Mr. Speaker, I and 
I’m sure all of the people of this place will be proud to welcome 
him as a fellow Canadian. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

DARE Graduation in Broadview 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 

Wednesday I had the pleasure of attending the Broadview grade 
5 DARE (Drug Abuse Resistance Education) graduation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, DARE stands for Drug Abuse Resistance 
Education. Over the past two years Cst. Sandra Sutherland of 
the Broadview RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
detachment has introduced and taught the program in both 
Whitewood and Broadview schools to their grade 5 students 
and hopes to expand this program to a number of new schools 
next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the intent of the program is to inform young 
students of the consequences of tobacco, drug, and alcohol 
abuse, and the problems that arise as a result of abusing these 
substances. 
 
The program also stresses the importance of showing respect to 
your fellow men regardless of their cultural background. 
 
It was certainly encouraging for the students and Cst. 
Sutherland to see the support of the community evidenced by 
the large turnout of parents and interested community residents 
for their graduation ceremonies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate the grade 5 classes of 
Broadview and Whitewood DARE programs, and Cst. 
Sutherland for their support and completion of such a 
worthwhile project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Hosts Special Olympics Summer Games 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Starting today and 
continuing until Sunday, over 400 athletes and staff will gather 
in Saskatoon to partake in the 2001 Special Olympics Summer 
Games. 
 
Over the past few years, Saskatchewan’s 1,300 Special 
Olympians, who range in age from 7 to 86, have been training 
and preparing for these games. And because they are held only 
every four years, the summer games are that much more 
exciting for both the participants and the spectators. 
 
And every athlete will be trying their hardest as the summer 
games are a qualifier for the national summer games which will 
be held next year in Prince Albert. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan will play host to most of the 
summer games events, and Saskatoon’s many volunteers will 
help to make sure that everything runs smoothly. 
 
Though these games are an athletic competition, they give all 
Special Olympians the chance to learn valuable skills such as 
teamwork and dedication, and above all, they give the athletes a 
chance to form a close bond with fellow athletes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to offer my congratulations to Co-Chair 
Angie Ginther, who is a special woman who grew up as my 
neighbour — I’ve known her since she was a baby — and the 
organizing committee that have worked tirelessly to put on 
these games since Saskatoon was awarded them last summer. 
 



June 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1663 

 

I also want to thank the volunteers who, as we know in 
Saskatchewan, make every event hosted here a success. 
 
And finally, I want to wish the Special Olympians much 
success as they pursue and meet goals. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Davidson Honours Brian Hanson 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I proudly rise in the House today 
to talk about one of my constituents who lives in Davidson. 
 
Last Sunday afternoon, residents in the community held an 
event to honour Mr. Brian Hanson. Mr. Hanson has been a 
pillar of his community for many years as a caring funeral 
director, a dedicated ambulance service provider, and an active 
participant in volunteer community service, including president 
of the Davidson Legion. 
 
Brian Hanson has maintained a family tradition of loyal service 
to his community, one that began with his father’s business 
back in the 1950s. Mr. Hanson has dedicated his life to the 
people of Davidson and surrounding area by providing a level 
of service that goes above and beyond the call of duty. 
 
His heartfelt attention to the families of loved ones lost is often 
mentioned, and his calmness and concern in emergency 
situations has saved many lives. 
 
Indeed, Davidson residents are so grateful for his service that on 
Sunday afternoon this event could barely be contained in the 
community hall in which it was held. This outpouring of 
gratitude for Mr. Hanson’s family was a very happy occasion. It 
was another reminder of how close small communities in rural 
Saskatchewan are in supporting one another. 
 
I congratulate Mr. Hanson on his life’s work and hope that he 
and his family will continue to provide the quality of care to the 
people of Davidson and surrounding area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

School Inducted into League of Peaceful Schools 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was just last fall 
during Education Week that this government launched 
Saskatchewan’s Education caring and respectful schools 
initiative. Yesterday the success of the caring and respectful 
schools initiative was recognized when St. Theresa School was 
inducted into the League of Peaceful Schools. 
 
The League of Peaceful Schools supports and recognizes 
schools and communities that are committed to fostering safe 
and peaceful environments. The criteria for membership in to 
the League of Peaceful Schools is consistent with the goals and 
framework of the caring and respectful schools initiative. 
 
Some of the goals are to: end bullying on the playground; teach 
responsibility and respect; and refocus from crisis response to 
planned prevention, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government believes that schools and communities should 

be safe places to live and work. That is why we are committed 
to working to help children develop the social and behavioural 
skills they need in order to live successful, happy lives right 
here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the Premier taught the students a very special lesson 
yesterday as well, Mr. Speaker. He taught the students that by 
working together that they can achieve things that they cannot 
achieve alone. 
 
He did this by placing a chair in the middle of the school 
auditorium and sitting on the chair and asking a young 
kindergarten student to see if they could lift the Premier. They 
couldn’t. He asked another student to come forward so there 
were two. They couldn’t. 
 
Then he asked five grade 8 boys to come and help, and lo and 
behold, working together they could lift the Premier off the 
ground and hold him high above the students, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Rates for Natural Gas 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For several days the 
official opposition has been asking very specific questions 
about the cost of natural gas and the price the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) is charging. Mr. Speaker, we’ve asked for 
any basic explanation from the government as to why they’re 
charging people $6.30 a gigajoule for gas, when they’ve 
admitted to buying on the spot market and the spot market 
price, including all the attendant costs, is only $4.50 a 
gigajoule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a recent editorial in The StarPhoenix, The 
StarPhoenix editors called the government’s response to these 
important questions, and I quote: 
 

. . . asinine posturing that has been the response by cabinet 
ministers Maynard Sonntag and Eric Cline. 

 
The editorial goes on to say: 
 

Instead of providing a direct answer to Wall’s question on 
how much gas SaskEnergy has locked in for the coming 
year and at what price, Sonntag blathered on about the 
utility’s investment strategy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the editorial comments in the editorial in The 
StarPhoenix, Mr. Speaker, go on to say and I quote: 
 

In response to the question, Sonntag was swaying in the 
political breezes, seemingly unable to provide facts 
pertinent to the hottest political issue on his plate. 
 

Like the vast majority of Saskatchewan people, The 
StarPhoenix expressed suitable indignation at a government that 
refuses or can’t answer the question. But the question remains, 
Mr. Speaker, in light of the government’s commitment that the 
cost of gas is not marked up to Saskatchewan consumers in any 
way, why is the NDP government charging people more for 
natural gas than it’s buying it for today? 



1664 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Booming Economy in Yorkton 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — A few days ago I said that I would be back 
with good more news for Yorkton and here I am again with 
another two good stories from Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. This time 
the news is about the booming Yorkton economy in spurring 
the Yorkton’s housing market in a very healthy situation. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, in my hometown paper, Yorkton This 
Week & Enterprise ran a recent article that said, that pointed to 
1,400 new jobs were created in Yorkton area in 1999-2000 
which led the housing stabilization at 75 per cent above what 
we’ve seen in the 1990s. 
 
And as Mr. Paul Caton of the Canada Mortgage and Housing 
said, quoting: 
 

The healthy economy is helping . . . the migration to 
Yorkton, and all . . . these families coming into Yorkton 
need a roof. 

 
And a healthy economy, he said, results from the growth in 
Yorkton because of the good business climate and the human 
resources and construction-manufacturing sector. 
 
And speaking about jobs, Mr. Speaker, on Wednesday — in 
spite of the Saskatchewan Party’s negative attitude and the 
member from Swift Current’s attack on SecurTek — on 
Wednesday of this week, SaskTel and SecurTek announced the 
moving of the SecurTek head office from Regina to Yorkton, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This now means that 40, Mr. Speaker, 40 new jobs in Yorkton 
in just two years, and the head office to Yorkton, of which 
they’ll now be monitoring, Mr. Speaker, 40,000 businesses and 
homes from British Columbia to Ontario. SecurTek projects 
another 25 to 30 more jobs in the next 18 months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a community and a province on the move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Accountability of the First Nations Fund 
 

Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, for four years the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan have been asking for the First 
Nations Fund to be opened up to access by the Provincial 
Auditor. Finally that has happened, and what did he find? He 
found three things. 
 
First, that the trustees of the First Nations Fund are not 
complying with The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Act. 
Second, that the trustees have no rules, no procedures, keep no 
records, and cannot account for $34 million of taxpayers’ 
money. And third, the trustees have made improper transactions 
worth over $280,000 that are not permitted under the law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are very, very serious findings. What 
specific actions is the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs taking to 

ensure the trustees of the First Nations Fund begin operating 
within the Act and within the law? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
believe I answered this question yesterday but I am more than 
pleased to answer it again today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, good governance is about co-operation and 
accountability. Our government places an extremely high 
priority on accountability. Bearing that in mind, Mr. Speaker, 
with respect to the member opposite’s question about what 
specific actions are we taking, I will tell her once again that the 
FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) has been 
advised of the auditor’s findings. 
 
I have instructed my officials to meet with the FSIN and the 
board of trustees of the First Nations Fund to work out 
expeditious processes to strengthen the rules and procedures 
that will safeguard and control the assets of the First Nations 
Fund. Those meetings will begin next week. 
 
I have also asked my officials to report progress to me on a 
regular basis as the meetings happen. 
 
I can carry on and give you more specific actions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, but over 
the past four years the provincial government has provided $34 
million of publicly funded casino revenues to the First Nations 
Fund that was targeted by law for the economic and social 
development of First Nations people. Yet the Provincial Auditor 
says he has no way to determine if money was actually spent 
for the purposes outlined in legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the minister’s responsibility to oversee the 
fund under the Act. She either doesn’t know how the $34 
million was spent or she doesn’t care to find out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is crystal clear that the NDP government has 
abdicated their responsibility for overseeing this fund to the 
point that $34 million is unaccounted for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan and to First Nations people what she is doing to 
determine where that $34 million was spent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to say that 
my department assumed responsibility for this fund last August 
and we worked very aggressively and very diligently to ensure, 
to ensure that the Provincial Auditor would have access to the 
First Nations Fund books. 
 
As a result of that, we have this report before us that was tabled 
by the Provincial Auditor yesterday. Mr. Speaker, members will 
note that the Provincial Auditor’s report speaks to improving 



June 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1665 

 

rules, procedures, and reporting for the fund — and that will 
happen, Mr. Speaker, as we work with the trustees, as we work 
with their auditor. 
 
And again I want to point out that that fund has been audited for 
each of the last four years. It’s been audited by a private auditor, 
not the public auditor. 
 
We will work with the trustees, their auditor, the FSIN, and the 
Provincial Auditor and we will explore ways to assure the 
public and First Nations people that the money from the FNF 
(First Nations Fund) has been wisely spent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister 
told the media that she was confident the First Nations Fund 
had adequate financial records. But the Acting Provincial 
Auditor says there were no records to show him how the $34 
million was spent according to the law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there are no records, according to the minister, 
why did the Provincial Auditor have such a tough time 
verifying expenditures? Has the minister seen records that the 
auditor hasn’t? And if so, maybe she should open the books on 
the First Nations Fund once and for all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the minister is so confident that there is good 
record keeping with the First Nation Fund, will she stand today 
and explain to all people of Saskatchewan how this $34 million 
was spent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to reiterate. The 
Provincial Auditor has said there were inadequate rules and 
procedures in place. We agree with that finding and, Mr. 
Speaker, we are taking steps to fix the problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the minister told the media that if the 
Provincial Auditor requested an investigation into how the $34 
million was spent, she would do just that. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
not the auditor’s responsibility to call for an investigation; it is 
the responsibility of the NDP government who created the First 
Nations Fund under The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP Premier, this Premier here, led protests 
against gambling in this province, yet it was his NDP 
government that brought in legislation to legalize gaming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. The NDP 
government is responsible for the First Nations Fund and for 
ensuring gaming proceeds aid the economic and social 
development of Aboriginal people. Will the Premier, will the 
Premier launch an immediate public inquiry into why the First 
Nations Fund cannot account for $34 million of taxpayers’ 
money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, it is important to emphasize 
once again our government believes in accountability. We not 
only believe in it, we act to ensure accountability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are fixing the problem the auditor has 
identified. We agree with him that there are inadequate rules 
and procedures in place. We will ensure that there are adequate 
rules and procedures in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are fixing the problem — quickly, effectively, 
and co-operatively. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, this government is a joke. Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation 
of Saskatchewan), he won’t take responsibility for the business 
activities of his Crown corporations. 
 
The minister of Liquor and Gaming takes no responsibility for 
her department when her department breaks the law and 
meddles in a police investigation of SIGA (Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Authority). 
 
The Minister of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) takes no responsibility for the fact that 
he knew a water crisis was imminent in the province months 
before people in North Battleford were infected with the 
parasite. 
 
And now the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs is not taking 
responsibility for $34 million that can’t be accounted for in the 
First Nations Fund. It’s as though this government, Mr. 
Speaker, believes that they are above the law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier take responsibility — will the 
Premier take responsibility for his government and his 
ministers? If the Premier won’t launch a public inquiry, will he 
explain to all Saskatchewan taxpayers and First Nations people 
why the First Nations Fund can operate outside of the Act and 
where $34 million has gone? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
going to say once again this government believes in 
accountability. This government has received the provincial . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again, I’m going to say this government believes in 
accountability. This government has received the Provincial 
Auditor’s report that says there are inadequate rules and 
procedures in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working to fix the problem. Unlike the 
members opposite, we are working to fix the problem, not the 
blame. 



1666 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2001 

 

What we are doing is meeting with the FSIN officials, we are 
meeting with the First Nations Fund trustees, and we will fix 
the problem. We totally endorse, support, and believe in 
accountability and we will fix the problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Latest Unemployment Numbers from Statistics Canada 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Premier. Mr. Speaker, the new employment numbers just 
released today by Statistics Canada paint a picture of a province 
in economic chaos. From May 2000 to May 2001 Saskatchewan 
lost 21,000 jobs. That’s lost . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, 21,000 jobs lost. That’s by far 
the worst record anywhere in Canada, and it’s the worst 
one-year job loss in Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 21,000 jobs have disappeared in the last 12 
months. Why is the NDP driving so many jobs out of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to say that the StatsCanada job numbers that 
were released today very much reflect the difficulties that we’re 
facing in agriculture in this province. I think there’s no secret 
that we have major economic challenges as it relates to the 
agriculture community. 
 
What I also want to say to the member opposite is the numbers 
— May over May — last May, we had the largest number of 
jobs on record for May at any time in the history of this 
province. Of these jobs there are just under 17,000 that are 
directly related to agriculture. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, just yesterday we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we 
just yesterday released our economic development document, 
Partnership for Prosperity, that we put together working with 
the business community, with business leaders, with the FSIN, 
and with people across the province, that shows a great deal of 
optimism, a great deal of enthusiasm with respect to future 
growth in this province, which we will see. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about jobs in 
2001. We’re not talking about in the past. 
 
In the last election the NDP promised 30,000 new jobs. 
Yesterday the promise was made again — more new jobs. 
 
Last year alone the NDP killed 21,000 jobs in this province. In 
fact there are fewer people working now than in 1999. Mr. 
Speaker, that is an economic crisis. 

In the last year alone Saskatchewan lost over 4 per cent of its 
workforce. In the last year alone the entire working population 
of Moose Jaw or Prince Albert has just disappeared. In the last 
year alone the NDP has killed 21,000 jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where are the jobs that the NDP promised? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, this province has seen 
year-over-year growth because there have been economic 
development strategies that have been put forward with targets, 
working with the business community, that have been reached. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we make no apologies for 
the strategy that we put forward because it very much reflects 
what the business community believes and says can be done. 
 
Now that might be a little unconventional to members opposite, 
to put together a game plan. After all their strategy is, as I 
understand it from the Leader of the Opposition, based on the 
weather. Now he tells us that under his government and his 
charismatic leadership, if the weather and the national economy 
co-operated, they could make some things happen. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit today about his 
economic strategy. In Saskatoon, in his speech, he talks about 
removing the barriers to growth and he refers to high taxes and 
regulatory quicksand. We have reduced the number of 
regulations in this province by 22 per cent and the largest tax 
decreases ever in the history of this province. We’ve got 
nothing to be ashamed about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, this is the worst, this is the 
worst job loss in Saskatchewan history, and the NDP are saying 
everything is just fine. Well everything is not just fine, Mr. 
Speaker. The NDP economic policies are killing jobs and at a 
record rate — 21,000 jobs in last year alone. And the NDP says 
everything is fine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the numbers speak for themselves. Manitoba . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, let’s look at those numbers: 
Manitoba, 1,000 new jobs; Alberta, 45,000 new jobs; 
Saskatchewan, 21,000 fewer jobs thanks to the NDP. And that’s 
because of high taxes, overregulation, unfair labour laws, 
Crown corporations competing with the private sector. The 
NDP policies are poisoning this economic climate and they’re 
driving business investment and jobs out of the province. 
 
Mr. Premier, very simply, if the NDP policies are working, why 
is Saskatchewan losing jobs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to that 
member opposite that the economic plan of this government is 
working. We’ve had consistent growth year over year. The 
Globe and Mail reports Saskatchewan has having emerged as 



June 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1667 

 

the star of the ’90s. Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say: the 
member over there, you listen to what he’s saying. He talks 
about chaos. He talks in negative terms with respect to this 
province and I want to say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. 
 
(10:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say not 
everyone in this province has a negative attitude about what we 
have been able to achieve. Because the business community 
support the development plan that’s been put together, the First 
Nations people support with a positive attitude . . . Yesterday 
there were hundreds of people at the launch of the new 
economic development strategy that was endorsed by the 
business people of this province. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the 
overlying theme of that document was improving the attitude of 
this province. 
 
And I want to say that they are very much in isolation because 
the only people believe that things can’t happen here, are them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, these just aren’t our numbers. 
These are StatsCan numbers that we’re talking about. 
 
But they’re more than just numbers. We’re talking about real 
people. There are 21,000 people who have had a job in 
Saskatchewan a year ago that do not have a job today. And if 
they are working, they’re probably working in another province 
— 21,000 people with families to support, with hopes and 
dreams into the future, who must now go somewhere else to 
fulfill those dreams because there is no jobs here for them. 
That’s the NDP record and that’s an absolute disaster. 
 
Mr. Premier, if the NDP policies are working, why are 21,000 
people not here? Why do they not have a job in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask that 
member if he will admit that the last years May figures for 
employment were the highest ever in the history of this 
province? I want to know if he’ll admit that. 
 
And I want to know if that member will also support the 
initiatives in the Partnership for Prosperity document. I want to 
know if he will support concentrating on youth employment. I 
want to know if he will support concentrating on innovation. I 
want to know if he’ll support concentrating on developing our 
rural economic economy. That’s what I want to know. Will he 
support those initiatives? 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, that’s the plan that’s put forward by this 
government. It’s supported by the people of Saskatchewan. It’s 
their document. It’s their direction. 
 
We’re going to succeed in this province in spite of the attitude, 
the political attitude I might add, of members on that side of the 
House. I said they’re very much in isolation. I believe that to be 
the case. 

Mr. Speaker, people believe in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Federal Initiative to Overhaul Agriculture Policy 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Agriculture. And, Mr. Minister, according to a number of media 
reports over the past few days, the federal government is in the 
planning stages of what could be the most comprehensive 
overhaul of national farm policy in Canadian history. 
 
Federal Minister Lyle Vanclief is saying he will be discussing 
his new plan with provincial ministers later this month and 
again in September. And any time that the federal Liberals start 
overhauling programs, Saskatchewan farm families get nervous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farm families expect the provincial 
government to play a lead role in developing any new 
agriculture program for this province and for our country. What 
specific proposals does the Minister of Agriculture plan on 
taking to the federal government in the meetings upcoming 
when he meets with the federal minister, Lyle Vanclief later this 
month and again in September? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I appreciate the member from Kindersley 
asking me the question. Because he and I had an opportunity 
this past week to be in Ottawa together and make a presentation 
to the Standing Committee on Agriculture and talk to them 
about what we think our vision for Saskatchewan and Canada 
should be. 
 
And we painted, Mr. Speaker, three frameworks. One is that we 
said emphatically to the, to the federal representative body that 
we want to see, in the future, an insurance that we’re going to 
have an emergency aid envelope for farmers and Canadian 
farmers across the piece — that the federal government 
shouldn’t abandon it. 
 
We said to them that they should review and readdress their 
safety net piece. And we said, Mr. Speaker, that as they work 
towards a new strategy and envelope as it relates to transition 
adjustment, food safety, and environmental stewardship that 
we’re going to be making an investment in that piece. And, Mr. 
Speaker, in this budget we did. 
 
We’re leading the country today in investment in the brand new 
envelope: 6 million brand new dollars of forage conversion 
program, Mr. Speaker. We’re leading the country in some of the 
initiatives today of which the federal government is talking 
about. 
 
And that member opposite and that group of politicians didn’t 
support the budget, Mr. Speaker — did not support the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Problem with Job Creation Initiatives 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize at the outset because I 
know the government doesn’t like to hear bad news about their 



1668 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2001 

 

economic policy. But I think it has to be said that the real 
prophets of gloom and doom on the NDP’s economic policy are 
not opposition members but Statistics Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Today it was revealed that Saskatchewan lost 
another 5,400 jobs — the worst record in the country. Doug 
Elliot now says that for the second straight year he anticipates 
Saskatchewan will post employment loss. 
 
Yet the same week as we learn of this job loss in Saskatchewan, 
the government spends 8.2 million to buy a Toronto insurance 
company in order to protect Ontario jobs. 
 
My question for the Premier: if your plan to create 30,000 
Saskatchewan jobs is to turn out to be anything more than a 
Grimm fairy tale will you finally say this policy is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member knows full well he 
ought to address all questions through the Chair. Would the 
member please rephrase his question through the Chair? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier: 
will you stop this insanity . . . (inaudible) . . . Will the Premier 
stop this investment to protect Ontario jobs and say the priority 
. . . will the Premier say the priority is finally Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I would be very 
pleased to answer on behalf of the government, but I want to 
begin by saying the best positive initiative that could have 
happened with respect to the development of our economy was 
the day he decided to sit over on that side of the House. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that member full knows that one of the 
Crown corporations, as an example, just as an example, brought 
— out of $90 million in profits to this province — $30 million 
from investments outside of this province. That member also 
knows that there are 40 people now working in Yorkton; that if 
it hadn’t been for the investment of a Crown corporation would 
not be working. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, as well, that member also 
knows understanding rural Saskatchewan that when you lose 
17,000 jobs in a sector over a period of a year, and you get no 
support from the people in Ottawa who should be supporting us 
in those initiatives, you’re going to have to work extra hard to 
compensate for what happens in that regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Tobacco Control Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 56, The 
Tobacco Control Act be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased today to 
stand and respond on behalf of the government and table the 
responses to written questions nos. 221 and 222. 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to 221 and 222 are tabled. 
 
Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — With leave to introduce a guest, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the gallery 
opposite yourself, I’d like to introduce Fred Soofi who is a 
respected Regina businessman. One of the things that makes 
Fred so special is that he not only is one of the best examples 
I’ve ever seen of entrepreneurial enthusiasm and success, but as 
well is a very strong supporter of human rights and other issues 
in the community. 
 
So I want everyone to welcome Fred to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Land Surveyors and Professional 
Surveyors Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to move second reading of The Land Surveyors and 
Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in today’s economy there is much co-operation 
amongst engineers, geoscientists, land surveyors, applied 
science technologists and technicians, surveyors, and 
community planners in performing services for the public. 
 
Because of this co-operative approach to their work, it’s 
difficult to describe in legislative language the lines to be drawn 
among their respective responsibilities. However, to protect the 
integrity of the survey system in Saskatchewan, it’s essential 
that the exclusive scope of practice granted to land surveyors be 
performed only by qualified land surveyors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill before the Assembly today implements an 
agreement between the Saskatchewan Land Surveyors 
Association and the Saskatchewan Applied Science 
Technologists and Technicians to refine the exemptions to the 
exclusive scope of practice of land surveyors. 
 
These amendments are also supported by the Association of 
Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan. All 
affected groups, Mr. Speaker, are satisfied that these new 
provisions will ensure that each of them can continue to practise 
their professions in the public interest. 



June 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1669 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Act and 
make a consequential amendment to The Saskatchewan Applied 
Science Technologists and Technicians Act. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 49, the 
professional surveyors amendment Act is really quite a brief 
Bill. There’s not much to it at all, but it does look at broadening 
the definition of professional land surveying. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, from . . . I think from our first glimpse is that 
it looks like it’s a very positive step to take into account land 
surveying, professional engineers, and geoscientists. So it, Mr. 
Speaker, is as I stated, it looks like its broadening and moving 
in the right direction. But there are a few groups that we would 
like to consult with and make sure that it’s not maybe going too 
wide or it could maybe go wider, whatever. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, until we get feedback from the different 
groups that we need to talk to on this Bill, I would move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2001 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 
move the second reading of a Bill to amend The Railway Act. 
This Bill contains amendments that will provide several 
changes to improve the current Act. 
 
The current Act was first proclaimed in our province in 1989. 
Given the dependence of rural Saskatchewan on railway 
service, this is an important piece of legislation. Rail lines 
provide an essential transportation service for the producers and 
their communities, and also are an essential element in the 
economic development of our province. 
 
There are four main issues included in the amendments we are 
introducing today with this Bill. These changes are a result of 
requests made from Saskatchewan communities, grain shippers, 
and short-line operators in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first amendment deals with entrance 
provisions. If a railway goes out of business it hurts our local 
communities, it hurts our farmers, and it hurts our economy in 
general. Farmers have to haul further distances at considerable 
expense. Municipal roads and provincial highways are exposed 
to the wear and tear of more frequent and larger trucks. And 
communities also lose an important part of their tax base and 
they lose jobs. 
 
Our government raised this as a major issue during the 
Kroeger-Estey process. We were successful in getting the 
federal government to introduce legislation that made railway 
companies more accountable to rural communities. 
 
(11:00) 
 

Federal railways must first make available rail lines they no 
longer need to commercial operators or to communities to 
operate short-lines. If there is no interest in operating the track, 
the railways are required by law to provide $10,000 for each 
mile of abandoned track for three years to the affected 
municipalities. As I stated the class 1, or federally regulated 
railways, have the option of selling track instead of abandoning 
it. If the new owner operated under provincial jurisdiction, CP 
(Canadian Pacific) or CN (Canadian National), as the case may 
be, would no longer have any responsibilities to our 
communities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, most rural residents would far prefer a 
viable operating railway to a compensation payment. But what 
if the sale is to an operator whose objective isn’t to provide 
service in the long term? What if the real outcome of the sale 
will be a loss of service after only a few years of operation with 
no recourse to the transitional funding. 
 
Our government believes it has the responsibility to determine 
if a sale is legitimate and in the best interest of the public. 
Provisions are being introduced today so that government can 
investigate and provide approval for an acquisition. 
 
In cases where the intentions of a company are found to be in 
question, the acquisition would not be approved. Ownership 
would stay with the federal railway that would then have the 
option of continuing operations, finding a bona fide operator to 
sell the line to, or proceeding through the normal abandonment 
process. Mr. Speaker, this provision will help protect the public 
and legitimate short-line operators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other . . . (inaudible) . . . entrance provision 
deals with creating a more predictable entry process for 
potential short-line businesses. Short-line operations require 
some predictability as to when they’ll be able to start up their 
business. They need to acquire locomotives, hire staff, set up 
their business processes, and so on. 
 
At the moment there are no timelines so a potential short-line 
owner can’t predict how long the process will take. We’re 
introducing provisions that have firm timelines so that a new 
operator can expect the process to take a certain number of 
days. This would allow the operator to better plan for 
acquisition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now want to outline some of the new exit 
provisions in The Railway Act. The current legislation requires 
a short-line railway to prove to the Highway Traffic Board that 
it’s uneconomic before the operator can discontinue service. 
The rail service provider must prove to the board that the 
service can’t be provided in a manner that is economically 
viable. 
 
Financial institutions have identified this provision as a concern 
as there are no assurances that they will get their money back if 
a deal forecloses. 
 
The situation is different for lines that follow under federal 
jurisdiction. The federal government has changed their 
legislation so that rail companies are free to get out of the 
business if they so choose. Rail companies must first offer the 
line for commercial sale, then to the province, and finally to 



1670 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2001 

 

local governments before dismantling the line. 
 
The federal government has provisions that establish the sale 
price to the province or to the affected municipalities at the net 
salvage value. With this Bill we’ll be harmonizing our process 
with the federal legislation, making the same rules available to 
interested parties for rail lines under provincial jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a second issue we need to address with 
respect to abandonment of service. Rail dependent shippers who 
suddenly discover they no longer have rail service could find 
themselves in a position of being out of business. Our 
government respects the right of any business, including a 
short-line, to get out of the business if they so choose. However 
with respect to short-line railway, we believe the parties most 
affected, our rural communities and our rural shippers, must be 
given a period of time for adjustments. 
 
This Bill provides that 180 days notice must be given before an 
operator can exit. This transitional time will allow shippers and 
our communities to recruit a new service provider or make 
alternate transportation arrangements. 
 
We believe that this is a reasonable balance between the 
interests of short-line operators and the users of the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s another important issue that’s important. 
Many of our communities have expressed a concern about 
federal railways dismantling track suitable for loading producer 
cars. The right to load producer cars is extremely important to 
our Prairie farmers and the importance of this has been 
recognized nationally and is enshrined in the Canada grain Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this right is of no value if there’s no track to load 
cars. This Bill ensures that the province, our province, has done 
everything within its provincial jurisdiction to protect these 
rights. 
 
We’re changing our legislation so that we as a provincial 
government can give our producers the opportunity to acquire 
tracks if it’s important for their operations. Any track suitable 
for accommodating traffic which falls under provincial 
jurisdiction will be subject to the dismantling provision in this 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next provision deals with rates and service. 
Farmers were concerned the rights they had under federal 
jurisdiction were being lost when a transfer was made to a 
short-line operator under provincial jurisdiction. In the farmers’ 
view, it should make no difference whether the carrier is under 
federal or provincial law. The grain is starting from and going 
to the same destination it did when the railway operated under 
federal jurisdiction. And, Mr. Speaker, we agreed. 
 
We’ve included these provisions that mirror the rules under the 
federal legislation. We’re cautiously optimistic that the federal 
government will make the necessary changes to effect a 
seamless system for our Prairie grain producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my final provision deals with safety. Improving 
our provincial economy is extremely important. An excellent 
rail line service is also important. Nevertheless, we have to 
insist on safe railway operations. 

We have several new provisions that reinforce safety for our 
travelling public and all others affected by railway operations. 
Every railway operation will be required to put forward a safety 
management plan and this plan will be subject to approval of 
the province. It is the responsibility of each short-line carrier to 
keep this safety plan updated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased to answer any questions 
during our committee stage, and I would move second reading 
of the Bill to amend The Railway Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
stand today in the House and speak on Bill 52, An Act to amend 
The Railway Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, short-line railways are one of the pieces in the 
puzzle that many rural people and organizations feel are 
important to the survival and revitalization of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This Bill, as you can appreciate, we’ve just received and 
haven’t had a lot of time to look into the many aspects of it. But 
it raises many concerns, and we definitely do want to study this 
and speak to many of the stakeholders in the industry and in 
rural Saskatchewan about the Bill. 
 
We want to make very sure that the many changes in this Act 
does not really defeat the purpose and discourage short-line 
railways. And some of the comments the minister made appears 
to be directed towards that area. 
 
Any business that’s starting up in any type of enterprise has to 
be very concerned about profitability and giving proper service 
to its customers. And as we know, in every community 
infrastructure, highways and railways are very important. As 
the minister stated, the loss of railways in communities really 
puts a heavy burden on highways. 
 
And I’d like to take this Bill back to the stakeholders and 
discuss any concerns they have with it. And at this time, I’d like 
to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of Bill No. 33, The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Act, as it currently exists, does not take into account the present 
or future potential for coalition governments in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Under the current legislation, a third party that sits in the 
coalition is unfairly discriminated against. The legislation 
restricts certain funding to only those circumstances in which 
the third party sits in opposition to the government. In the 
interest of fairness and equitable treatment, there is no reason 



June 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1671 

 

why these resources should be limited to a situation in which 
the third party sits in opposition and not available when the 
third party sits on the government side of the House. 
 
This amendment brings the legislation up to date by removing 
the current provisions that unfairly limit the allocation of 
resources to a third party in this Assembly. Under the proposed 
amendments, the third party would be entitled to the same 
resource allowance for staff, supplies, stationery, and services 
for the Leader of the Third Party whether in opposition or in 
coalition. If the third party caucus includes additional duties of 
whip and deputy whip, then the appropriate allowances would 
also be available whether or not the third party participates in a 
coalition. The proposed amendments also authorize provision of 
an additional salary allowance for the Leader of the Third Party 
should the leader not have additional duties and responsibilities. 
 
Under the current circumstances where the Leader of the Third 
Party sits in cabinet and receives the additional allowances 
related to that position, the Leader of the Third Party would not 
be entitled to this additional allocation. This amendment does 
not change the role, responsibilities, or funding allowances 
which are currently provided to the official opposition. Those 
remain as they have in the past. 
 
The official opposition continues to receive significant funding 
for their caucus office for their additional duties assigned to the 
whip and deputy whip. The Opposition House Leader and the 
Leader of the Opposition continues to receive the same 
allowance as a cabinet minister. And the allocations to the third 
party, as determined by the Board of Internal Economy, 
represent 50 per cent of the allowances set for the official 
opposition. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we have always 
been leaders here in Saskatchewan. We’ve always been leaders 
in social and economic progress, but we’ve always been leaders 
as well in the reform of our democratic process. 
 
When we took the unprecedented step of moving to a coalition 
arrangement, the people of this province welcomed that move 
and it was seen to be new, innovative. It set the stage for an 
effective, co-operating, working relationship between two 
parties that will continue to have, on occasion, legitimate 
political differences in terms of public policy, public 
administration, and management of government issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the coalition has provided good, stable 
government for this province, and it has shown that 
co-operation does work. 
 
In a province of a million people we have demonstrated that 
co-operation can achieve positive results and it does not require 
our legitimate, partisan, political interests to be subverted or 
undermined. 
 
This legislation eliminates the existing disincentive to 
co-operation and ensures that a third party in Saskatchewan can 
continue to function as a legitimate political interest while 
making real and substantial contributions to stable, progressive 
government. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 33, 

The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment 
Act, 2001. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to enter 
into this debate, but I must say at the outset that I am somewhat 
conflicted. 
 
I have to say that I actually agree with the principle of the Bill 
as outlined by the Government House Leader. I agree that in 
principle a third party can sit on either side of the House and 
remain a third party. So I agree that the present legislation is an 
anomaly in saying that a third party can only be a third party, in 
effect, when it sits on the opposition side. 
 
It just happens to be in the British parliamentary tradition that 
we are very familiar with oppositions being composed of more 
than one party. We are not as familiar as other countries are of 
the situation where the government is composed of more than 
one party. 
 
Although I must say the Government House Leader was wrong 
in his history when he said the present situation is 
unprecedented. This is in fact the second coalition government 
in Saskatchewan. The first coalition government was formed in 
1929. It ended in 1934 when every single solitary member of 
that government was defeated. 
 
That election, by the way, Mr. Speaker, was also the election 
which saw the birth of the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation), the forerunner to the present NDP. 
 
(11:15) 
 
So it’s not correct to say that there has never been a coalition 
government in Saskatchewan. There has been a coalition 
government in Saskatchewan. It’s largely passed from memory 
because, as I say, not one member of that coalition government 
was re-elected. 
 
But I do agree with the principle that third parties may be in 
opposition or may be part of government. And therefore the 
principle of this Bill, it seems to me, is correct. And although I 
have left the coalition personally, I still wonder whether the 
coalition was of and in itself a bad idea for the Liberal Party or 
whether it was badly executed. 
 
I accept in principle that a government can be composed of 
more than one political grouping and that the minority grouping 
can be given direct input by being in a coalition, direct input 
into government policy. It can be seen by its members to have 
an agenda, to have a program, to have a plan, which is being 
forced on the larger party as the price of survival. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hypothetically you’re right. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And certainly as we look at examples such as 
Israel or the Green Party in Germany, we know that that has 
happened elsewhere. Sadly, I have to admit that did not happen 
in Saskatchewan. And to the people of Saskatchewan and to 
Liberal members generally, they simply saw no evidence of 
Liberal input into government policy. 



1672 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2001 

 

One small example probably serves to suffice. In the 1999 
election the Liberal leader campaigned against forced municipal 
amalgamation. Then when the debate was on last year, he said 
he was inclined to vote in favour of it. Then when it was 
scuttled he took credit for it being scuttled. 
 
It is little wonder that to Liberals and to the people of the 
province generally, this was more than they could comprehend 
or understand. 
 
So I do not . . . if it wasn’t for cabinet confidentiality, I could 
certainly tell you where we stood. However, it is a matter of 
public record that when I became Municipal Affairs minister I 
said on the first day that forced amalgamation was DOA (dead 
on arrival). So that’s where I was if the hon. minister of Rural 
Development wishes to know. 
 
So I ask myself if coalition is wrong in principle or it was 
merely badly executed by ourselves. 
 
Coalitions, as we know, exist in many parts of the world and 
operate successfully. They are less common in the British 
parliamentary world and that may be because in a parliamentary 
democracy there is the principle of cabinet solidarity and 
cabinet confidentiality which precludes members of the cabinet 
for saying, I am taking this position in the cabinet room and my 
support for this government depends on my colleagues 
accepting these positions. That is really not allowed in the 
British parliamentary system, in the cabinet system, because of 
cabinet confidentiality and cabinet solidarity. 
 
In that regard, Mr. Speaker, the new Government of British 
Columbia has said that they will have cabinet meetings before 
the television cameras. That will be an interesting experiment. 
 
I have to say I’m skeptical because I accept that it is important 
for a cabinet to be able to speak frankly, to air differences 
thoroughly in the confidence that these divisions will not 
become public. And I frankly do not really understand how 
cabinet ministers will be able to speak frankly and forthrightly 
in the cabinet room if there’s a television camera present. 
 
However, this is nonetheless an experiment being tried by the 
new government of British Columbia that will be interesting to 
watch to see if in fact there is room for breaking the system of 
cabinet confidentiality and cabinet solidarity. 
 
More to the point, it seems to me that we in Canada have taken 
the issue of votes of confidence far . . . much further than was 
intended in the parliamentary system. We know that in Great 
Britain, the Mother of Parliaments, it is reasonably common for 
members of both the government and opposition parties to vote 
against the majority of their members on matters which do not 
involve confidence. 
 
In Canada this is almost unheard of. And indeed any Member of 
Parliament who does not vote the party line; it creates headlines 
in this country. It does not create headlines in the United 
Kingdom. 
 
It is my view that the principle of confidence — in other words 
the life of the government — was intended only to include the 
address and reply to the Throne Speech and the budget. We 

have expanded the concept of confidence to involve almost all 
votes. 
 
We see on our Tuesday afternoon private members’ debates, 
even there the votes almost invariably come down solely on 
party lines. Clearly the life of the government is not at stake 
with those private member’s resolutions. 
 
That should be a time for private members to tell constituents 
how they stand and what they believe on the issues of the day. 
However, sadly we have to say that is not happening at present. 
What is happening is we see the government moving a motion, 
congratulating the government for being the most marvellous 
institution ever, ever to govern a province or state on the face of 
the earth. And we see an opposition taking the, of course, 
obviously the opposite point. 
 
So even on private members’ day we simply don’t see the 
flexibility for members to bring to bear their views, their 
judgment on the issues of the day. 
 
Well I said at the outset, Mr. Speaker, that part of me favours 
this Bill because I accept the basic principle that a third party 
may sit on either side of the House. And my view: on the face 
of it, that’s all this Bill does. And that is sensible. 
 
But in the specifics of this situation, I have some very serious 
problems. I again looked up the Liberal caucus Web site this 
morning. And what did I find? Well under the heading, current 
news — current news, that was the heading — there was a news 
release put out by myself dated October 3, 2000 — before I was 
kicked out of caucus of course. 
 
The next item I came upon under current news was another 
news release dated September 29, 2000. And again, I had put 
that one out. 
 
Well there was also a large, a large section criticizing the 
Saskatchewan Party’s position on the budget — the budget a 
year ago, not the budget this year, the budget of 2000. 
 
I looked to see if perhaps the Liberal leader had something to 
say to party members and to the people of the province. And I 
found that the last word from the Liberal leader to the people of 
the province on where his party stands was dated June 1, 2000 
— June 1, 2000 — more than a year old. 
 
Now of course I mentioned this last week in the legislature and 
the member from Melville jumped up with not one, but two 
news releases which were literally hot off the press. He jumped 
up the next day to say that the caucus office had in fact issued 
two news releases since I had made my comments. There was 
more activity in those few hours after I made my statement than 
there had been literally in the preceding year. 
 
The situation we now have is that of course most of the staff has 
been dismissed from the Liberal caucus office. And of course 
last week the member for Canora-Pelly accused the government 
of using the $65,000 that will go to the Liberal caucus as being 
a payoff. Quite correctly the Liberal leader took offence at this. 
The member for Canora-Pelly was forced to retract his 
allegation that this was a payoff to the Liberal members of the 
coalition. I agree with the Liberal leader’s position on that. 



June 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1673 

 

However, the question still has to be put. If it wasn’t a payoff, 
what is the money for? What is the additional $65,000 for? 
We’re told it’s for staff; well the staff has been mostly let go. 
We’re told it’s for communicating; there is no communicating. 
The last little bit of communicating ended when I left the . . . 
when I was kicked out of the caucus. So we need 65,000 for 
communications but there is no communications. We need 
65,000 for staff but by and large the staff is gone. So what is the 
money for? 
 
I have already said, Mr. Speaker, that the principle of this Bill I 
happen to support. I support, not just for the present situation 
but for the long-term — as the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote correctly said — I support that a third party may be 
sitting on either side of the House. That is a correct principle. 
 
But seeing as there is $65,000 . . . $65,000 that is entailed in 
this Bill on top of, I think the figure is $165,000 already going 
to we don’t know what, I believe there is an onus on the 
government and on particularly the coalition Liberals to tell us 
what that $65,000 is intended to be used for. And I don’t think 
it’s an answer to say it’s going to be used for communicating 
when we all know there is no communicating going on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I accept that members of this legislature need to 
communicate first of all with their supporters and party 
members, but also with the broader population so that the 
people of the province will know where we stand on the issues 
and so that we can in turn, of course, get feedback from the 
people and they can respond to us and they can tell us what is of 
concern to them and what they want to see us doing. 
 
So of course communications is the lifeblood of politics. 
 
I, myself of course, receive as . . . now in my present situation, 
$21,000 for my communications. I maintain regular 
communications, regular reports to my constituency, and of 
course, on my Web site which has a few entries added to it 
every month. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What does that cost Jack? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — It costs a few hundred dollars so it’s minimal 
cost. 
 
And this is certainly part of the job. This is important. And if 
one is going to lead a party in particular, it is important to speak 
to party members and to the province in general on a somewhat 
more frequent basis than once a year. 
 
So I acknowledge that that should be done. But they must 
acknowledge it’s not being done. It hasn’t been done. One of 
the reasons for the failure of the coalition, for the repudiation of 
the coalition by Liberal Party members at our annual 
convention last March is because nobody was saying to them 
where the Liberal Party stands, what it is working for, what our 
position is. 
 
Nobody was telling Liberal members that we haven’t simply 
been subsumed into the NDP, that we haven’t merely accepted 
cabinet positions and cars and travel in return for not having 
any Liberal policy to put before the people of this province. 
 

And our party has responded to this with a massive vote of 
non-confidence, the by-elections which have been held have 
also shown that we simply have not succeeded in convincing 
the people of Saskatchewan that we can sit in coalition and have 
an independent voice and be a force in Saskatchewan politics 
for the things which matter to us. 
 
May I say, Mr. Speaker, that as a Liberal there are many values 
I hold in common with the New Democrats, and I think that 
they are the right track in saying we have to end the 
marginalization of Aboriginal people — something I was most 
concerned with. 
 
(11:30) 
 
However, increasingly I see this province is in a crisis in terms 
of economic development, in terms of giving hope to our young 
people, and I think it is fundamentally wrong to think that the 
only engine for economic development in this province must be 
through state-owned enterprises. And that has and will continue 
to hold us back. And I would really ask the NDP to review that 
because state-owned enterprises have largely now been 
excluded as an engine for economic development everywhere 
else in the world but here. 
 
Well I will at that, Mr. Speaker, say that I am not convinced yet 
how I will vote on this Bill. The principle I actually happen to 
agree with, but I will not vote for the Bill unless we hear in 
some detail what the Liberals plan to do with the extra $65,000. 
I think they owe that much to the taxpayers of this province. 
 
They have $165,000 now; they’re going to get an additional 
65,000, presumably to do communicating. There is no 
communicating, and I do not think that we can justify voting 
these additional funds unless we hear some detailed plans as to 
what this money is going to go for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there are others who will want to 
participate in this debate but at this time I will move that we 
adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Trew that Bill No. 30 — The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a pleasure to rise today on Bill No. 30, an amendment to 
The Labour Standards Act. In particular, this piece of 
legislation deals, Mr. Speaker, with changes that occurred at the 
federal level. This is companion legislation to Bill C-32 at the 
federal parliament that deals with maternity leaves in the cases 
of Unemployment Insurance, Mr. Speaker . . . or I guess it’s 
now called Employment Insurance, Mr. Speaker. 



1674 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2001 

 

The changes are being made to extend the number of weeks that 
a woman is entitled to and the number of weeks, Mr. Speaker, 
that the father is entitled to, in the case both of a natural birth 
and in the case of an adoption, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, families, as we know, are very, very important. 
They are the bedrock of our society, and, Mr. Speaker, how a 
family operates and the interaction between the family 
members, parents, and children really mould our society for the 
future, Mr. Speaker, and how our society is going to be 
structured, how it’s going to operate. Actually what kind of a 
society we are going to have in the future is being established 
today by families, Mr. Speaker — how they interact together, 
how they interact with the community, Mr. Speaker. So 
anything that can be done that enhances families, that benefits 
families, is worthwhile, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact we have seen a number of pieces of legislation over the 
last number of years that have been detrimental to families. And 
I think of some of the items in The Income Tax Act, Mr. 
Speaker, that are more beneficial to people being single than 
they are to being in family units, Mr. Speaker; where there is 
better deductions for individual people rather than for family 
units. And those kind of items, Mr. Speaker, are detriments to 
families and need to be amended. 
 
Now I’m not sure that any government . . . The federal 
government is the one that has to deal with that. I’m not sure 
that they’re even looking at that but that’s one of the areas that 
they should be taking a look at, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation is moving things to a total of 89 
weeks, Mr. Speaker, on this particular Bill. We will deal with it 
— excuse me — not we will deal with it. The total amount of 
leave available to parents on a pregnancy, on a birth, or an 
adoption, Mr. Speaker, totals out to 89 weeks. That’s 52 weeks 
for the mother and 37 weeks for the father. That is very 
important, Mr. Speaker, as it gives the parents time to bond and 
to spend that very important initial year with their child. 
 
Mr. Speaker, though, there are some concerns to be raised with 
this particular Bill. Concerns on how it’s going to be . . . how 
it’s going to affect families, how it’s going to affect businesses, 
Mr. Speaker, because we’re talking about the interaction of the 
family with their place of employment, with the business 
involved. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we need the opportunity to learn and see and 
access how this will impact on those businesses; just how it’s 
going to have an effect on this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the things that happen when maternity 
leaves are in place is, is it possible to extend from one maternity 
leave to another maternity leave without any employment in 
between? Can you run maternity leaves consecutively? 
 
I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. Is it possible? Does the legislation 
deal with this? I know that it’s physically possible to have two 
pregnancies within a 12-month calendar year. But is it possible 
to extend maternity leaves consecutively? I don’t know. That’s 
one of the questions I think that the minister needs to address, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, what happens to the replacement workers that are 
coming in to replace a person who goes off on maternity leave? 
What kind of security do they have in place for their 
employment if it’s possible to have consecutive maternity 
leaves, Mr. Speaker, because obviously the person who is hired, 
Mr. Speaker, to be the replacement worker is there as a 
temporary employee. 
 
As a temporary employee will they receive increases in salaries 
that the rest of the employees may receive? I know that they 
receive benefits, Mr. Speaker, but do they receive all of the 
benefits and all of the increases in the benefits that may occur at 
that work site? Again, those things impact on the employee that 
is replacing the employee that’s off on maternity leave, Mr. 
Speaker. So again that causes a great deal of difficulty and the 
minister needs to be able to respond to those kind of questions. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, we need to determine what is happening in 
other jurisdictions across Canada. I know that in some cases 
that employees need to give notification prior to going off on 
maternity leave. What kind of time frame is required here? 
 
In Alberta the notification period is six weeks prior to leaving. 
That gives the employer the opportunity to find a replacement 
worker, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, in another jurisdiction, an employee has to 
have worked at that location for 12 months — one year — prior 
to qualifying for maternity leave. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask why the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood is on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hart: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank my 
colleague, the member from Cannington, for yielding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, a group of grade 4 and 5 students 
seated in your east gallery. They are the students from the 
Kelliher School. They’re accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. 
Phyllis Bigalky, and a number of chaperones. 
 
I’ll be meeting with the students shortly. We’ll go and have our 
pictures taken, and we’ll meet in room 255 and I’ll be happy to 
answer their questions. So I’d ask all members to welcome the 
students here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2001 

(continued) 
 



June 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1675 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We need to 
look at what other jurisdictions are doing, Mr. Speaker, in 
relationship to this Bill, what other thoughts have been given to 
this, what other avenues have other jurisdictions explored to 
come into not necessarily compliance, Mr. Speaker, but into 
companionship with the federal legislation. Mr. Speaker, I think 
it’s very important that the minister take note of some of the 
questions that I have raised. 
 
I know that the government is anxious to have this Bill moved 
through the House. But in that anxiety, Mr. Speaker, I wonder 
why it is, though, that this Bill was not brought forward earlier. 
The Bill was presented no more . . . initially, Mr. Speaker, was 
laid on the Table, given notice, three weeks ago. The 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, passed the federal parliament over a 
year ago. And fact is it came into force on January 1, 2001, Mr. 
Speaker. We could have been looking at this Bill much sooner 
had the government brought it forward. 
 
This legislature started sitting, Mr. Speaker, on March 20, two 
months prior to the government introducing this Bill. Mr. 
Speaker, if there’s any concerns about the timeliness of this Bill 
proceeding through the House, the government should have 
given consideration to that when they first called the session 
back in. We came back in to session, Mr. Speaker, a month later 
than normal. This Bill was not presented for the first two 
months of this sitting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has had a year to look at the 
federal legislation and make the determination on what kind of 
things they wanted to do with this Bill before presenting it to 
the House. The opposition, Mr. Speaker, and the public have 
had less than three weeks. I think it’s very presumptuous of the 
government, Mr. Speaker, to believe that we should 
immediately pass this piece of legislation because of their 
ineptitude in presenting the legislation to the House in a timely 
manner. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are members of the House 
that want to be able to address this Bill. We are prepared to give 
them the courtesy of doing so today. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 
it’s important though that the public be given the chance to 
know what is in this Bill and to make an evaluation of how it’s 
going to impact their lives. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise not so much to explain what the Bill is about, 
although I will review it briefly, but on . . . I rise to speak about 
the urgency in having the Bill passed. 
 
As we’ve heard previously, as a result of these amendments, a 
birth mother or primary caregiver would be entitled to a 
maternity leave of 18 weeks and a parental leave of 34 weeks 
for a total of 52 weeks of job protected leave. And I think job 
protected is an important thing that we need to consider when 
we are explaining why it is that it’s a matter of some urgency 
that we get this Bill through. 
 
Birth fathers and spouses of the primary caregiver would be 

entitled to 37 weeks of job-protected leave, and together the 
combined maternity and parental leaves a family is entitled to 
would be 89 weeks. 
 
We’ve heard before, and we certainly agree and support the 
idea, that those first few months of a child’s life, indeed, the 
first few years of a child’s life, are very important formative 
years and it’s very important for families to be able to bond 
early. 
 
And as the member from Cannington said, we have known that 
the federal government passed this legislation a year ago, even a 
little bit more than a year ago. And in a nutshell, Bill C-32 
extended the number of weeks of maternity and family leave 
benefits payable through employment insurance to 50 weeks 
per family — 15 weeks of maternity leave and 35 weeks of 
parental leave. 
 
And I’m disappointed to hear that he’s taking further shots at 
the government, saying that we should have introduced it 
earlier. But they could have consulted earlier as well, Mr. 
Speaker, because they knew, they knew that we were going to 
be introducing this legislation. It was contained in the Throne 
Speech. I think it was in every one of our leadership platforms. 
 
(11:45) 
 
And so I’m disappointed and I’m asking that the members 
opposite co-operate. I’m not trying to be argumentative in any 
way. But I am disappointed that they would take yet a further 
opportunity to take another poke at us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like other provinces and territories, Saskatchewan 
is increasing its parental-leave provisions to provide job 
security for families while one or both parents receive the 
increased level of Employment Insurance benefits. We’re doing 
it because it’s good for families; we’re doing it because it’s the 
right thing to do. And I really . . . I think that we can all agree 
on that on both sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, passage of this legislation is rapidly becoming a 
matter of urgency for many Saskatchewan families. In order for 
people to be able to take the full advantage of this legislation, 
under the current legislation they must give a minimum of two 
weeks notice of their intention to return to work. That will not 
change to four weeks until after the legislation is passed. 
 
And so in one week it will be June 15 and they will have to give 
two weeks of notice in order to return to their jobs on July 15. If 
this legislation is not in place by then, people will not be . . . 
although they will be entitled to the Unemployment Insurance 
benefits, they won’t be able to access them because they will be 
back at work as a result of having to give two weeks notice. If 
they don’t return to work, then they’re not guaranteed their job 
back if they take the additional time. 
 
And that’s the whole problem that we have and that’s the 
situation that I ask the opposition to understand and co-operate 
and allow this legislation to go through. 
 
Under the current Act, new mothers are allowed job protection 
for a total of 30 weeks, including both maternity and parental 
leaves. Many mothers will soon be required to give the two 



1676 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2001 

 

weeks notice to return to work under the required legislation 
and they will not be able to access and stay home for an 
additional 22 weeks that will be allowable under this new 
legislation. 
 
And I see that there isn’t a lot of attention being paid and that’s 
disappointing too, because all of the members of their 
constituency I’m sure have families and would want to access 
this legislation. I understand that the minister’s office is 
receiving 12 to 15 calls a week of people that are urgently 
awaiting this legislation and time is closing on them. 
 
The amendments we have will grant new mothers and primary 
caregivers, as I’ve said, a total of 52 weeks of job-protected 
leave and 37 weeks for spouses or secondary caregivers. These 
extended leave periods will be available to parents who are 
currently on leave when this legislation receives Royal Assent 
and whose child is born or came into their care on or after 
December 31, 2000. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would not want to be the person 
responsible for holding this legislation back a week or two 
weeks so that someone whose child is born on January 10 is not 
eligible and somebody whose child is born on January 3 is 
eligible. So I would ask the members opposite to please take 
that into consideration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, hundreds of Saskatchewan people are 
waiting for this legislation to be passed so that they can be 
assured of retaining their jobs while they access the extended 
benefits under federal employment insurance programs. I urge 
the members opposite to stand with us today in support of this 
legislation and in support of the families of Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan families have been asking that they be able to 
enjoy the same level of EI (Employment Insurance) benefits as 
those in other provinces. It’s up to us to ensure quick passage of 
this legislation so that they can do so. And, Mr. Speaker, I ask 
the members opposite to please give this Bill their support and 
let it pass on. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to raise a few comments or bring forward a few 
comments regarding the legislation, Bill No. 30, The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act, and just reiterate some of the points 
that some of my colleagues have already raised in regards to 
this legislation. 
 
Pointing out the fact that, Mr. Speaker, our caucus certainly 
isn’t opposed to parental leave and the opportunity to spend 
some time with a young child. But I guess, Mr. Speaker, I 
would have to say I am somewhat concerned a bit when we 
basically have to put in legislation the opportunity for parents to 
spend time with their children, especially when they’re very 
young. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think a lot of parents through the years have 
made a choice. A lot of parents, when they chose to begin a 
family and if both spouses happen to be working, one of the 
spouses made a choice to take some time to spend with their 
family. 

And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, in the case of our family, my 
wife was a teacher but she felt very strongly that it was 
important for her to be at home and to spend the time with our 
children when they were very young, with the feeling that when 
they reached school age, she would then look at the option of 
going back into the educational field. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if there’s something I hear it’s the fact that 
we seem to be putting less and less of an emphasize on the 
family relationship, and on the importance of providing that 
necessary care. And, Mr. Speaker, I would add that one of the 
major issues that needs to be debated is the fact that when a 
child is very young, those early years of a child’s development 
are very informative years, and very permittable years, and, Mr. 
Speaker, what I hear from a lot of parents is the fact that they 
want to have the impact of creating and giving the sense of 
direction for their child in those formidable years as they’re 
developing, versus going back into the workplace, Mr. Speaker, 
and letting somebody else raise their children, and actually train 
their children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So while this Bill in many respects is saying to, I guess, to the 
families who have . . . the two-income families who just feel 
they don’t have the opportunity economically or the time to 
spend time with their children, so we’re going to give it to you 
through legislation. We’re going to give you rather than six 
months, now we’re going to give you a year, following the 
federal legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to also encourage members and 
parents to realize the importance of not just the first year, but 
even up to the school age years, Mr. Speaker, the importance of 
being there. To be with your children, to watch them when they 
begin to walk, take those first steps. To be there when they 
begin to say the first few words that would come out of their 
mouth. Because there’s nothing — nothing — can replace that, 
Mr. Speaker, to see your child take those first few steps, or to 
say those first few words, whether it’s mommy or daddy. 
 
And just by legislating the fact that we’re going to give you that 
opportunity, I think diminishes the responsibility and role of the 
parent. And, Mr. Speaker, also there are many parents are 
offended by this type of legislation because they feel it’s . . . 
when they chose to become a parent, they made that choice 
because they wanted to have the joy of having a family and 
watch that young child, son or daughter, begin those few early 
permittable days in their lives, and watch them begin to develop 
as they developed into that young boy or girl in their family. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the government members are talking about the 
fact that this legislation is needed by a certain period in time. 
My colleague, the member from Cannington, mentioned the 
fact that the period . . . for more than a year the government has 
had the opportunity to bring this piece of legislation forward. It 
could have been one of the first pieces of legislation on the 
order paper if it was that important. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, and the member from Regina South says it’s 
standard legislation. Well I think the member from Regina 
South should remember that yesterday . . . or I believe on 
Wednesday on the introduction of a Bill, and why are you 
holding up the Bill, I think the member said. 
 



June 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1677 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think if indeed there’s a process, then 
we’re suggesting to the government there was a process where 
they could have brought this piece of legislation forward much 
earlier as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to suggest to you that I think 
when we talk about families, the importance of the family, and 
the recognitions of the role of the family, one way that we could 
certainly look at recognizing that fact is a tax credit for parents 
who choose and would love to stay home. Maybe they’d love to 
stay home longer than the first year. Maybe they’d like to spend 
those . . . maybe that first five or six years at home with their 
child to give them that education process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — And, Mr. Speaker, maybe this legislation should 
have gone beyond that. Maybe this legislation should have 
offered the tax credit to that parent so they could make that 
choice and it doesn’t affect them, their family, that much 
financially, Mr. Speaker. I believe that is another avenue that 
certainly can be looked at. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I believe there are a number of issues that 
need to be addressed in this piece of legislation. I know that my 
colleagues and I have much more we would like to raise. 
However, at this time, Mr. Speaker, I believe it would be 
appropriate to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m 
pleased to have with me the deputy minister, Glenda Yeates. 
And then to her left is Bert Linklater, who’s the executive 
director of district management services. To my right is 
Lawrence Krahn, who’s the assistant deputy minister. 
Immediately behind me is Marlene Smadu, who is the principal 
nursing adviser. To her left is Duncan Fisher, who is the 
assistant deputy minister. And to his left is Rod Wiley, the 
executive director of finance and management services. And 
behind Mr. Krahn is Kelly Kummerfield, who is the executive 
director of human resources. Thank you 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees. And first of all, welcome, Minister, and to your 
officials. And especially welcome Deputy Minister Yeates. You 
had missed our last opportunity to talk and so it’s a pleasure to 
be here. 
 
And certainly to some of the other officials, Minister, we had an 
opportunity in the past Public Accounts meetings to talk about 
some issues there and I appreciate their openness and candour 

when we discussed those issues in that format. 
 
Mr. Minister, today I want to begin at least by talking about in 
general the issues surrounding the health care professionals 
recruitment and retention and training and those issues. 
 
And, Minister, I guess by way of a bit of a preamble to this 
whole topic — because I think it’s an absolutely critical one — 
I have to say that I want to go on record as expressing my 
concern about the fact that the demographic realities of our 
medical professionals, the increasing need for their services, 
and the disproportionate low numbers of people we’re able to 
bring in from other jurisdictions because of the competitiveness 
in the health care world. I’m very concerned about the level of 
internal training that we’re doing in this province because I 
think we’re facing a ticking time bomb when we look at the 
demographics. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Certainly when you look at the absolute numbers, it could be 
argued that indeed we have enough registered nurses, adequate 
licensed practical nurses, enough technicians, etc. But I think if 
you look at the demographic reality of that population, there is a 
disproportionate curve getting up into the more senior years of 
their careers. And we are going to face a reality in very short 
order of being in a very significant shortfall on those numbers. 
 
The second thing I want to say that I think increases my 
concern about this whole issue is I had the pleasure last Friday, 
I believe, to attend a presentation by David K. Foot, the author 
of Boom Bust & Echo, who does a lot of work and is fairly 
renowned at making some pretty significant projections in 
terms of the population changes over time. 
 
And it was interesting that he said there is only one fundamental 
assumption that he makes, and that is each year each of us gets 
one year older. And I think that is a safe assumption. 
 
But it also indicates that when you look at the bell curve, if you 
like, and the disproportionate number of people that are 
approaching the end of their careers, there is going to be no 
escaping from that. It is going to be an absolute inevitable fact 
that these people are going to move inexorably forward to the 
time when they’re going to either have the option or choose to 
retire. And so we are facing some really significant problems. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to start by asking you for your general 
comments on this topic and then I will move into more specific 
questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I very 
much appreciate your comments and your question and the 
opportunity to talk about this. 
 
It’s very clear that we have to work together with the 
professions, the various professional organizations as well as 
the employee organizations and the unions, because it is a 
concern for them as well as us in the whole system. 
 
We also have been doing pretty careful analysis each year of the 
demographics as you’ve pointed out. We know that the sort of 
baby boom bubble of people, which we’re all part of, has been 



1678 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2001 

 

moving through the system and has had some fairly dramatic 
effects on the health system. 
 
And what we do know is as this group moves closer to 
retirement ages and some of the higher health cost ages that we 
are having to do a number of different strategies. Hopefully one 
of them is to have healthy lifestyles and many of these things as 
part of that. 
 
But as we look at where and how we get the health care workers 
for the next generation, we’re looking at the demographics, 
we’re working together with the professions. We’re also 
working very closely with the First Nation and Métis people, 
the Aboriginal people of Saskatchewan because they have many 
capable people who are quite interested in longer-term careers. 
And so a number of our initiatives actually are working together 
with SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated College), the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies and with our 
colleges throughout the system. 
 
So there’s a whole broad array and I will let you ask some 
further, more specific questions. Then we can answer those. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
there are a number of statistics that are available from different 
sources. And you know, I think that your comment about the 
baby boom phenomena if you like, is both at this time a 
comforting thing because these are the people that are . . . the 
people, I believe Dr. Foot said, born starting at about 1947 or so 
till ’56, ’57, and they’re the people that are in a large majority 
of their professional careers at this stage. 
 
So because there is that phenomena, this boom if you like, we 
now have a disproportionate number of people available as 
professionals to look after the generation not only in the system 
right now, but the heavy demand generation which is the 
generation older than us at this stage. 
 
And so if you like, we are living in a bit of a false sense of 
security right now because we have more people of the 
contribution age, of the age of professionalism that are 
participating as practitioners in the health care field looking 
after a disproportionately smaller number of older people. In 
not too many years, I’m afraid, for my instance and many of us 
in this House, we’re going to be of the generation that’s going 
to need support. 
 
And following us is a much smaller demographic reality that 
there are fewer people in the upcoming generations available to 
start with. 
 
And so if we’re going to start dealing with that phenomena 
we’ve got to start making some pretty significant initiatives in 
the training fields starting now. Because as you know, Minister, 
this doesn’t just happen tomorrow. If you said to the College of 
Nursing tomorrow, we’re going to give you another 100 seats, 
literally I think they’d have to move ATCO trailers onto the 
campuses in order to find the physical space in order to 
accommodate those programs. That’s the first problem. 
 
The second problem is finding in this competitive medical 
world right now qualified instructors and things of that nature in 
order to provide the courses. 

So the point I’m trying to make, this isn’t something that we 
can make on a spontaneous decision and expect results in 
almost an immediate fashion. 
 
As you know, Minister, I mean licensed practical nurses are on, 
basically, almost a two-year program; registered nurses is a 
degree program — three years if you fast track but basically a 
four-year degree program. Medical doctors, family practitioners 
— it’s basically what, seven years? You know, it’s a long-time 
training program and there’s going to be a fairly significant lead 
time that’s required even to ratchet up to anticipated educational 
requirements. We’re almost looking at anything from five to 10 
years lead time in order to make this happen. 
 
And when you compound it with the reality that the 
professional colleges, the College of Nursing for example, is 
saying at the University of Saskatchewan we’re bursting at the 
seams for available space, then all of sudden we make this 
problem even worse because we’ve got to make some 
commitments to space. So I mean we’re talking a fairly long 
lead time. 
 
And the principle that Dr. Foot talked about is that each of us 
are going to get a year older one year at a time; it’s sort of a 
very strong initiative for us to do this. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have in front of me some information from the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, their 
membership count and method of registration over the last, I 
guess, 15 years from 1985 to the year 2000. And in that 
statistical information it shows, for example, going back to 
1988 where there were . . . and maybe it was a part-year so 
that’s probably a poor example. But in 1989 there were 308 
graduates as registered nurses that were then registered with the 
SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association). That 
dropped to a low in 1994 of 85. And that seems to me that it 
was a pretty short-sighted thing because now everywhere we 
go, we’re taking about a critical shortage of registered nurses. 
 
I saw the other day, I think last week, on the recruitment Web 
site for the Health department or that facility, there was 
something like 23 full-time permanent registered nurse 
positions for the Regina Health District. And so obviously there 
are full-time permanent positions that are going unfilled. 
 
In the year 2000, which is the last year that there was 
information for, it had gone to 149. Now I think out of a total 
practicing enrolment of 9,000, you know, 149 are not going to 
keep up to our needs as the demographic curve shifts. That’s 
just not going to be enough. And so, Mr. Minister, in total, in 
the year 2000, practicing registered nurses were 8,987. That’s 
the lowest that has been recorded since 1985. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I wonder, with those realities what concrete 
steps is your department taking to dramatically increase the 
graduation and potential availability of registered nurses in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. Basically 
what’s happened is that this is an issue that’s been examined by 
the Department of Health over a number of years. 
 
In 1999, the Provincial Nursing Council and people who are 



June 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1679 

 

concerned about this started looking at it and commissioned 
some work done by Doug Elliott from Saskatchewan Trends 
Monitor. And his information . . . and this was basically 
projected from 1998 to the year 2008, so it would be going to 
another seven years from now, is that the worst-case scenario 
— these are based on exactly the figures that you talked about 
— would be about 331 RNs (registered nurse) and RPNs 
(registered practical nurse) each year to meet the supply. Sort of 
a status quo number would be about 235. And sort of the least 
required of that, I mean basically if everybody could stay in the 
profession, was about 105. 
 
This was the information that was used by the Department of 
Health and the Department of Post-Secondary Education when 
they increased the number of nursing positions from 180 up to 
260. And it’s also working from this base of information that 
we’re looking at further expansion of the nursing positions to 
get up closer to that 331 worst-case scenario. 
 
So I guess what I would say is that exactly what you’ve been 
asking about is the kind of questions that are being asked by the 
Department of Health, by the Department of Post-Secondary 
Education, by the Provincial Nursing Council people, and by 
the various professional groups that we work with, because 
you’re very correct that if we don’t do this in advance of the 
problem arising, we’ll be in even a bigger difficulty. 
 
You add into all of that the whole question of making sure that 
our compensation packages and benefits aren’t too far out of 
line with our neighbours. That also becomes a factor. 
 
And so all of these things are included in the discussion. But I 
think the specific question around the demographics is 
something that’s been very carefully looked at and has informed 
some of the plans that have made over the last number of years. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, a couple 
of days ago I believe, and I’m not sure exactly when, but there 
was a letter read on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
Morning Edition by Sheila Coles. And it talked about, it was a 
letter from an individual who had received some long-term care, 
I believe it was respite care in Saskatoon. 
 
And as part of the medical practitioners that were dealing with 
his needs were many nursing students who, as part of their 
program, are available for health districts to work, in the last 
year of their program, I believe, specifically. 
 
And this gentleman in his letter that was read over the radio 
said that . . . he made a point and he said he really appreciated 
the quality of care, first of all. That it was, you know, he was 
really well looked after, and he appreciated that. 
 
But he said, as part of his curiosity, he made a point of asking 
every single one of these nursing students that came to him or 
was in contact with him . . . and it wasn’t a scientific poll by 
any means, he just wrote this letter and said that he had done 
that. And he said that the high percentage of people that he 
talked to were asked this question. After you graduate as a 
registered nurse from your program, is it your intention to stay 
and practice in Saskatchewan or to go to another jurisdiction? 
 
And it’s a pretty simple fundamental question. And he said that 

the majority of people in his experience on that little survey he 
did, were going to . . . had indicated they were going to leave 
this jurisdiction; they were going to leave this province to 
practise. 
 
And he asked them further why that was going to be their 
choice. And he said the practical reality for these young people 
was, first of all, I think universally they were carrying student 
loans and some of them significant student loans. And so job 
security and the ability to count on a job to meet their needs 
once they graduate is going to be a big one. 
 
And I, Minister, have had three daughters go through university 
programs and I know pretty well what each of them were 
facing. I have one daughter that is a registered nurse. And when 
she graduated with her degree, she wanted to practice in 
Saskatchewan and, thank God, she is. 
 
(12:15) 
 
But I remember her sitting by the phone, literally trapped by the 
phone, waiting for a casual call. And the problem with that is if 
you’re a young student is that you have no life. You can make 
no plans, you have no assurance of stable income. 
 
So when you go to your lending institution to set up yourself in 
an apartment and buy some modest furniture — maybe to 
arrange to make payments on a vehicle or to make payments on 
your student loans — lending institutions don’t want to hear 
you say, well I’m not sure if I’m going to have stable income or 
not; I think I am because there’s a shortage of nurses that surely 
that’ll be okay. They want something more concrete than that. 
They want somehow to know that there is a long-term, stable, 
permanent full-time job and that there is some prediction then, 
based on the salary grid that’s appropriate, that you’re going to 
be able to maintain that program. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, it is important firstly that we get the 
appropriate number of training seats. I agree with you and I still 
think that we are not there yet. 
 
The SRNA, in recent documents that I have seen, I think are 
talking about a target of about 400 training seats — 350 to 400 
— so something in the magnitude of a hundred more registered 
nurses. And I know . . . And I want to talk to you a little later 
about registered psychiatric nurses’ programs. 
 
But what is in place to try to make sure, first of all, that there is 
a sense that these young people are going to have jobs here, that 
they’re going to be full-time permanent? And what are we 
doing to make sure that those are offered to our graduating 
students and that they know when they’re in their training 
program that indeed there’s going to be a job for them here in 
this province? And I think there might be some contractual and 
seniority problems and all the rest of it, but what’s your 
department going to do to try to address that issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for allowing me to talk about 
this particular area. Just first a bit of information about the 
nursing graduates. We know that from the classes of nurses that 
graduated December ’99 and April 2000, that about 75 per cent 
of the graduates stayed in Saskatchewan. Another class 
completed their studies the end of April or end of September 



1680 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2001 

 

2000, and there were 14 graduates and 12 of those or 86 per 
cent have remained in the province. 
 
The particular issue around what are the opportunities and how 
we can make the work opportunities in Saskatchewan friendly 
for these new graduates is a very specific topic being discussed 
by the Provincial Nursing Council that I’ve talked to you about 
before. That group includes members from the various 
professional groups, from the labour groups, but it also includes 
student representatives — people who are in the process of 
studying to be nurses. 
 
And I actually had the opportunity to talk to some of them at the 
SRNA convention. And they are bringing forward exactly the 
points that you are making here, about how do we get jobs that 
allow us to make some plans for our life. 
 
So one of the things that is happening right now, is that in this 
year’s budget the Nursing Council has money — $150,000 — 
where they’re working together with the Regina Health District, 
SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses), SRNA, and the students 
to research and develop strategies to address the issues of the 
casual workforce. 
 
So they’re going to be looking at sick time, hiring practices, 
overtime costs; and also what is it that needs to be done to 
address the issue of people making a plan to make a career and 
knowing that they’ve got a long-term job without going through 
some of the casual lists that you talk about. So these are 
problems that have been identified by the nurses themselves and 
our goal is to listen to them and work with them to solve the 
problems. 
 
What we know is that it’s a complex solution given the fact that 
there are various contracts that are signed. There are also 
staffing requirements that the managers require. And what it 
takes is all of the people working together and looking at some 
new models or just making sure that some of the plans that they 
have had, work to their full effect. 
 
And any suggestions that you may have over the time that I 
know that you work in this area, well they’d be very much 
appreciated. And I know the Nursing Council would be happy 
to hear from you as well. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister. Minister, 
you know I’m sure you get calls and there’s always some 
discrepancy between anecdotal type of stories and statistical 
evidence. And I do appreciate the fact that a majority of our 
graduates are staying in this province. And I know that the 
recent statistics from the College of Medicine are similar. And 
that’s very good. 
 
Minister, the other day I talked to a nurse in Saskatoon, a 
registered nurse with some experience who was concerned 
about the fact that nursing students were being hired at LPN 
(licensed practical nurse) rates to fill positions on units and 
registered nurses, who are looking for more than casual hours, 
were only getting one and maybe two shifts in the week. 
 
And I wonder, Minister, when I think of the good idea of hiring 
nursing students and to get them familiar with the system and 
get them oriented, and get them knowing a sense of worth — I 

think that that’s a good program. But I am concerned when I 
hear that these hands should be extra hands. They are learning 
hands. They shouldn’t be hands that are substituting for the 
hands of professional, fully trained registered nurses. 
 
And, Minister, I wonder if you have any communications with 
the health districts in terms of setting up some policies so that 
the nursing students that are hired by districts — and I want to 
make sure you understand I support that idea — but they should 
be the extra hands. 
 
They should be the hands that make the workplace issues a little 
less pressured and those sorts of issues instead of replacing 
people who are really qualified and trained and looking for 
more shifts. Is there a policy guideline in place for health 
districts that takes care of this danger? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. I think what 
you are referring to is the student senior assist program, and 
these basically are paid summer jobs for these RN students to 
get experience in the system. They’re additional to the RN 
complement. They can’t replace that. They’re not there to 
replace the LPNs. They are there to learn. 
 
Often what happens is that during the regular year, these people 
are the precepts — I think is the term, but the students working 
in clinical areas — and at that point they’re not paid because 
they’re students, and then when the summer comes, they can 
apply and get some of these as summer jobs. 
 
I think it’s probably no different than what I did when I was in 
law school and worked after my first year of law school in a law 
firm. And I don’t think I replaced any lawyers but I learned lots 
of things about that. 
 
And I think it is a very good program. The intention is not to 
replace other workers but it’s to train them. So that’s the basic 
policy around that. And it’s something that the students 
themselves have asked for because it’s a very key part in their 
learning experience. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister, and I concur. The 
question that I’d ask you specific on this: is there a clear 
direction to district health boards so that they do not schedule 
these individuals in replacement of registered nurses, 
particularly when schedules are tight? And sometimes into the 
summer, as you know, every health district virtually in the 
province reduces to some extent services, some more 
significantly than others, because of holiday time and all that 
sort of thing. 
 
Is there is a specific direction from your department that says to 
district health boards that this program is not intended in any 
way to replace registered nurse shifts, but to supplement and 
augment them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think there are two factors that explain 
. . . or answer your question. First thing is that they are not 
registered as nurses, so they can’t work in that role. The other 
thing is that when they take these summer jobs, they become 
members of the unions, whether it’s CUPE (Canadian Union of 
Public Employees) or SEIU (Service Employees’ International 
Union), like the other people within the hospital. So that they 



June 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1681 

 

have their role within the normal labour structure in the 
hospital. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Okay, thank you, Minister. Minister, I 
would like to speak now about the registered psychiatric nurses. 
In discussions with this profession, I find that they are very 
concerned about their demographic future as well. I believe in 
broad numbers there are about a thousand registered psychiatric 
nurses practising in the province. And their concerns are many. 
 
First of all, they’re concerned about the role and the recognition 
of registered psychiatric nurses and how they’re used in the 
health system. There are many instances and there certainly are 
instances of improvement where registered psychiatric nurses 
are used very effectively. But I think they make the point as 
well that mental illness and the issues surrounding mental 
illness and their particular expertise is sort of a silent, quiet 
issue that many times gets overlooked in terms of its 
seriousness. 
 
And they are very concerned about the current configuration in 
terms of how many people are coming out of the NEPS 
(Nursing Education Program of Saskatchewan) program, which 
is the integrated Nursing Education Program of Saskatchewan. 
And I believe they’ve told me is that they’re only finding that of 
the number of graduates coming out of the program, that very, 
very few, like under . . . in single-digit numbers are coming out 
graduating as registered psychiatric nurses. 
 
And I would like you to comment if you have any concerns 
about the effectiveness of the NEPS program of meeting 
anticipated future needs for registered psychiatrist nurses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The whole area of the role of the psych 
nurses in Saskatchewan is one that I think we will continue to 
have some discussion around. I’d like to give you a little bit of 
good news about the psych nurses in the fact that, you know, 
we have a bursary program for re-entry of people to come back 
and work in the profession after they’ve been out. And of the 
bursaries that have gone out, there are 13 of them that have 
gone for psych nurses to come back into the profession. So 
that’s a positive sign. 
 
Now one of the difficulties obviously is that there are 
equivalent . . . equivalencies between the psych nurses’ jobs and 
the RN jobs, and there’s slightly more mobility with an RN 
designation than with an RPN designation. 
 
But what I think is happening, —and I was at the convention for 
the registered psychiatric nurses — it’s very clear that they have 
some very key skills for use within our whole medical system. 
And they are working together with the Nursing Education 
Program to make sure that their skills aren’t lost in the process. 
The continued discussion I think between SRNA and the 
Registered Psychiatric Nurses Association has allowed them to 
identify the kinds of strengths that they bring together and 
we’re, as the department, part of that discussion. 
 
(12:30) 
 
I would just say that I have a special interest in this area of 
psychiatric care in that my mother — who I’ve mentioned 
before is a dietitian — worked for many years at psychiatric 

hospitals providing dietetic advice. And so I’ve had this as part 
of my growing up experience to hear about the key role that 
psychiatric health care workers provide. 
 
And so I think that I know that the mental health field and the 
psychiatric nursing field is an extremely important one. And 
what we want to do is work together with them to bring this 
unique Saskatchewan gift that we have of the psychiatric 
nursing profession, a very strong psychiatric profession, on into 
. . . as we look at the health care for this century. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, in just 
broad-rounded numbers: there are about 1,000 registered 
psychiatric nurses registered to practice in the province at this 
time; there are approximately 10,000 registered nurses 
registered to licence at this time. If you look at a 20-year career 
cycle you’d need approximately — just on an average 
replacement number — somewhere in the magnitude of 50 
psychiatric nurses and 500 registered nurses on an annual basis, 
if you had everything levelled off and real smooth in terms of 
training. 
 
We certainly are not going to be able to get by, by talking about 
260 registered nurses training positions and then being really 
pleased about an 80 per cent retention rate, because that just 
takes the numbers down to under 200 that are staying in the 
province instead of the 500 of registered nurses. 
 
And on the psychiatric nurses side, I mean if we need an 
average number of 50 a year, if we’re only in single digits — 
and I’m pleased that there are 13 people came back into the 
profession — but again that doesn’t come anywhere near an 
average number of 50. And that’s ignoring the demographics of 
the situation that’s calling for even higher numbers. 
 
The registered psychiatric nurses have voiced serious concern 
about the NEPS program, the Nursing Education Program of 
Saskatchewan, in terms of the result at their end — of 
graduating registered psychiatric nurses. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Minister, that they have actually made a 
proposal to your department about saying that we need to look 
at a specialized training program that focuses more individually 
on psychiatric nurses. And I believe that they were looking at a 
program that’s available from Brandon College, or whatever, 
that they felt really met their needs as psychiatric nurses. 
 
And certainly both issues I think are important ones. There 
needs to be a methodology of helping the registered psychiatric 
nurses replenish their supplies of graduates so that the 
profession will continue to at least offer the level of service that 
they do right now. But the way the demographics are working 
in terms of the output from the NEPS program, it is entirely 
possible that this profession is going to be in serious jeopardy 
not many years in the future as their more senior members are 
approaching retirement age. 
 
Are you looking at specifically the issues that the registered 
psychiatric nurses are raising in terms of their concern about the 
outcome from the NEPS program that’s currently there? And 
are you considering looking at a special program for registered 
psychiatric nurses? 
 



1682 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2001 

 

The Chair: — Order. We’ve had quite a bit latitude in the 
committee as to putting the direction to the Chair or not to the 
Chair. But I think we’re trying to bring it back so that the 
questions are directed to the Chair and through the Chair and 
answers are to the Chair and through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The specific question that the member has 
raised has two aspects or two answers that I can give here and 
possibly further with more questions. 
 
Basically with the Nursing Education Program, the NEPS 
program, the registered psychiatric nurses are part of a process 
that’s going on now together with the Post-Secondary 
Education people as they evaluate that program and look at its 
strengths and its various places where there are things that 
could be improved. And so we are strongly encouraging the 
registered psychiatric nurses to be part of that process. 
 
But we’re also looking at the whole provision of mental health 
services in Saskatchewan. And we anticipate doing a broader 
review of provision of mental health services in Saskatchewan 
where the Registered Psychiatric Nurses Association will be 
involved as one of the key players, along with obviously the 
psychiatrists, psychologists, and other workers that are working 
in that field. 
 
So practically, at that point, there will also be discussion around 
the unique role that psychiatric nurses have provided and also 
the . . . kinds of roles that can be in that area. 
 
So there are two parts to my answer. One is that there is an 
ongoing evaluation of the nursing education program, and I am 
aware of the discussions around possibilities of having a 
connection with the Brandon program. But I think that 
practically, the discussions need to take place around the overall 
nursing education program in Saskatchewan which is 
continuing, and then also we need . . . we’re looking more 
broadly at mental health services. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
Through the Deputy Chair, will the minister undertake to 
address the issue of the fact that the registered psychiatric 
nurses are saying we’ve had this discussion, we’ve looked at the 
NEPS program, and it simply isn’t working. 
 
I mean it’s all well and good, and I think that consultation and 
discussion and dialogue is fine, but it can’t go on forever. And 
quite frankly, the registered psychiatric nurses and their 
professional association are saying this isn’t working. 
 
I mean having further discussion about it is just going to sort of 
prolong the issue. They’re calling for specific initiatives and 
action from the Department of Health and Post-Secondary 
Education perhaps, of saying that the program as it’s structured 
now clearly is not meeting their needs nor is it likely to. 
 
So I appreciate the fact that discussion occurs, and it has 
occurred I believe, from the registered psychiatric nurses’ point 
of view. What is the department . . . And I would like to ask the 
minister, of what are going to be the specific and concrete 
responses to the psychiatric nurses who have identified the fact 
that this program is not meeting their needs? 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The simple answer to the member’s 
question is that the legislation — the Registered Psychiatric 
Nurses Association of Saskatchewan legislation — has specific 
provisions in there whereby the professional organization 
approves the education programs for qualification into the 
profession. There is a specific process of how they do that. 
 
They are in the midst of that process of evaluating the nursing 
program in Saskatchewan and when the process is done, they 
will say well it’s good in this area, there’s some inadequacies 
here. The department is waiting for them to complete that 
process and then give a report and then we can work together 
with them to correct the inadequacies, change the whole 
program, do whatever kinds of things that might be necessary. 
 
So what we are now in the midst of is a process which is part of 
the Registered Psychiatric Nurses Association of Saskatchewan 
legislation and we’re planning to work together with them in 
that process. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, last session 
there was legislation that was passed by the House unanimously 
that licensed practical nurses would operate as an independent, 
self-regulated profession. 
 
I think that the initiatives between the licensed practical nurses, 
the registered nurses, and the registered psychiatric nurses in 
terms of mitigating some of the competitive misunderstandings, 
let me call them, across the nursing field in practice were being 
resolved in terms of a document that came out and talked about 
collaborative practice. 
 
And there was the commitment that a committee representing 
these three professions or these three categories of nursing were 
going to go around the province into different workplaces and 
talk to the local workplace individuals to sort of lay out how 
this collaborative practice was going to function, to hopefully 
mitigate some of the hard feelings and suspicion, and 
competitive tradition that has been developed would be moved 
to a more comparable one, to a collaborative practice. 
 
Can you update the Assembly and the people as to where that 
process is at and how many individual workplaces have been 
visited today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I’m very pleased to give the member 
an update on this process. There’s been at least 10 of these 
visitations. I think they’re going to Swift Current next week and 
North Battleford the week after that. 
 
There also was a presentation at the SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations) meeting where many of 
the people were together. And I know it is also a topic of 
discussion at the SRNA meeting, the LPN meeting, and the 
registered psych nurses meetings that have been held over the 
last number of months. So this is an ongoing process and 
they’re working at it and that’s what’s happened so far. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, I would like 
to turn my attention to the area of technologists a bit, in terms 
of training, etc. From the information that we have, I believe 
from SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology), it outlines the number of seat capacity, the 



June 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1683 

 

number of applications, those enrolled, how many have 
graduated, and how many have left and things of that nature, 
and it’s kind of small. 
 
But I see, for example, that on the medical laboratory technician 
program and the medical radiology technician courses, there are 
16 seats allocated in each of those programs. Now if I’m not 
mistaken, Minister, very recently there were comments made 
from the Regina District Health Board that there was almost a 
dozen people that they needed as an ongoing replacement for 
their personnel. 
 
And I wonder if you would comment on, first of all, are these 
program numbers that I’m looking at correct; and if they are, do 
you think that they’re adequate? 
 
(12:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank the member for that particular 
question. Basically I have information around the medical 
laboratory technologists which has been a recent issue. 
 
In the fall of 2000 — which is just eight months ago, I guess, or 
nine months ago — SIAST increased the number of positions 
by 100 per cent. Basically the plan was 16 positions every 
second year, and now there’s 16 positions every year. So 
basically we doubled the numbers of positions in the last eight 
or nine months. 
 
We also know that this shortage of medical lab technologists is 
a national concern. And there’s a national committee called the 
Advisory Committee on Human Health Resources that actually 
has a specific subcommittee to work on a national strategy for 
allied health personnel, including the medical lab technologist. 
 
This initiative is one that is part of the deputies’ meetings that 
you were asking about the last time we were together and the 
. . . also does relate to some of the national questions about how 
do we provide the technologists that we need within the health 
system. 
 
But I guess I’m pleased to say that this problem was identified 
here; we doubled the number; we’re continuing to monitor the 
situation. And if we need more places, well then we’re going to 
have to look at how we can get more places and that will be 
done together with the Department of Post-Secondary 
Education’s skills training. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One quick 
question before my colleague from Swift Current would like to 
ask some questions. Minister, how long ago was it that indeed 
that the technologists’ programs were cancelled completely in 
this province? Was that from ’93 to ’96? Or when was the 
program virtually cancelled entirely? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The member asked a question about the 
history of the programs over the last number of years. 
 
We, in Saskatchewan, ended up limiting the people entering the 
program for a couple of years while curriculum was 
redeveloped, but we didn’t shut the programs down. We kept 
the . . . the staff kept them working. And then we went to a 
every-other-year entry point, which was the 16 people every 

other year, basically because we didn’t want to shut down the 
program. Other provinces completely closed everything and lost 
the resource that they had. 
 
We, in Saskatchewan, didn’t do that. We’re very happy that we 
didn’t. And now as of last September we basically doubled the 
program and so we have 16 people going into the program each 
year. We’re going to continue to monitor that and basically if 
there’s a greater demand, which it appears that there is, we’ll 
look at some more positions. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. And in passing the 
questions to my colleague, I would like to thank you and the 
officials for your attendance today. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Through you to 
the minister, a question regarding the Swift Current Regional 
Hospital. 
 
The minister will no doubt be aware that daily I’ve had the 
opportunity to present some of the 6,000 petitioners in this 
House from Swift Current and southwest Saskatchewan who 
desire a new facility. The prayer of the petition, I think, is 
reasonable. It asks the government to carefully consider Swift 
Current’s request. 
 
And while I know that maybe no formal request has been 
presented, I guess this question I would ask of you relates 
directly to the estimates we’re considering. If the city of Swift 
Current, if the community and municipalities in the southwest, 
along with the health district came forward to the government 
and met its 65/35 per cent funding requirements for capital 
facilities, what would be the response of the provincial 
government as regards to the Health budget that we’re dealing 
with today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I appreciate the member’s question. 
Basically what happens is we have a whole process that’s 
required to spend money of a capital nature, which then requires 
ongoing operating costs. And it is very much a process where 
you work together with the local community. 
 
And what I’ve discovered in this job, as we go and see projects 
that are at various stages, is that it’s very much a community 
effort over the longer term. But it is a positive process which 
results in some very good projects. And I know that the member 
from Last Mountain-Touchwood and I saw the results on 
Wednesday of this week of a project up in Wynyard. 
 
I think where Swift Current is at, is they’re in this process of 
trying to work with the department officials and the local 
community around the scope of the project. And it’s very 
difficult to make comments of sort of approving or not 
approving around a total project until you know, kind of, what 
the scope is. And that includes the local people obviously doing 
an assessment of what they see their needs are. And then getting 
all the statistical information over the last number of years. And 
then also looking at the demographics of the . . . that the 
member from Melfort was talking about where, where you 
project what kind of a community . . . 
 
Practically, we know Swift Current is a thriving, growing 
community and they have some needs that will have to be 



1684 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2001 

 

addressed. And our plan is to work together with them to get the 
scope part sorted out so that we can look at the longer term. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, just 
to say to the minister that his, I think his . . . I think there’s 
some . . . quite a reason for hope in the response that he just 
gave. And I would urge him to be, to be aware that I think that 
kind of proposal may be coming soon from the community. I 
think it would be very much a community-based approach. 
 
And when it comes across the minister’s desk, I ask him to 
consider the fact that the hospital, the hospital was built in 
1948. It hasn’t seen a major capital improvement since ’71. And 
I think some of the issues that my colleague, the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale, has raised with respect to the shortages of staff 
and utilizing what staff we do have better could be addressed in 
a new, integrated facility. 
 
And so I don’t really have additional question other than to urge 
the minister to really consider favourably community . . . a 
community proposal for a new hospital for Swift Current and 
the southwest. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I thank you for that comment and I 
thank both the members for their questions. I move that we rise 
and report progress. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Have a good evening and a good 
weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:55. 
 


