















































Hansard: June 18, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1861 
 June 18, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to present again 
today from people who are concerned about the EMS 
(emergency medical services) report: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Naicam. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I present a petition 
concerning the restoration of old Government House in 
Battleford. And the prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to designate the 
restoration of Territorial House in Battleford as a centenary 
project and provide the necessary funds to complete the 
project prior to the 2005 Saskatchewan centennial. 

 
And your petitioners come from the town of Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the condition of 
Highway 339. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Moose Jaw, Spring Valley, Milestone, Lang, Avonlea, and 
Belle Plaine. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people from southwest Saskatchewan concerned about the state 
of the hospital in the city of Swift Current. The prayer of their 
petition today reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by residents of 
the city of Swift Current, the communities of Waldeck, 
Wymark, Hazenmore, Webb, and Rush Lake. 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 
concerned about the proposals in the Fyke report, and the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take the necessary steps to 
ensure that services are maintained at least at their current 
levels at Weyburn General Hospital, Bengough Health 
Centre, Radville Marian Health Centre, and Pangman 
health centre in order that accessible health care services 
are available to residents of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency and beyond. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Bengough. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding the EMS service in the province, 
and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Redvers, 
Bellegarde, and Storthoaks areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Redvers, Regina, 
Wauchope, Storthoaks, and Antler areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from citizens calling for the immediate 
implementation of province-wide 911 emergency service. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to fulfill its 



1862 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

promise to the people of rural Saskatchewan by 
immediately implementing the 911 emergency telephone 
system province-wide. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Sighed by the good citizens of Rabbit Lake and Glenbush. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to do with the lack of funding to non-profit 
personal care homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Regina, Bredenbury, Esterhazy, Veregin, Togo, and Kamsack. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here of citizens 
opposed to possible reduction of services to Davidson and Craik 
health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum with 24-hour acute care, emergency, doctoral 
services available, as well as lab, public health, home care, 
and long-term cares services available to the users from the 
Craik-Davidson area and beyond. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Craik, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again I rise in the Assembly to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of the constituency of Shellbrook-Spiritwood and their 
regards to the cellular telephone coverage. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
improve reliable cellular telephone service in the districts 
of Spiritwood, Medstead, Glaslyn, Leoville, Chitek Lake, 
Big River, Fenwood, Debden, Shellbrook, Parkside, Shell 
Lake, Duck Lake, and Macdowall. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood, Shell Lake, and Leoville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by folks that are concerned about the heritage Territorial 
House in the Battlefords. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to designate the restoration of 
Territorial House in the Battlefords as a centenary project, 
and provide necessary funds to complete the project prior 
to 2005 centennial celebrations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks from Richard, 
Battleford, Wilkie, and Unity. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with a petition from citizens concerned about the 
future of ambulance service in rural Saskatchewan. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Wood Mountain and Fir Mountain. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Petitions of citizens asking the government to take steps to 
ensure the Kelvington health centre is maintained at its 
current service. 

 
And 10 other petitions that are tabled today as addendums to 
previously tabled petitions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As every 
member will know, later this afternoon we will be unveiling in 
the rotunda of the legislature what are described as the 
millennium busts — the bust of our very first premier, Walter 
Scott; the bust of Tommy Douglas, first CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) premier of the province; and the 
restored bust of Prime Minister John Diefenbaker. 
 
To help us celebrate this very historic event a number of people 
are with us today in the gallery, including, we’re very pleased to 
say, a number of family members of those individuals who are 
we are going to honour in the rotunda later. 
 
And I would ask all members of the legislature, therefore, to 
welcome the following people. First group of people, Mr. 
Speaker, are those who are here as descendants of our first 
premier, Walter Scott. And they have come from quite diverse 
parts of the country and some of them are in Saskatchewan for 
the very first time. 
 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1863 

 

Mr. Speaker, in your gallery are descendants and family of 
Walter Scott; from Ontario, Dr. John McDonald; Dorothy 
Mitchell and her husband, Barry; Carolyn Feasey, and her 
husband, Bob; Alex McDonald, and his wife, Beverley 
Evans-McDonald, and their sons, Ian and Wesley, from 
Winnipeg; and from another branch of the Scott family, Gordon 
Scott from Ottawa, and Arlean Scott-McPherson from Regina. 
 
Members, please welcome these members of the Walter Scott 
family. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And we are delighted that Shirley 
Douglas, daughter of Tommy Douglas could take time from her 
busy life to be with us today for the unveiling. Shirley. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And it’s also my pleasure to welcome 
Mr. Dick Spencer and Mrs. Lily Spencer, former mayor of 
Prince Albert, and a very close friend and associate of John 
Diefenbaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I would also like, Mr. Speaker, to 
introduce, through you to members of the Assembly, the artists 
who have sculpted the three busts. First of all, Mr. Hans 
Holtkamp, who crafted the bust of Walter Scott. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Susan Velder, who did that of T.C. 
Douglas. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And Mr. Leo Mol, the original sculptor 
of the John Diefenbaker bust, first done in 1964, today being 
unveiled restored. Mr. Mol. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And as I said, Mr. Speaker, to our guests 
at lunch today, every good project needs a solid foundation. 
Would you please also, members, welcome Allan Douma, who 
has crafted the marble pedestals on which the busts are placed. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, I also want to 
welcome to our House this afternoon three individuals who 
really need no introduction to this House. First of all the Hon. 
Ralph Goodale, who will be taking part of the unveiling of 
Walter Scott’s bust. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The Hon. Allan Blakeney, who will be 
unveiling the T.C. Douglas bust. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And no stranger to this House, Mr. 
Gordon Barnhart, former Clerk of our Legislative Assembly, 
who has recently written a biography of Walter Scott. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And finally, Mr. Speaker, two other very 
special visitors in your gallery. Mr. Hugh MacDonald, MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for the Edmonton-Gold 
Bar constituency in Alberta, and his son Isaac. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — On behalf of all members, Mr. Speaker, I 
welcome our guests and look forward to participating with them 
in the ceremonies later in the rotunda. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the Premier in welcoming our special guests in your 
gallery this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I too was privileged to be present at a luncheon in 
honour of the families of our first premier, Walter Scott; and 
Premier Tommy Douglas; as well as associates of a 
Saskatchewan-born prime minister, John Diefenbaker. 
 
I was able to personally sit with Mr. Gordon Scott and Ms. 
Arlean Scott-McPherson, members of Walter Scott’s family, 
and I look forward to meeting other family members later in the 
day. 
 
But certainly, the official opposition welcomes each one of you 
to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Also, a very warm welcome to the sculptors. I have to confess, 
Mr. Speaker, that I was probably one of the guilty ones that 
touched John Diefenbaker’s nose, and that’s probably part of 
the reason we have to have the refurbishment. I understand now 
we’ll have two more busts to go along with that one, so that’s 
excellent. 
 
Also I’d like to pass on a warm welcome to the Hon. Ralph 
Goodale, a former colleague of mine when I served in the 
Parliament of Canada; and to Dr. Gordon Barnhart, and the 
other special guests that are here for the unveiling of the busts 
this afternoon. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, Mr. Speaker, again we 
welcome them and would you join with us. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 
of the Liberal caucus, I too would like to acknowledge the 
special guests seated in the gallery today. 
 
Today is a celebration and recognition of the many 
contributions made by three of Saskatchewan’s most dedicated 
and talented leaders. Two former premiers and a former prime 



1864 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

minister have made a colossal input on Saskatchewan’s 
collective destiny in the 20th century and whose legacy is 
remarkable indeed. These three men have shaped the direction 
of this province not only through the policies they promoted, 
Mr. Speaker, but also through the example of their own 
personal integrity and dedication. In these days where people of 
such value seem few and far between, these men were giants in 
their vision, their idea of what this province could be and could 
represent to the world. 
 
They were all pioneers, Mr. Speaker — Walter Scott who 
helped bring this province into Confederation and led it during 
those formative years; Tommy Douglas who brought in a new 
way of thinking in Saskatchewan that made this province a 
world leader in policies such as medicare and leading the 
transition from the Depression to the modern age; and John 
Diefenbaker, who attained the highest office in this land, 
brought in the first Bill of Rights in this country, and proved 
that Saskatchewan people are capable of leading this country 
and that we were and remain a province to be reckoned with in 
innovation and new ideas. 
 
And now as we enter the 21st century, Mr. Speaker, it is only 
fitting that we recognize their achievements on behalf of all 
Saskatchewan citizens with these enduring artistic renditions of 
three truly remarkable men. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I got quite a 
shock a minute ago. I looked up into the gallery and thought I 
saw my father, but in the west gallery is actually his brother — 
Uncle Noel, I call him — Noel Elkin, and cousin Jackie. And 
we always had balance in our family. My father was a union 
organizer but Uncle Noel was an entrepreneur so we kept that 
balance in the family and this is the way that we spent quality 
time together. 
 
So I want you to welcome Noel and cousin Jackie to the 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to, through you and to the members of the 
Assembly, welcome a school group from Lawson Heights 
School in my constituency in Saskatoon. 
 
There are 34 grade 8 students seated in the west gallery with 
teachers, Ms. Tammy Boychuk, Mr. Scott Reeves, and 
chaperone, Mrs. Donella Schatz. 
 
I will be meeting with this group later this afternoon for a photo 
and a quick chat on what they may or may not see in the 
Assembly this afternoon in question period. 
 
But I would ask all members to welcome this school group to 
the Assembly today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Western Canada Farm Progress Show 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Regina is about to play host to the Western Canada Farm 
Progress Show. This annual event put on at Regina Exhibition 
Park runs from June 20 to the 23. Mr. Speaker, I encourage all 
— young and old — to attend the events taking place as there is 
everything from an antique tractor pull to a fashion show. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the MacDon Stadium will be a theatre of 
innovation featuring the new 52 series self-propelled draper, 
auger windrowers, the new 5010 mower conditioner, and high 
clearance self-propelled sprayer. 
 
New to this year’s event, Mr. Speaker, are demos in cattle 
handling and equipment, and the Power Take Off Pub. These 
will be great places for shop talk and the idea exchange, Mr. 
Speaker. Along with the demos and the planned events, there 
will be 50,000 square feet of new-to-the-market machinery and 
products. 
 
Regina will play host to people from an estimated 36 different 
countries attending the show to research and facilitate sales of 
North-American-made machinery and services. 
 
Overall, Mr. Speaker, the Western Canada Farm Progress Show 
has much to offer to all. It is an event that all people will enjoy. 
I would like to congratulate the organizers on what is sure to be 
another very successful show. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Condition of Highway 43 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to read from a 
letter from Mr. Paul Boisvert, editor of the Gravelbourg 
Tribune, in support of maintaining weight limits on Highway 
No. 43 and upgrading its condition. 
 
Mr. Boisvert’s comments apply to many secondary highways in 
this province as well. And he says: 
 

You can’t turn your back on economic development that 
has been 50 years in the making. How much value does a 
government place on a business like Trailtech? How much 
does it place on something like a hospital? There are no 
economic models or studies made to answer those 
questions. What is certain is something so simple as a road 
can be the straw that breaks the camel’s back in terms of 
creating communities that can survive in the newly 
emerging economy. A Trailtech and/or Bickner Trucking 
have established themselves in rural Saskatchewan because 
the area can provide basic needs like a road. If the decision 
is to close down rail lines then why let the roads go to ruin? 
Is it worth putting an entire region of southwest 
Saskatchewan at a disadvantage without first doing an 
economic impact assessment of the kind of wealth 
Highway 43 creates for the region and the province? 

 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1865 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Boisvert’s letter underscores the importance 
of our secondary highways to commerce in this province, and 
the high priority that is placed on our highways infrastructure 
by both rural and urban residents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Week 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During this week, 
people throughout Canada will be wearing a blue cornflower on 
their lapel. The cornflower is a hardy wildflower found across 
Canada, and because of its beauty and hardiness, it is the 
symbol of hope for those suffering from ALS, amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis, or as it’s more commonly known, Lou 
Gehrig’s disease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, smallpox is gone from the face of the earth; polio 
is practically eliminated except for some small pockets in parts 
of the Third World; medical research has even made very 
hopeful advances in the fight against many forms of cancer — 
but the cause of ALS remains unknown and there still is no 
cure. 
 
The purpose of this week and of the cornflower is to raise 
public awareness of this disease and to raise funds for medical 
research. As we know, ALS is a slowly degenerative disease 
which affects muscular function and leads to an inability to 
walk, talk, smile, eat, and sometimes even breathe. The most 
terrifying aspect of ALS though is that through all of this 
physical deterioration a victim’s mind and senses remain clear. 
They are acutely aware of their suffering but they cannot 
articulate their pain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ALS can strike at anyone at any time regardless of 
age, sex, ethnic origin, or state of one’s health. The fact that the 
disease is named after a famous athlete struck in the prime of 
his career tells us how unpredictable it is. 
 
I know all members will join with me in saying a special word 
of thanks to the ALS Society of Saskatchewan for its work in 
raising money and awareness, and in wishing them well during 
this special week. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kenaston Resident to Celebrate 100th Birthday 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to honour a constituent of mine who’ll be celebrating her 
100th birthday on December 6 of this year. Mrs. Francis Brkich, 
who is also my grandmother, has seen an entire century come 
and go. And I have to say she’s a great lady who’s gained a lot 
of wisdom over the past 100 years which she’s tried to pass on 
to me, along with guidance, advice, and abundance of love. 
 
Mrs. Brkich was a true Saskatchewan pioneer who raised a 
family of nine children through some of the most difficult times 
in the history of farming in our province. She has a very big 
heart and spent much of her life helping anybody that needed 
her help. She’s very active in the local church, community, and 
volunteered for church events and community events as well. 
She worked very closely with my grandfather, and together they 

built a life based on the love of family, honesty, and strong rural 
values. 
 
For myself, I look back upon the good visits we have together 
and look forward to many more visits, and of course the 
celebration coming this winter. 
 
My grandmother’s doing great these days and still lives in her 
own home in Kenaston. So you see, Mr. Speaker, longevity 
runs in our family. So if any of the members opposite are 
wondering how long I’m going to be here, I can advise them I 
maybe . . . may live to be 100 years old. 
 
I would ask all the members to join me in congratulating Mrs. 
Francis Brkich on her upcoming 100th birthday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good Food Box Program in Saskatoon 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to draw to your 
attention a program called the good food box in Saskatoon. It is 
an initiative that makes healthy food accessible, supports local 
farmers, and builds community. This program was recently 
featured in Synergy magazine. 
 
Twice a month, Mr. Speaker, volunteers gather at Mount Royal 
Mennonite Church to fill boxes with fresh produce, nutrition 
information, and creative recipes. Customers pre-order and pay 
low prices for the boxes which are delivered in our community. 
Many of the items are locally grown, allowing participants to 
support Saskatchewan producers. 
 
The good food box program was developed in 1998 by the 
community hunger and education program, also known as 
CHEP, in conjunction with low-income families, local 
producers, and Saskatchewan Health. The initiative is open to 
all Saskatoon residents and is growing rapidly. The number of 
good food boxes sold monthly has increased from 40 to over 
2,000. The program is now the second largest of its kind in 
Canada and more can register by calling CHEP at 655-4635. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to reducing poverty 
and hunger in Saskatchewan. Hard work, creativity, and 
community initiative are required to address the challenges 
facing our province and I know we all commend those involved 
with the good food box program. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Liberal Leadership 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m reluctant to mar 
the tranquility of this Chamber; however, that is about to end. 
For too long the Liberal Party has been on the sidelines of 
political debate in this province. For too long I have sat quietly 
in this House. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, well, Mr. Speaker, no more Mr. Nice Guy. 
The gloves are coming off. 
 
Our infrastructure is crumbling, our young people are leaving, 
our farmers are in crisis, patients wait unconscionably long 



1866 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

times for necessary services, a civil servant is fired for 
co-operating with a RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
investigation, Aboriginal people remain outside the mainstream, 
and this province turns in the worst job loss record since the 
Great Depression. 
 
The NDP’s (New Democratic Party) only strategy for building 
our economy is to buy companies in Nashville and Toronto and 
to compete with private business here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We need new vision; we need new direction. I know that not all 
members will welcome the announcement of my seeking the 
Liberal leadership. The reason is simple; they’re scared. They 
know a rejuvenated Liberal Party will decimate them. 
 
In the recent BC (British Columbia) election, the Liberals swept 
to power. The NDP won a measly two seats. And the 
Saskatchewan Party did even worse — they didn’t win a single 
seat. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Trans Canada Trail Volunteer Receives Recognition 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many times during 
this session our government has recognized the great number 
and quality of volunteers we have within the boundaries of 
Saskatchewan. Today, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate one 
of my constituents by the name of Gordon Glen who received a 
five-year pin for his volunteer involvement in the development 
of the Trans Canada Trail. 
 
Mr. Glen is one of the many dedicated volunteers who have 
spent a great deal of time and energy on the development of the 
Trans Canada Trail. Mr. Speaker, he can only be described as a 
jack of all trades in his approach to building of the trail. Mr. 
Glen has flown over, hiked, soil tested, and driven the route and 
potential route of the trail in the Saskatoon area. His knowledge 
and experience from hiking in many parts of the world have 
been important resources in developing trails throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in dedication to volunteers like Gordon Glen, who 
have made the Trans Canada Trail part of the Saskatchewan 
landscape to be enjoyed by everyone, I send out my deepest 
respect and congratulations. This trail will go on to reach many 
generations and bring a sense of unity throughout this great 
land. 
 
I would once again like to thank Mr. Glen and all the volunteers 
who have worked so hard on the development of the Trans 
Canada Trail in Saskatchewan. You truly represent the spirit of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Court Ruling on Termination of former Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority Employee 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday, Justice Larry Kyle 
delivered his ruling in the Joe Dosenberger case. It was a 

scathing indictment of the NDP government that is more 
interested in protecting its political hide than in fulfilling its 
regulatory responsibilities. 
 
Justice Kyle paints an extremely disturbing picture, Mr. 
Speaker, of a mean-spirited, vindictive government that was 
prepared, Mr. Speaker, to destroy the reputation of a respected 
28-year-RCMP veteran in order to cover up their political 
embarrassment. And even now, this arrogant, mean-spirited 
government refuses to admit it did anything wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of this ruling, the NDP owes Mr. Joe 
Dosenberger 10 months salary, but they also owe him an 
apology and his job back. 
 
Will the minister stand in the House today and apologize to Joe 
Dosenberger and give him back his job? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I would want to say today that the circumstances 
surrounding this situation are very unfortunate. 
 
Through this, Mr. Speaker, it should be said that I have never 
doubted the integrity of Mr. Dosenberger or his intent would be 
other than to co-operate with the police, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think that Mr. Dosenberger would need to hear that. That there 
is no way that I would question his integrity or the intent in this 
matter being other than to co-operate with the police. 
 
I regret, Mr. Speaker, the results that this has had on Mr. 
Dosenberger and his career. I hope the decision rendered, which 
we will not appeal, and the court settlement will enable him to 
move forward from this unfortunate situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as the minister said, this was 
indeed unfortunate. It’s unfortunate for the whole province of 
Saskatchewan to have to put up with that kind of 
mismanagement from the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — They just don’t get it, Mr. Speaker. A judge 
has now said Joe Dosenberger was right to co-operate with the 
RCMP and the NDP was dead wrong to fire him. But even now 
the minister refuses to take responsibility. She refuses to 
apologize. She refuses to admit she did anything wrong. Even 
in the face of that court ruling, the cover-up continues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is the NDP going to take responsibility for 
the mess it created in Liquor and Gaming? Will the minister 
take the first step by admitting she was dead wrong to fire Joe 
Dosenberger? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I am the minister 
responsible and I have accepted the court’s decision. And I have 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1867 

 

accepted that procedures and policies within the authority must 
change. 
 
I’ve talked with officials, Mr. Speaker, and they’re informing 
me that we will put in place procedures for ensuring that 
employees are aware that any requests from any outside party 
for confidential documents must be referred to the employee’s 
supervisor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The authority continues to work co-operatively with the police 
at all times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll have more procedures 
which will just give them more opportunity to hide more 
misdoings by this particular government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, it is now clear Joe Dosenberger 
was wrongfully fired for co-operating with the RCMP in a 
criminal investigation. He was fired, Mr. Speaker, for doing his 
job. That sends a clear message to government employees who 
uncover wrongdoing — keep your mouth shut or the NDP will 
fire you. 
 
In his ruling Justice Kyle said that Joe Dosenberger’s job and 
the authority’s was to maintain the integrity of gaming in 
Saskatchewan. His actions were fully directed to that end. He 
had no other agenda, Justice Kyle says, and I quote: 
 

When his zeal was thus rewarded, a chill on regulatory 
diligence may have been the result . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP telling people who uncover the 
wrongdoing: keep your mouth shut or we will fire you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the authority and 
myself and this government is not in any way saying that to any 
employee. We have stated before that if they know of any 
wrongdoing, they could take that to the police. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Dosenberger himself stated that he was not 
able to share information with the authority because he felt that 
it could compromise the confidentiality of police information he 
was gathering. Mr. Speaker, he was also part of developing the 
terms of reference for the intensive audit that took place. 
 
We would want to say, Mr. Speaker, as I stated earlier, that we 
regret how this case has unfolded and the actions that have been 
taken. And we would also say, Mr. Speaker — I would like to 
say — that it has never been the intention to state other than Mr. 
Dosenberger is a man of high integrity and we know the 
intentions of his actions were nothing other than to co-operate 
with the official police. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The only regret on 
behalf of that NDP government is the fact they got caught. They 
got caught in two cases, and they fired both the people that 
uncovered that — both of them. 

The NDP has no interest in truth. They have no interest in 
addressing these serious problems. Their only agenda has been 
to avoid political embarrassment. That was clear in Justice 
Kyle’s ruling. 
 
Justice Kyle said the cabinet document that went to the RCMP 
was a document about damage control, Mr. Speaker, designed 
to cover up a regulatory system that was clearly not working. 
Yet what was the first point of the communication strategy, Mr. 
Speaker? Our system of regulations and safeguard is working. 
Just like in the North Battleford water crisis we had. The NDP’s 
first priority is to tell the public the system is working, even 
when the system obviously was not working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the NDP continue to cover up the truth 
and then punish those who do uncover the truth? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, it must be remembered 
that Liquor and Gaming Authority is a legally constituted 
regulator under the Criminal Code of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, cabinet cannot interfere in the actions that will be 
taken by a legally constituted regulator, and it should be 
remembered that in this case this was a cabinet information 
item only to inform of the circumstances and the actions that 
would be taken as they affect a partnership, Mr. Speaker, and as 
they would be given to the public for information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The moment Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority was 
informed of the problems at SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian 
Gaming Authority) in June of 2000, action was taken. The very 
minute I was informed of that, I was asking our duly constituted 
regulating body to take action, Mr. Speaker. Actions speak 
louder than the words of that member across. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I love that 
quotation: actions speak louder than words. Tell Mr. Joe 
Dosenberger that. He’s seen it. He’s seen it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, Justice Kyle points out that 
after Joe Dosenberger was fired by that NDP government, 
Liquor and Gaming took a number of steps that actually 
weakened its ability to investigate SIGA. They withdrew from 
the Saskatchewan Criminal Intelligence Services. They chose to 
conduct its investigation into SIGA without the aid of Ron 
Ferguson, another former RCMP and their most senior 
investigator. 
 
Again this raises a question: does the NDP really want to get to 
the truth or do they just want to avoid political embarrassment? 
Mr. Speaker, firing Joe Dosenberger for co-operating with the 
RCMP, and then Liquor and Gaming took specific steps to 
avoid any further co-operation with the RCMP. Why? What are 
they trying to cover up? What are they hiding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1868 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about a 
cabinet information item document that was given to cabinet for 
information purposes. Mr. Dosenberger, as I said, the 
circumstances surrounding that are unfortunate and I regret the 
outcome of that and will respect the decisions of the court. 
 
When we talk about Criminal Intelligence Services, Liquor and 
Gaming Authority has never been a part of or attached to that 
group. They are a non-profit organization of police who get 
together to talk about the issues of the day and how they could 
further their investigations, Mr. Speaker. That came out clearly 
in court. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we already know that the reason why the CII 
(cabinet information item) was taken from the file by Mr. 
Ferguson was to find the trail of how many people had the 
documents in their hands. That’s as far as that goes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now further, Mr. Speaker, Liquor and Gaming had been part of 
an intensive audit process that now is the subject of Justice and 
ongoing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we started off this 
afternoon asking for an apology. The hand is barely out of the 
cookie jar and we have nothing but defence and excuses from 
that government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, for weeks the minister has been 
telling us she doesn’t micromanage her department. But both 
Joe Dosenberger and Justice Kyle paint a picture of constant 
political interference in every aspect of SLGAs (Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority) operation. 
 
Justice Kyle said: 
 

Liquor and Gaming knew that misuse of funds had already 
taken place but they lacked the authority or the political 
will to deal with the matter without cabinet direction. 

 
Is what he said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming need 
cabinet approval to investigate the misuse of gambling funds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, Liquor and Gaming 
Authority is a constituted body under the Criminal Code of 
Canada. They have a responsibility to act outside of any 
direction from cabinet in these matters. As a courtesy, they 
would inform cabinet because this involves a partnership, and 
also the public would be notified immediately of the actions 
that would be taken, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the moment that SLGA knew of wrongdoing at SIGA, 
action was taken. Mr. Dosenberger states himself he could not 

make the authority aware of an investigation underway because 
it was confidential police information. 
 
What we did know from our Provincial Auditor is action must 
be taken. And what we did, Mr. Speaker, was have an intense 
comprehensive audit under the direction of our Provincial 
Auditor and the firm Ernst & Young. 
 
The reference terms said that we should look at all of the 
information according to financial records, regulatory action 
that would have to be taken, and all of that information has been 
referred to Justice and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat the quotation. Justice 
Kyle said: 
 

Liquor and Gaming knew the misuse but they couldn’t act 
because they lacked authority or the political will to deal 
with the matter without cabinet direction. 

 
That minister said they don’t need cabinet direction. Everyone 
watching on TV and sitting in the galleries can now choose, Mr. 
Speaker, whether to believe Justice Kyle or that minister. Our 
minds are made up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming need 
cabinet approval to investigate the misuse of gambling funds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, whether or not that 
member understands the function of a duly constituted 
regulator, there is an Act that is in place that states what their 
authorities are; and that’s certainly the point, Mr. Speaker, that 
they have the right to act under the Criminal Code of Canada 
and outside of the purview of this political body. 
 
What they do have the responsibility to do, Mr. Speaker, and 
what I have the responsibility to ensure, is that there was a 
complete intensive audit done of all of the circumstances the 
minute we found out about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The terms of reference were expanded to include many of the 
suggestions that were brought forward from Mr. Dosenberger. 
The final terms of reference required the special audit to 
examine expenses, records, materials, decisions of the SIGA 
board. We took action on behalf of the CEO (chief executive 
officer) there. We pulled the licences of the board members, 
which a regulator can do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we found out about this, we took action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
appears to be a constant political interference in the operations 
of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming, yet the minister refuses to 
take any responsibility for a gaming industry that’s completely 
out of control. Whether she likes it or not, the minister is 
responsible. 
 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1869 

 

She’s responsible for the maintenance of the integrity of the 
gaming industry in this province. She has completely failed in 
that area. 
 
She is also responsible for Joe Dosenberger’s firing. And the 
judge has now ruled that the firing was dead wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is the minister going to take the 
responsibility for the negligence, political interference, and 
cover-ups at Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, on one hand, this 
member has repeatedly said to me, do you not know what’s 
going on in your department and do you not have control of 
Liquor and Gaming Authority. In the area of a duly constituted 
regulator under the Criminal Code of Canada, no, I do not have 
the right to direct or act the authority. 
 
(14:15) 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, I do have the ability to ask 
them to go through a complete auditing process to get 
information to co-operate with the police, which has always 
been done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1999 the Provincial Auditor said: 
 

The operation of commercial casinos in Saskatchewan is 
relatively new. Accordingly, the Authority faces a 
challenge in designing systems and practices to regulate 
and monitor SIGA’s casinos. We think the Authority has 
addressed those challenges well. 

 
He goes on to ask us to continue in partnership to work to get 
complete compliance with the November report, Mr. Speaker, 
and SIGA is complying. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, let’s just review who’s been 
fired at SLGA and who still has their jobs. Joe Dosenberger 
tried to investigate misuse of funds by SIGA and he got fired. 
Bonnie Swan uncovered Liquor and Gaming officials who were 
violating their own Act, and she got fired. Kathy Langlois, a 
judge has now ruled that she was dead wrong in firing Joe 
Dosenberger, but she still has her job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All the Liquor and Gaming officials under investigation for 
taking free trips to the Bahamas, they still have their jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The minister who approved all these firings and even now 
refuses to apologize, she even has her job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why are all the people who did the right thing 
fired and the people who did the wrong thing get to keep their 
jobs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
knows the Wakeling report is due soon and we should wait to 
see the results of that report, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, the members of Liquor and Gaming Authority, 
when they became aware of the financial mismanagement at 
SIGA, informed me of the actions that they would take and I 
informed this Assembly and the public, Mr. Speaker. There was 
no cover-up of information and no trying to hide any of the 
facts. In fact, the exact opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We required an intensive audit process, and in 2000 the 
Provincial Auditor made a number of recommendations 
following the completion of that audit process. The Authority is 
acting upon all of those. 
 
We’ve given that information over to Justice in its entirety, Mr. 
Speaker, and the police are now looking at those. Let’s let that 
process go as it should, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister keeps 
saying how open she’s been with all the information. It was the 
opposition that dragged the truth, kicking and screaming, out of 
her mouth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, no matter how many times, no 
matter how many times the minister tries to wash her hands of 
this matter, she cannot shake the stench of a cover-up and 
corruption. 
 
Justice Kyle delivered a blistering judgment, Mr. Speaker, 
against an NDP government that has lost all its sense of right 
and wrong. The NDP let wrongdoing go unchecked for years, 
Mr. Speaker, and then fires one employee who is trying to 
uphold the integrity of the gaming industry in this province. 
 
The NDP knows the gaming industry is out of control but they 
are more concerned in damage control than in regulatory 
control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the minister to take some 
responsibility; it’s a time for the minister to tender her 
resignation. Mr. Speaker, will the minister hand in his 
resignation today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I am the minister 
responsible and I have accepted the court’s decision and I’ve 
expressed to Mr. Dosenberger and this Assembly my regret at 
the unfortunate circumstances of this incident, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have talked with the authority and I know that things must 
change in the way we tell our officials and our employees of the 
sharing of confidential documents, Mr. Speaker, and those will 
be put in place. 
 
The minute I found out about any misappropriation of funds at 
SIGA, Mr. Speaker, those members were notified; the public 
was notified. We’ve had a process in place to act. 
 
All of the recommendations from the 2000 audit are being acted 
upon, Mr. Speaker. Let the processes now that have been given 



1870 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

over to Justice and the police go forward as they should. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Problems in Gambling Industry 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. The NDP government’s mismanagement of the 
gambling over the past few years has exposed a government 
with a big problem — a government more interested in 
covering up politically embarrassing and potentially illegal 
activities than ensuring integrity in a rapidly expanding 
gambling industry in our province. 
 
The Premier himself, Mr. Speaker, has been a vocal opponent 
of government involvement in the gambling industry. In fact the 
Premier warned more than a decade ago that gambling 
expansion would mean, and I quote: “more prostitution, drug 
trafficking, and other crimes.” Mr. Speaker, it seems like the 
problems may even be greater. 
 
The Premier used his opposition to the expansion of gambling 
to launch his political career. Now that he’s in the Premier’s 
chair, what action is he taking to rein in a gambling industry 
that his government created that is running out of control? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, when the Leader of the 
Opposition stands in the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
and accuses the many, many hoteliers in rural Saskatchewan, 
the many charitable organizations across this province, First 
Nations people of running amuck, Mr. Speaker, he should 
withdraw that kind of statement in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been a very unfortunate set of 
circumstances . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now I’ll appreciate it when the Leader 
of the Opposition clarifies his statement that he just made a few 
moments ago, accusing everyone involved in the gaming 
industry in the province of running amuck. I’ll appreciate when 
he clarifies that conversation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we are involved here in a very unfortunate 
circumstance. The minister, when she became aware through 
the Liquor and Gaming commission of what was wrong, acted 
immediately, Mr. Speaker. There has been much, much public 
disclosure of events. And we are working with the First Nations 
people, with SLGA, to put this thing right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m very disappointed that the Premier is downplaying serious 
exposure of SLGA and SIGA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has asked dozens of 
questions about the NDP’s lack of concern. And we’ve just seen 
that lack of concern expressed by the Premier about the massive 
and potentially illegal, illegal misuse of gambling revenues. 

A retired judge is investigating potential illegal activities within 
the NDP’s Liquor and Gaming Authority. And now another 
judge has ruled that the NDP fired the lead investigator at 
Liquor and Gaming simply for doing his job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has been told by employees and 
investigators and now even a judge, that there is serious 
mismanagement and possibly illegal activity taking place within 
SIGA and the SLGA. 
 
My question to the Premier: will he stand tall and apologize to 
Joe Dosenberger, and will he do the right thing — the right 
thing — fire his minister responsible for the SLGA and lodge a 
full independent inquiry into this mess to clear the air? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, who was it, Mr. Speaker, 
who was it that has asked Justice Wakeling to look into the 
affairs at Liquor and Gaming? Who was it? It was this 
government, Mr. Speaker. And Justice Wakeling will do a 
thorough review and we will have that report soon we 
understand, Mr. Speaker. And when that report is available, it 
will be available to this legislature and to the public, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce a 
motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Recess 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Cannington: 
 

That this Assembly do now recess until 3:30 p.m. for the 
unveiling of the busts of the Hon. T. Walter Scott, the Hon. 
T.C. Douglas, and the restored sculpture of the Rt. Hon. 
John G. Diefenbaker; and that this Assembly will 
reconvene at the call of the Speaker. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1871 

 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 32 — The 
Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2001/Loi de 2001 
modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Responding to Bill 
No. 32, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act. I think the heart 
of government in this case is probably in the right place, but as 
usual we’re not quite sure if what they’re trying to accomplish 
is actually going to be that good. 
 
And the unique thing in this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is 
that . . . what will be happening here is that in any case where 
there happens to be some family difficulties and a possibility of 
a family breakup, that there are now going to be mandatory 
parent education programs. At the beginning of a family law . . . 
and the example given is a divorce proceeding. 
 
Now that in itself is probably not a bad idea except that usually 
by the time the relationship comes to that particular point in 
time, it’s been that badly poisoned that I’m not sure going 
through a parent education program would actually provide any 
kind of a solution to what’s going on. 
 
There’s a lot of other questions that come to mind here and I 
guess they worry us substantially. For example, so these classes 
are going to be set up; they’re going to be mandatory. And I 
guess the mandatory part in itself may not be a particular 
concern. But what exactly are these classes all going to be 
about? How are they going to be taught? What’s the content of 
those particular classes? As usual, that’s being left up to 
regulations. 
 
So we’re asked at this particular point to accept the concept that 
there will be some mandatory parent education programs before 
or at the beginning of that family law proceeding, but we are 
not given any particular information, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as to 
what will be involved, what the regulations are, and those sorts 
of things. 
 
It appears that these classes are going to be required for all 
couples who become engaged in court fights over 
custody/access issues or child support issues. And that in itself 
is no particular problem. 
 
Now another interesting thing in this is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that the particular individual who launches that family law 
proceeding is then the one that has to run around and find the 
. . . and hand the notice to the other member. 
 
So if all of a sudden this family unit’s fallen apart in a very bad 
way, you could essentially force the one member who is 
initiating the proceedings to travel essentially all over the 
province, maybe North America, trying to find this other 
individual because they’re the ones that have to hand off that 
notice to require those particular classes. 
 
And I think that’s going to create some odd situations down the 
road. And I have no doubt that at some point government may 
have to come back with an amending piece of legislation to 
clear this up. 
 
As I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what will those classes consist 

of? And what we’re not told is exactly what the government 
hopes to accomplish through those classes. Is this, you know, 
similar to putting up those signs on the highway, just an 
employment opportunity. Are they hoping to get some 
reconciliation going? Are they basically saying well, if this 
marriage unit is broken up, here is how to do this most amiably 
and here’s how to continue on with your life. 
 
None of those things are listed in this piece of legislation. So we 
really have no idea, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where this is going in 
that area, and again, as I said, that’s up to regulations. And I 
guess we’ll have to watch and wait, and obviously with some 
fear and trepidation as usual. 
 
(15:45) 
 
I’ve discussed in this House earlier on this spring and winter, 
the penchant this government has for inventing the wheel. And 
so the question is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, did this idea come from 
another jurisdiction? 
 
And it would be nice if, when government comes up with a 
piece of legislation, they would give us that information, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, so that we could go there and see exactly what 
had precipitated that legislation in that particular jurisdiction 
and how it’s working and what the upsides and the downsides 
of that are, or is it just another one of those cases where this 
government has decided to create the wheel on its own again? 
 
This is a very interesting idea. I think the direction or the hope 
that government has here is probably good and we will have to 
take that a little further when we discuss this, and at this point 
I’m prepared to move this on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Political Contributions Tax Credit Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 57, an 
Act respecting a tax credit for political contributions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation is the result of a truly co-operative 
effort between all political parties represented in this Assembly. 
This Bill is the product of an all-party consultation process. It 
has been reviewed by officials within the Department of Justice, 
the Department of Finance, and by the Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
The Act, as the title suggests, provides a provincial income tax 
credit for political contributions made to a political party and to 
an independent candidate during an election period. Under the 
terms of this legislation the taxpayer, both individual and 
corporate, would be entitled to claim a tax credit for 
contributions made to a registered political party or to an 
independent candidate during the course of an election 
campaign. 
 
Receipts would be provided by a political party or an 
independent candidate’s business manager. 



1872 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

Under the terms of the Act the political parties bear reporting 
responsibility for the legislation with the Chief Electoral Officer 
administering the Act. 
 
Under the terms of the Act if the contributor is under $200, the 
amount of the tax credit to be claimed is 75 per cent of the total. 
A contribution of less than $25 will not be considered an 
eligible contribution. 
 
If the total is greater than $200 but not greater than $550, the 
amount of the tax credit would be $150 plus 50 per cent of the 
amount by which the total exceeds the $200. 
 
If the total contribution is greater than $550, the amount of the 
tax credit that a taxpayer is entitled to claim is the lesser of 
$325 plus thirty-three and one-third per cent of the amount by 
which the total $550 and $500. 
 
The Act will appropriate parallel . . . or operate, sorry, parallel 
with The Election Act, 1996 and does not replace reporting 
requirements or disclosure requirements under the Act. 
 
The legislation ensures that an eligible tax credit contribution 
must be a legal contribution under The Election Act, 1996 and 
it must be a monetary contribution. It also recognizes net 
proceeds of a ticket to a fundraiser determined in accordance 
with the formula set out in the legislation as an eligible 
contribution. 
 
The legislation sets out the requirements for an official receipt 
issued on behalf of a registered political party and on behalf of 
an independent candidate, as well as the record-keeping 
requirements for an eligible issuer of a tax credit receipt. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the legislation before you today sets 
out the reporting requirements in the case of an independent 
candidate following an election and the annual reporting 
requirements for a registered political party. 
 
Contravention of this Act or a provision of this Act represents 
an offence and any persons found guilty of such an offence is 
liable on summary conviction to a fine of not more than $5,000, 
to imprisonment for a term not to exceed two years, or both. 
 
The annual cost to the government for implementation of this 
program is estimated to be $625,000. And it should be noted 
that the legislation is retroactive to January 1, 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that this legislation is a move towards 
levelling the playing field between all political parties when it 
comes to raising the necessary resources to carry out the work 
of our respective political organizations. Political parties are a 
fundamental element of our democratic parliamentary process. 
They provide stability and continuity. They ensure political 
representation of political interests. 
 
As legislators, Mr. Speaker, we must recognize the legitimate 
needs of our parties and candidates to adequately, financially 
support. And we must encourage our citizens to support the 
political process with the financial resources to allow political 
parties and independent candidates to present their ideas to the 
public, to ensure that political choices are available, and that 
democracy can indeed continue to offer the best political 

representative our citizens can offer. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And with that, I move second reading 
of The Political Contributions Tax Credit Act. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this Bill is about democracy. It’s about 
levelling the playing field and fairness. It’s about allowing all 
individuals, be they within a political party or as an independent 
candidate, to come forward and seek election with more or less 
the same opportunities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The opportunity that is there doesn’t necessarily mean though 
that all candidates seeking election will have the same 
resources. But it means they have the same access to gain those 
resources, Mr. Speaker, and that’s very critical. 
 
Up until now it’s only been political parties that have an 
affiliation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with a federal entity that would 
have an opportunity to access tax credits. Those tax credits were 
put in place, Mr. Speaker, for two reasons. They were put in 
place to level the playing field for all candidates that all, no 
matter what resources they had available, did have some 
resources available to them. 
 
And the second part, Mr. Speaker, it was tax credits were in put 
place along with spending caps so that candidates could only 
spend up to a certain limit in a campaign. That was, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, done to ensure that those candidates with massive 
resources simply didn’t swamp those candidates who had few 
resources. 
 
And the trade-off for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was the tax 
credit. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what this Bill does, it moves towards levelling 
that playing field; that all candidates, either in a political party 
or as an independent member, have an opportunity to access 
those kind of resources. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this was . . . the planning for this Bill, the 
work, the detailed work in coming to an agreement on what the 
wording meant, how it would operate was done, as the House 
Leader for the government said, was done co-operatively in 
conjunction with the three political parties in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it took a while to get this done, but we’re very 
pleased to see that it happened. I know that discussion on this 
started on this about two years ago, but it’s taken a while to 
bring it in. But we’re certainly very pleased to see it in place, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This Bill is very similar in nature to the way it operates to how 
the federal tax credit operates. We’re not really breaking new 
ground here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we’re following what I 
believe every other province in Canada has, with the possible 
exception of one other — there may be one other province that 
does not have political tax credits for political contributions, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think it’s time that Saskatchewan 
did get into line with the rest of the country on this very issue. 
 
The tax credit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will be made retroactive to 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1873 

 

January 1 of this year. It would be unfair if, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if only contributions from today, let’s say, or from the 
time that this Bill was proclaimed, when it was given Royal 
Assent . . . if contributions to political parties were only given 
after that. 
 
Because clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, monies that were 
contributed prior to today are as equally valid and useful to the 
political parties as money contributed after this day. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are very supportive of this 
particular Bill. We believe that it allows democracy in 
Saskatchewan to be exercised in a fair manner, on a level 
playing field for all members — those in political parties, those 
that are independent members, those that may be in political 
parties yet unformed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or political parties 
that are Saskatchewan-based and do not have federal ties. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re prepared to allow this Bill to 
move forward. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 55 — The 
Miscellaneous Statues Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 
2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Probably in 
most cases, not a bad Bill at all. It’s rather interesting that the 
way the whole thing is worded, it sounds like it’s just collecting 
a whole mishmash of who knows what and we’ll put it in a 
bucket and say we don’t need this any more, which is basically 
what this is all about. 
 
There are pieces of legislation that this Bill addresses that go 
way back. For example, one is The Estate Tax Rebate Act, 
comes from way back in 1969. The relationship between the 
federal and provincial government in taxes has changed since 
then so this Act is no longer necessary and so it gets to be 
repealed. 
 
A more recent one is another one on estate tax rebates, 
reciprocal arrangement Act. Somewhat similar, it comes out of 
1970. 
 
Industrial Towns Act — now that’s an interesting one. It sounds 
like it comes out of medieval England, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
has special provisions to towns, villages, northern communities 
designated as industrial towns and so it’s supposed to regulate 
the physical development of an industrial town. Well it doesn’t 
even give a date on this one so this one’s probably prehistory. 
 
What it does do though, it’s interesting, I think if we look at a 

lot of these things, they’ve been, over the years they’ve been 
efforts by the NDP government to run every facet of life for 
people in Canada, particularly people in Saskatchewan. They 
try and do that throughout Canada as well, but places such as 
British Columbia have told them very specifically what they 
think of the way the NDP wants to run industries. 
 
So that if a town happened to be an industrial town, the 
province would step in and say, now this is how you can be 
developed. Well I would think that if it’s a good enough way 
for towns to develop, as it is presently where the mayor and 
council makes decisions on how the development takes place, if 
that’s adequate for a town that grows for any other reason 
except industry, why shouldn’t it be adequate for an industrial 
town as well. 
 
So it’s one of those ludicrous things that the NDP has put in 
place over the years and now because of embarrassment, they’re 
pulling this out. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Also an interesting one here, Mr. Speaker, is that there’s 
another one being repealed that’s called the Wascana Energy 
Act . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And I’d love to comment on 
the member who said that’s a good one. But Wascana Energy, 
it’s been now privatized basically — the remains of SaskOil, a 
former Crown. The fact is the previous deputy premier I believe 
now works for the company that they were referring to over 
here. 
 
So I can see the NDP on the other side being quite happy this is 
now being, you know, totally set aside and out of the control of 
the NDP because that seems to be where they go to roost after 
they’re through over here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Whether they lose or whether they fall into disrepute and the 
premier moves into a back bench or whatever, they seem to 
move down to Alberta real quick to get themselves just a fine 
job over there — in a private enterprise, I should say. 
 
I don’t recall the last NDP cabinet minister that went over to 
BC and got a job with that NDP government. And I would have 
thought they’d be good at bingo or something like that. There’s 
an opportunity there. 
 
I also don’t remember through the annals of history that any of 
them went down to Ontario and took part in the Bob Rae 
government. 
 
It seems that whenever they are looking for another job they’re 
off to Alberta. It’s that Alberta envy that seems to do that. 
 
Anyways, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s quite a number of Bills 
in here that need to be wound up, and by and large this is what 
Bill No. 55 does. There’s another interesting one, though, that 
needs to be commented on. 
 
Back in 1996 there was a Bill passed called the Crown 
foundations of district health boards which let local people put 
money into their district, so that they could put money in and it 
would be for the benefit of their particular health district. It 
gave, the Act gave the trustees of the Crown foundation 



1874 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

absolute discretion to spend the money as they saw fit. And 
there was quite a ruckus about this in 1996. It’s taken this 
government a number of years but they’re finally getting around 
to getting rid of it. 
 
The irony of the whole thing when we look at Bill 55, is that on 
the one hand this seems to be opening up the door for this NDP 
government to be a bit more friendly to private enterprise, just 
to get some of that government red tape out of the way. And to 
that extent this is just a fine piece of legislation, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
But I think if we paid any attention to what’s gone on in the 
House during the last two, three months, we’ve had time after 
time after time . . . I’m sure the critic for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) must have asked a 
hundred questions if he’s asked one on why is government 
Crowns, why are they buying up another business? And they 
keep doing this. 
 
So on the one hand Bill 55 seems to move them a bit more in an 
area of being a bit more business friendly to the private world, 
to the real world of business, but on the other hand they just dug 
their heels in and if something comes along that looks good, 
they have to buy it. 
 
And you will recall very definitely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it 
wasn’t more than two months ago and the Minister of 
Highways stood in his spot right over there and said very 
definitely, we will grow the economy. Unfortunately that 
wasn’t the end of it. 
 
Then there was a whole lot of information given about how they 
were going to grow the economy through the Crowns. The 
Crowns were going to buy up stuff in Saskatchewan, in Alberta, 
in the US (United States), anyplace in the world. Anything’s for 
sale, the Crowns will buy it up. Probably lose money. 
 
We’ve had a big long list this year. It’s been a whole litany of 
sadness, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of things that they’ve purchased 
which have either lost money on the face of it right directly, or 
just taken Saskatchewan entrepreneurs, people who risk their 
own money, took a chance, had a great idea, moved it ahead 
due to hard work, and this government said, well now that 
someone else’s done the work, I guess we could do it as well. 
So they’ll stand by and watch. 
 
So basically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill No. 55, has a number of 
good areas in that it gets rid of some of the red tape. It is, 
however, ironic that this government is going in two directions 
at the same time and also shows a substantial amount of 
hypocrisy on how this government thinks and how they act, if 
those go off in different directions. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d be prepared to move 
this Bill No. 55 on to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 43 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 43 — The 
Police Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Bill No. 43, 
basically called The Police Act, is the short term of that. I guess 
the unfortunate thing is not so much what this Bill all does or 
doesn’t do — and I’ll go into a few things where it falls short, 
and some places where it may have a good point to it — but 
very specifically that it is actually needed in Saskatchewan. 
That’s the unfortunate part; that’s the sad part. 
 
And part of it again comes down to about this particular 
government’s attitude when we deal on law and order — how 
do they deal with it, how do they deal with situations that are 
questionable — this government has a history of having things 
badly messed up. 
 
If you listened to CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
about four months ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ll recall very 
clearly they did a rerun, a one-hour rerun of a program that 
they, I believe, ran about a year ago in which it dealt with 
Social Services and how they dealt with a particular situation 
that is still in the courts. I believe, matter of fact, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it has been in the courts for seven years, and it’s been 
an unfortunate case. I won’t go into any details of it because 
there’s no merit in that as far as discussing Bill 43 is concerned. 
But what it does do, it shows how this government seems to get 
itself into those sorts of binds. 
 
And the questions that I have asked of me very often is not a 
question of detail on that particular court case, but the question 
is: why would it take so long; why would it take seven years; 
why couldn’t this have been done in one or two? And even I 
guess that most people on the street wonder how something 
going to the courts could take as long as two years, but when 
it’s gone on for this length of time, that’s the question. And I 
think it indicates how this particular government doesn’t know 
where it’s going in that area, in many cases doesn’t know how 
to deal with it. 
 
And then we have The Police Act which deals with procedures 
of dealing with complaints regarding police procedures. And 
that CBC program that I talked about; definitely the police 
procedures were one of them. There was an interviewing that 
was taking place — an interview of a young child —and those 
procedures were questioned. Now how do you deal with those 
complaints? 
 
There are some things in here that I think are good. For 
example, it allows the Vice-Chair of police boards to have all 
the powers of the Chair in the Chair’s absence. And I think that 
makes eminent sense, because obviously we know that the 
Chair won’t always be able to be at every single meeting. So 
what happens if something needs to take place — the Chair 
isn’t there — do we all go home and the problem stays? Bill 
No. 43 allows the Vice-Chair to sort of take over in the Chair’s 
absence. And we do that in most organizations in our everyday 
life, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and so it should be quite acceptable to 
have that happen here as well. 
 
It also indemnifies members of the local police boards against 
lawsuits for actions taken in their role as a board member under 
the Act. And it’ll be interesting because this seems to probably 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1875 

 

offset another Bill that we’re dealing with this spring, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I won’t go into that one at great length, 
but it’s the one that allows for class-action suits so where you 
could possibly have a class-action suit dealing with a whole 
board or a member of that board; in this case the members are 
indemnified in those situations. 
 
It also makes the provisions for the Sask Police Commission to 
issue a province-wide code of ethics — and I think that’s good 
— so that the code of ethics that applies in one city jurisdiction 
or another are exactly the same. I think where the code of ethics 
should have gone a little broader than this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the code of ethics should have gone over to the NDP cabinet 
because when we see what’s been happening with SIGA and 
with SLGA, the firing of people who give information to the 
police, I think a code of ethics is needed more in this NDP 
government across the way than it’s needed in the Sask Police 
Commission. It’s good to see these people have the dignity to 
lead the way. It’s too bad it doesn’t go as far as it should. 
 
It also gives the Board of Police Commissioners the right to 
hold meetings in camera where privacy is deemed necessary. 
And there’s a couple of parts in here that go down the same 
road. It says it also protects an investigator from being 
compelled to disclose information to any member of a police 
force on behalf of the investigator. 
 
As we go through part of that and as we keep in mind, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, what this government’s done with SIGA and 
with SLGA over the past, well, it’s probably a month and a half, 
two months, any time that we see something that says they can 
do things in camera where privacy is deemed necessary, well if 
those things are properly defined there’s probably a place for it. 
We all know from our work on municipal councils and town 
councils that there is a place for in-camera meetings. 
 
But I get a little afraid when this government seems to be the 
one that’s leading the charge for in-camera meetings and 
protecting people from not disclosing things to the RCMP, 
which are two items in Bill 53. We’ve questioned those before 
very seriously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but this government has 
refused to bring forth any amendments to sort of clarify some of 
those situations. 
 
It also says that all hearings are open to the public except cases 
where there’s an ongoing police investigation that would be put 
in jeopardy. Well I would think at first blush we would agree 
with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if there is an ongoing 
investigation taking place you don’t want to ruin that, destroy 
the work that’s been done by opening up to the public. 
 
However, what this Bill . . . where it falls short again is the fact 
that it does not — it does not, and I think that’s important, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — it does not tell us what happens to that 
information on those particular cases after the police 
investigation is over. Does it now become public, or is it now 
kept under wraps forever as we’ve seen this happen with the 
government opposite. 
 
But to the extent that it deals with some positive things, like a 
code of ethics, the Vice-Chair of police boards being able to 
operate as the Chair in the Chair’s absence, and those sorts of 
things, there are some positive things in here. And I think at this 

time we will allow this to move on to the Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Peters: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce in your gallery, Pete and Marg Penner. They’re from 
the community of Rabbit Lake. And I’d like the rest of the 
Assembly to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 37 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 37 — The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Dealing 
with Bill No. 37, An Act to amend the Statute Law, and I would 
like to read a few sentences that were made by our Justice 
minister because it underlines very specifically what this one is 
all about. And I quote, he says: 
 

This Act, Mr. Speaker, makes several very minor 
amendments to a number of existing statutes. It corrects 
inaccurate references, numbering errors, typographical 
errors and other mistakes in statutes. 

 
It’s just amazing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a government that 
can keep on hiring individuals as this government does, still 
can’t get it right. Inaccurate references, numbering errors, all 
sorts of things. 
 
So it’s always scary and you get a piece of legislation and you 
know that it may be wrong just because all the, you know, i’s 
haven’t been dotted and t’s haven’t been stroked. 
 
But at least they’re going through that and I imagine their 
handy-dandy little Apple computer, when they pressed 
spell-check, probably must have found all of these mistakes. 
And so we’re prepared to let this one go on to Committee of the 
Whole as well. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(16:15) 
 



1876 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

Bill No. 38 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 38 — The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2001 (No. 2)/Loi corrective de 
2001 (no 2) be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — As you and I probably both realize there’s 
nothing of great import I could say about this one because of 
what it actually does. 
 
We’re quite aware that this government can probably make the 
same mistakes in both languages so we’re quite prepared to let 
this one go on to Committee of the Whole as well. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 47 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 47 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Domestic Relations) Amendment 
Act, 2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This particular Bill 
is a very interesting one and as you may be aware that I, you 
know, spoke to the public on this one. And one of the . . . 
there’s two things about it that I need to underline. 
 
First of all, in many areas this Bill is totally inadequate and 
doesn’t go far enough. We have some of the provinces in the 
Maritimes, we have Hawaii, and I believe, I think it’s Vermont 
but I’m not sure of that, have taken some of the aspects of this 
Bill a whole lot further. And I think this government was very 
remiss, Mr. Speaker, in not taking it that far. And I’d like to go 
into some detail on what they should have done and could have 
done. 
 
I think on . . . when we’re talking about relations, two people 
living together, and the financial relationship and concern that 
builds up between one and the other and the statement that’s 
there, there’s a lot of groups of people that are left out of our 
legislation here in Saskatchewan. And those are the following, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
For example, if a daughter has stayed home with her father and 
basically made the housework her part of the contribution. The 
father becomes aged and she takes care of him. So over the time 
he basically has . . . whatever equity or wealth there is in the 
family is in his control, the daughter is in there taking care of 
him, should very definitely be taken care of in that relationship. 
But at the end of the day he has a will written out which might 
totally leave her out of the benefits that should be there, 
considering the commitment she has made to that household in 
her life. 
 
We can say exactly the same thing, Mr. Speaker, for a son 
living with his mother, two sisters living together, two brothers 
living together. All those sorts of things, Mr. Speaker, should 
have been addressed. If we’re going to deal with this issue and 
deal with the issue of domestic relations and the responsibility 
of one to the other and how financially one is sometimes sort of 

subject to the other one, this Bill falls very far short of doing for 
the people of Saskatchewan what it should do. 
 
And I believe it’s in one of the Maritime provinces, Mr. 
Speaker, where the situation that they have set up is that any 
two people living in a domestic relationship — and remember 
I’m saying domestic relationship — can draw up a contract to 
sort of cover that off. Where I started off with the example of a 
father and a daughter, where they could say, okay, the daughter 
says: I’m prepared to stay home, take care of you, help take care 
of the house and the yard and all the other sorts of things, but at 
the end of the day I believe I should have the home or I should 
have this or there should be something there for the input that 
I’m putting in into that. 
 
Some of the Maritime provinces have that. We didn’t put that 
into our legislation in Saskatchewan and I think that is highly 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, because I think it could have received 
a lot of very public support in that area. And it’s unfortunate, as 
I said, that our Saskatchewan government has decided not to do 
that. 
 
The other part that comes into that Bill — and that’s where 
some of the controversy comes in — there’s also an adoption 
section in this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, dealing with 
different relationships and adoption procedures and possibilities 
and how those are set up. 
 
That is something that I think the public, by and large, has a 
large concern about. And what I’ve done, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
done a survey in my constituency to see exactly what the public 
support is. And probably another time I’ll go into some of the 
details of how this turned out percentage-wise. But I know on 
that particular aspect, my constituency came out very strongly 
against this particular piece of legislation. 
 
Now just to make sure that I wasn’t just speaking for my 
constituency, I also picked up the constituency of Saskatoon 
Idylwyld and I had exactly the survey done over there — same 
survey, written-out questionnaire worded exactly the same way. 
 
And it was interesting that when it went into the urban area, I 
also had a similar result. That in both my rural area and in the 
urban area, in both cases, people were concerned and objected 
and did not want this Bill passed for those particular reasons. 
 
So those bits of research, those surveys, are being done, that 
polling is being done across Saskatchewan right now as we 
speak. And I’ve talked to a couple of the MLAs who are going 
to be finishing it off in the next couple of days. Mine is done, as 
I said, and I did one urban one as well just to sort of get a feel 
for that as well. 
 
It’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that members 
opposite have particularly polled their people. I haven’t heard 
any of them get up and say we checked with our people in detail 
on this — this is a questionnaire, we did it in a scientific way, 
and here are the results. This is what the people of 
Saskatchewan want. 
 
So first of all, the two things that I mentioned — they didn’t do 
that on the adoption section; and on the other section where we 
talk about domestic relationships and taking care of those 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1877 

 

relationships so that no one is hurt in a financial way — this 
legislation falls very far short. 
 
And for that particular reason, Mr. Speaker, I will be adjourning 
debate on this particular Bill, Bill No. 47 at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 48 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 48 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Domestic Relations) Amendment 
Act, 2001 (No. 2)/Loi corrective (relations domestiques) de 
2001 (no 2) be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Because we know 
of the relationship between Bill No. 48 and Bill No. 47, that 
essentially they’re the same in the information that’s in there, I 
also move adjournment of Bill No. 48 at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 35 — The 
Public Trustee Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a very 
important Bill. It’s a Bill in which we entrust government to 
take care of the financial considerations of people who are less 
fortunate. It might be a young child, it might be someone for 
whatever other reason is not able to handle its own financial 
transactions and the business that’s required to be taken care of. 
 
So we need to take this particular Bill very seriously. Because 
what this Bill does is it ensures, or it’s supposed to ensure, that 
when you have these people who cannot handle their own 
finances that we have somebody that we can trust to do that. 
 
And I’m sure in all of our communities from time to time, as 
MLAs on both sides of the House, we’ve had someone phone 
up and say, well there’s this person who has probably inherited 
a whole lot of money or land or something else, how’s that 
being taken care of? 
 
Well this is exactly what we’re talking about. Bill No. 35 deals 
with the Public Trustee, the individual that essentially . . . or the 
office that takes care of this money, uses it properly for the 
benefit of only that person to ensure that other individuals who 
may want to take advantage . . . and unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 
we know that the world is full of Shylocks and carpetbaggers. 
And so I think essentially what this does is protect some of 
these people against those individuals. 
 
Now having said that, Mr. Speaker, there’s something highly 
unfortunate that’s happened — highly unfortunate that’s 
happened. In the auditor’s report, the last one that came out, the 
auditor found the following: a difference of $490,000 between 
the office’s records and the financial items held by the office on 
behalf of its clients. 

Now I’ve just spent some time, Mr. Speaker, underlying the 
importance of this office because this office probably holds 
more trust, or we put more trust and more faith in this office 
than most other ones just because there is so much money that 
is being handled on behalf of the individuals that have no way, 
no ability to handle it for themselves. Almost half a million 
dollar discrepancy between that. That’s frightening, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When we look at a number of other things that showed up in the 
report — and I won’t go into any details on that — but we’re 
given information such as following. That there was buildings, 
cars, jewellery, on top of the nearly half a million dollars that 
had just been basically lost. So somewheres you had an 
individual in Saskatchewan who for whatever reason was not 
able to take of themselves, and whatever they had inherited or 
owned at one time for whatever reason was now being held by 
government and somewheres in the interim, houses lost track 
of, cars lost track of, jewellery lost track of, and half a million 
dollars. 
 
Now I guess that’s very frightening, that something that is so 
critical for taking care of the most disadvantaged in our land 
would have been dealt with so poorly. 
 
In doing this research for Bill No. 35, I believe there were over 
20 different groups that were represented in a committee 
consultation, and that’s good. I think we have to recommend . . . 
or commend government for doing that. It’s a good step to 
make sure that other people were involved in that. 
 
There are individuals who raise some concern about the power 
of state involved in someone’s life and their financial affairs. 
But let’s just make sure, Mr. Speaker, that we’re all aware that 
this isn’t taking over money and funds from people who should 
be able to take care of themselves. This is handling the money 
and funds from people who cannot take care of themselves. 
 
And to that extent, Mr. Speaker, we will allow this Bill to move 
forward to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 36 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 36 — The 
Public Trustee Consequential Amendment Act, 2001/Loi de 
2001 apportant les modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 2001 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said earlier on, 
the consequential Bill just basically follows through in the same 
vein as the original Bill that has been discussed. Just hopefully, 
the government isn’t going to make the same mistake on a half 
a million dollars in two different languages. So I move that goes 
on to Committee of the Whole as well. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 



1878 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

(16:30) 
 

Bill No. 40 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that Bill No. 40 — The 
Teachers’ Dental Plan Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to stand 
today and discuss the issues that are brought forward in the 
teachers’ dental plan amendment Bill. This is one of only three 
Bills that the Department of Education has brought forward this 
year, and I would imagine that this may be disappointing for 
some school divisions. 
 
But when you recognize that the Bills are the government’s 
vision and plans and changes for a department, and with the 
Role of the School report that was brought forward this year, I 
was hoping that maybe we would see some more issues brought 
forward; the minister rising to report the committee that he had 
put together to discuss and implement some of the issues that 
were brought forward in the Role of the School. But this hasn’t 
been done. 
 
So many of the problems facing this province could be 
addressed through increased education and changes in our 
education system — the Aboriginal issue, the issues dealing 
around health, the smoking issues, even economic development, 
Mr. Minister. I think that increased education is the basis and 
the foundation for the future of this province, and something 
this government has to rely on if we are actually going to see 
the province prosper the way it should be. 
 
I think that the collective bargaining agreement that we saw last 
year, where the potential strike raised a lot of concerns across 
the province in the minds of taxpayers and parents and students. 
I guess we never really know what we have until we’re in 
danger of losing it. And the fear of losing our teachers in the 
school system last year excited a lot of taxpayers. 
 
I think we take our teachers for granted. And the teachers, along 
with the boards of education, held our education system 
together when the government attacked it relentlessly in the 
’90s. There was over $380 million was taken from the 
education system that we should have seen in the ’90s, and the 
teachers were one of the groups of people that paid a heavy 
price for that. 
 
Last fall the boards of education and the teachers worked their 
way through a collective agreement and this dental plan 
amendment Act was part of the agreement that was reached. 
There are essentially two issues that are being dealt with in this 
Bill. 
 
The first issue deals with the changes to the teachers’ benefit 
programs that was signed last fall. The amendment should bring 
greater consistency in the application of teachers’ dental plans, 
especially for those teachers who are working in historical high 
schools and alternate schools such as Ranch Ehrlo in Regina 
and the Radius program in Saskatoon. 
 
Any school that has registered or otherwise recognized by the 

Department of Education must be in receipt of the foundation 
operating grant in order for the teachers to qualify under this 
Bill. Coverage will not apply if the teachers in the school 
belong to a trade union, as they have an opportunity to negotiate 
their benefits directly through their own collective agreement. 
 
The second issue deals with a series of housekeeping 
amendments that are repealing redundant provisions that will 
update terminology. According to the Minister of Education, 
these amendments are required so the collective agreement 
provisions agreed to last fall can be implemented. 
 
So there are a number of questions that I will have for the 
minister, but at this time I move that we forward this Bill to the 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 41 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that Bill No. 41 — The 
Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits 
Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again we’re dealing 
with a Bill, education Bill, and teachers’ superannuation and 
disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the shortage of teachers in Saskatchewan is just an 
example of a number of . . . a group of people that have left this 
province in the past few years — 21,000 people have left in the 
last year. That’s the worst job loss since the Depression. And it 
has impacted every aspect of our economy and the teaching 
profession is one of the areas that has been impacted by job 
losses. 
 
The amendments to this Bill are dealing with teachers that retire 
and teachers that can be hired back for no more than 120 days. 
Both the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) 
and the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) have passed 
resolutions in the last year calling for the government to relax 
the rules regarding the number of days that a retired teacher 
could be hired in a school year. This is directly dealing with the 
fact that there are not teachers available, especially in the math 
and science programs, to deal with the students and the classes 
that are required. 
 
This has impacted education and teachers in two ways. There 
are a shortage of teachers, and the teachers who want to be 
hired back are reluctant to do so because if they went over their 
allotted number of days their pensions were affected. 
 
This is rather a contentious issue for teachers because from their 
standpoint a person’s pension is their entitlement, and legally 
the government is not within their rights to penalize someone in 
this matter. 
 
The other amendments that came forward in this Bill deal with 
various topics. The definition of contributory service is being 
expanded to cover periods of time during which a teacher is in 
receipt of long-term disability benefits, providing that the 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1879 

 

teacher returns back to the classroom. 
 
In a small number of cases the surviving spouse of a deceased 
teacher has been unable to receive a teacher’s contribution and 
interest from the superannuation plan, and these changes will 
prevent future cases from falling through the cracks. And the 
government will now make an appropriate employer 
contributions with respect to the teachers in the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Retirement Plan for those who choose to take 
deferred salary leaves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues again in Education 
that we would like to discuss. And these ones . . . I know that 
this Bill is brought forward in order to relieve the problems that 
we have with the shortage of teachers. And there are 
discussions I would like to have with the Minister of Education 
where we can do this in the Committee of the Whole. 
 
So at this time I’d like to move this Bill forward. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 34 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Lorjé that Bill No. 34 — The 
Saskatchewan Natural Resources Transfer Agreement 
(Treaty Land Entitlement) Amendment Act, 2001 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 34 takes 
care of some things that unfortunately took a long time to be 
taken care of. And it deals with the obligation of Saskatchewan 
to the Government of Canada to assist in the fulfillment of 
treaty land elements with respect to three of the areas in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately it’s taken about a hundred 
years too long to take care of those things, and I think that’s 
highly unfortunate. On the other hand, when we look at how it 
was done, it created a whole lot of other difficult situations. 
 
I think particularly the RMs (rural municipality) over the years 
voiced a lot of concerns about how this suddenly changed tax 
structures, how it changed responsibility for roads, changed a 
lot of those responsibilities; and had, you know, sort of little 
chunks of land here and there that weren’t under their 
jurisdiction. So I think it’s unfortunate, as I said, that this 
wasn’t dealt with a hundred years ago because then that land 
would’ve all been in one, nice, neat package and I think it 
would’ve been to the betterment of everyone else. 
Unfortunately that’s not the case. 
 
So this Bill deals with those three First Nations groups, and to 
that extent I think it’s good. This follows out of some 
legislation passed back in 1992 that didn’t recognize some 
further TLE (treaty land entitlement) settlements that would be 
taking place between 1992 and the present, so this addresses 
that. 
 
Now where the concern comes in, Mr. Speaker, is if we look at 
this Bill it has two parts to it and I mentioned the one part. The 

other part it essentially says, and this clause deals with any 
agreement between the Government of Canada and the 
Government of Saskatchewan, taking us into the future and is 
. . . Again, Mr. Speaker, we have no idea where it’s going to 
take us. We have no idea what those agreements are going to be 
and it’s a little difficult sometimes to give a lot of support to a 
Bill that has some very good aspects to it but then leaves all 
kinds of questions unanswered — major questions. 
 
We just talked in the last few minutes, Mr. Speaker, about some 
of the shortcomings of the land entitlement system, the 
difficulties it created. Now is the Government of Canada, the 
Government of Saskatchewan going to get into further 
agreements which will create some more problems? Likely 
they’ll get into more agreements and likely those agreements 
are going to cause some problems. 
 
And it’s unfortunate that this piece of legislation doesn’t sort of 
list and put some parameters around where this could go and 
what could all happen. And that’s unfortunate but I guess we’ll 
just have to wait and see how it turns out and then have some 
other Bills to deal with that, and we’ll debate that at that time. 
 
So at this time we’re ready to move this to the Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 42 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Lorjé that Bill No. 42 — The Métis 
Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker it’s a 
privilege for me to rise in the Assembly today to speak to Bill 
No. 42, The Métis Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that being of Métis descent and 
for more than 40 years I have lived in a constituency where 
there is a large number of Métis people. During this time, Mr. 
Speaker, I have become personally aware of the many issues 
affecting the Métis people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recognition and respect for the many contributions 
that the Métis have given Saskatchewan is long overdue and 
much deserved. In fact, Mr. Speaker, members on this side of 
the House applaud the minister’s initiative in this area. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, there are some parts of The Métis Act 
that are definitely lacking. One of the most important parts 
surrounds the issue of accountability. We know that in some 
areas of the province, Mr. Speaker, the Métis grassroots people 
have recognized the necessity for stronger accountability 
measures. In spite of their efforts to have these measures 
implemented, they have no results. 
 
We have also heard from a number of instances where financial 
and electoral accountability has been lacking, causing a great 
deal of strife and discontentment among the Métis people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



1880 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, when public funds are used there can only be one 
way of ensuring accountability, and that is to allow the 
Provincial Auditor access to financial statements and other 
irrelevant documents. This Bill unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 
does not have any provisions for this. 
 
The members on this side are very concerned with the 
minister’s apparent lack of insight considering problems of the 
past. 
 
When accountability is lacking, Mr. Speaker, who are the ones 
that suffer? All Métis people suffer, but the ones that suffer the 
highest are the ones . . . the ones that pay the price are the Métis 
children. 
 
Some might ask how this can happen. What this means, Mr. 
Speaker, is that children and families may be denied services 
needed to preserve their economic and social well-being. 
 
We have met with many grassroots people who have expressed 
their concern regarding this Act. In fact the issues that I have 
just talked about are issues that have been brought to our 
attention by these people. 
 
One of the most profound concerns of this Act as it is written, is 
the encompassing power of the secretariat. Grassroots Métis 
people fear their democratic right and influence may be 
compromised as it stands under this existing constitution. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, the minister wants this Bill to go 
through as quickly as possible. And while the Bill does move to 
recognize the many contributions of the province’s Métis 
people, there are some parts of this Bill that we feel must be 
clarified. Given the many concerns that we have brought to our 
attention, we feel that more discussion and consultation should 
take place. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, at this time I will move 
to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(16:45) 
 

Bill No. 39 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Trew that Bill No. 39 — The 
Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2001 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I’m 
pleased to be able to rise in the Assembly today to talk about 
The Occupational Health and Safety Bill, Bill No. 39 — 
redefined definitions and roles of chief mines inspectors to 
ensure person in the position has the necessary qualifications 
and expertise to exercise his or her authority under this Act. 
 
It also, Mr. Speaker, makes it necessary for the person filling 
the role of chief mines inspector to hold a valid licence under 
The Engineering and Geoscience Professions Act. 
 
This Bill also makes it necessary for legislative changes to be 
given to the mines chief or the chief mines inspector. The legal 
authority to do the job. 

Mr. Speaker, many changes are necessary to go along with the 
new mine regulations expected later this year. Both 
Saskatchewan Mining Association and the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour supports these changes. The changes 
being put forward here seem to make a lot of sense and appear 
to be supportive by the industry. That is absolutely vital. 
 
Anyone filling the roles of chief mines inspector must have a 
great expertise in a wide variety of areas given the range of 
mining activity we are lucky to have in Saskatchewan: potash, 
uranium, coal, precious metals, Mr. Speaker. And also possibly 
even diamonds. 
 
The mining industry employs somewhere in the 
neighbourhoods of 20,000 people in Saskatchewan and has an 
annual sales of about $6 billion. 
 
We understand from the industry that the government is 
currently working on a major rewriting of the mining 
regulations in Saskatchewan, and these changes are necessary to 
comply with the other changes. 
 
We should point out, Mr. Speaker, that with the rewriting of 
those regulations, it will probably come even more . . . there 
will probably even come more substantial changes, changes we 
will not see in the legislature for a few years. 
 
I would hope that when the Bill winds up in Committee of the 
Whole, the minister will be kind enough to give us an overview 
of the regulation . . . regulatory changes the government is 
complimenting at present. 
 
One of the chief mine inspector’s major roles is to ensure a safe 
working environment for the 2,000 men and women who work 
in the mining industry which are so very important. 
 
Mining, traditionally, Mr. Speaker, has been a fairly dangerous 
operation compared with others, with the potential for more to 
go wrong, so we need to ensure the safety of the workers, and at 
the same time, make it possible for the mining industry to 
continue to flourish. 
 
That’s why it is so significant that we have heard supportive 
words from both the mining association and the labour 
movement in regards to this Bill. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, at 
this time I would move this Bill onto committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill. No. 1 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 1 — The 
Partnership Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1881 

 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 11 — The 
Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Amendment Act, 
2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 13 — The 
Class Actions Act/ Loi sur les recours collectifs be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 16 — The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2001 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

The Chair: — It being near 5 o’clock, we will recess until 7 
p.m. this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 
 
 


