















































Hansard: June 14, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1803 
 June 14, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petition 
regards two of the government’s Crown corporations. 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy both recently announced significant 
rate increases for residential and business customers. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Saskatchewan residents in Biggar and in Landis. And I’m 
pleased to present the petition on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today from citizens who are concerned about the EMS 
(emergency medical services) report and the impact it will have 
on rural Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Kelvington, 
Saint-Front, Spalding, Naicam, and Quill Lake. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who are expressing interest in the 
maintaining and upgrading of the Saskatchewan road network. 
And the prayer goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ask the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue with its foresight and its vision 
of increasing the funding to $900 million over the next 
three years to maintain and upgrade our thoroughfares of 
commerce. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Crystal Lake, Canora, and Buchanan, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I 
present about 100 pages of a petition from citizens of North 
Battleford hopeful that the Premier’s announcement in North 
Battleford tomorrow will be a positive one. The prayer for relief 

reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to call on the 
provincial and federal governments to provide immediate 
financial assistance to the city of North Battleford in order 
to facilitate necessary improvements to the North 
Battleford water treatment plant. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the capacity 
and condition of the Avonlea dam. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconstruct and expand the Avonlea dam to meet current 
water supply demands, allow for sufficient water supply to 
accommodate proposed economic developments, and 
reduce flooding that has caused significant hardship in 
previous years. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Avonlea and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise yet again on 
behalf of citizens from Swift Current and area regarding the 
state of the hospital, of the regional hospital in Swift Current. 
And the prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition today, and there’s a number of them, 
it’s signed by residents from Swift Current, Vanguard, 
Waldeck, Neidpath, Ponteix, Gull Lake, Stewart Valley, Central 
Butte, Kyle, Moose Jaw, Shaunavon, Eastend, and Hazlet. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to bring 
forth a petition on behalf of citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
who are concerned about the Fyke report. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take the necessary steps to 
ensure that services are maintained at least at their current 
levels at Weyburn General Hospital, Bengough Health 
Centre, Radville Marian Health Centre, and Pangman 
Health Centre in order that accessible health care services 
are available to residents of the Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency and beyond. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Bengough, Radville, 
and Unger. 
 



1804 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2001 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present regarding the deplorable condition of Highway 35 
that goes through the Indian Head-Milestone constituency and 
further. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of life, and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in this area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by people in the Lipton, Fort 
Qu’Appelle, and Qu’Appelle areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present a petition from citizens calling for the immediate 
implementation of province-wide 911 emergency service. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to fulfill its 
promise to the people of rural Saskatchewan by 
immediately implementing the 911 emergency telephone 
system province-wide. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Hafford, Radisson, Krydor, and 
Richard. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to present today to do with the lack of funding to 
non-profit personal care homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Kamsack, Calgary, and 
Stornoway. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again I rise in this Assembly to bring forth a petition regarding 
health care in the Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce current levels of available 
acute care, emergency, and doctor services. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from the 
good centre of Duck Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from citizens 
concerned with the high energy costs. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Neilburg, 
Hafford, and Marsden. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from concerned citizens with 
reference to the EMS report and ambulance service in rural 
Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Ponteix. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Petitions of citizens asking the government to reconstruct 
and expand the Avonlea dam. 

 
And 10 other petitions that are presented as addendums to 
previously tabled petitions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and to all the members of the Assembly, it’s with great 
pleasure that I introduce 35 members of Brunswick School from 
Melfort, Saskatchewan. These students are brought here this 
afternoon by their teachers, Brenda Bessette and Randy Steciuk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I used to live across the alleyway from Brunswick 
School, and many of these young students were always there at 
their best behaviour, and I can assure you, they were never the 
students that used to throw stones at our poodle. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s with great pleasure that I welcome these 



June 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1805 

 

35 students from Brunswick School. We had an opportunity to 
discuss the issues of the day and they’re very knowledgeable. 
And they look forward to their day here in Regina, and I look 
forward to them having a great day and a great weekend. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to all the members of the Assembly the 
grade 5 students from St. Olivier School in Radville. I’d like to 
welcome them and their teacher, Lorrie Bolton. They have with 
them chaperones, Randy Mazenc, Bev Pirio, and Stacey 
Turcotte. 
 
Radville is a very industrious town, and I would like to 
welcome them and wish them all the best as they endeavour to 
study in Radville, and hopefully stay in Radville when they 
grow up. I hope they have a great time and I look forward to 
meeting them later on this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of 
this Assembly, Brent Robertson who is sitting up in the west 
gallery. Brent is with MB Projects Incorporated, a project 
engineering firm from Saskatoon. It’s an amalgamation of two 
Saskatchewan firms and they are keenly interested in helping 
build the province. I have known Brent for many years, and I 
know that he is committed to the development and building of 
this province. I’d like all of us to welcome him here to this 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Why thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of this 
Assembly, a group of grade 6 to 8 students from Stewart Valley 
in my constituency. And, Mr. Speaker, there are 11 students 
with us today in your gallery; in addition to that there are two 
teachers with the group — Kevin Regier is here, as is Sheila 
Pool. Sheila was recently here, Mr. Speaker, participating in the 
social studies teachers’ institute. And so we want to welcome 
her back. 
 
And we certainly want to welcome all of the students from 
Stewart Valley to the legislature and wish them a great visit to 
Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Business Expansion in Saskatchewan 
 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here are nine good 
news stories from constituencies represented by opposition 
members. These are examples of good things happening in rural 
Saskatchewan that all members of the Assembly should be 
aware of and pleased with. 
 
In Churchbridge, the Pump House Fitness Centre recently 

opened for business. And Helson’s Heating, Plumbing and Air 
Conditioning held its grand opening on June 7. 
 
Two businesses in Esterhazy recently celebrated their openings. 
Penny’s House Cleaning and Char’s Wash N’Shine both held 
their grand openings on June 2. 
 
George Lamb and Merv Hunter of Lamb and Hunter Hardware 
in Wynyard have opened a second hardware store in Foam 
Lake. And Foam Lake’s credit union recently celebrated its 
60th anniversary. 
 
In Swift Current, The Quest Business Centre held its grand 
opening on May 30. 
 
Wynyard Technologies has expanded their second business, a 
shrimp fishing operation with a newly built warehouse. 
 
And on a bit of a different note, the Cypress Hills Regional 
Economic Development Authority will aid in the promotion of 
tourism in Saskatchewan’s southwest. The REDA (regional 
economic development authority) will be offering assistance to 
organizers of the Native gathering at Cypress Hills in late 
summer. It is an event that draws thousands of visitors from 
around the world. 
 
I wish to congratulate all these businesses on their new 
ventures. I am sure that all members of the Assembly will join 
with me in offering best wishes to everyone who contributes to 
our province’s economy. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Student Attends National Science Fair 
 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a young 
man in my constituency recently made his first trip to the 
National Science Fair in Kingston, Ontario. Thomas Kerluke of 
Elfros, a 15-year-old grade 9 student, passed through the district 
and regional levels of competition to advance to the nationals 
where he competed in the engineering intermediate category. 
 
During the nine-day encounter he was able to meet with 450 
participants including international visitors from Australia, 
Taiwan, Japan, and Sweden. 
 
Thomas’s entry in the science fair entitled “A Quick Fix for 
Baler Belts,” received an honourable mention in the top 10 in 
Canada. This innovative system allows one person to repair a 
baler belt, which may lead to a commercial venture. 
 
This young teen also demonstrated his initiative and desire to 
ease the often-difficult chore of farm machinery repair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate Thomas and all of the 
Saskatchewan participants who attended and received an award 
at this national competition. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1806 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2001 

 

(13:45) 
 

Royal Regina Golf Clubhouse 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On June 9, I had 
the pleasure of addressing the members and staff at the Royal 
Regina Golf Club about the opening of their new clubhouse. 
 
The Royal Regina, founded in 1899, celebrated its centenary 
two short years ago. That same year, Mr. Speaker, the oldest 
golf club in Saskatchewan also received its royal designation 
from Queen Elisabeth II, a Bill that I was able to help move 
through this House. 
 
And now we have just recently celebrated the dedication of the 
Royal Regina’s new clubhouse. This new facility is something 
to be seen, Mr. Speaker. It is a credit to the vision, commitment, 
and hard work of the directors and members of this fine club. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this time to formally 
recognize the volunteer fundraisers who made this facility 
possible and, of course, the donors. Without people like the late 
Stan Larkin, this vision would still only be a vision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Royal Regina is a vital contributor to the 
tourism and recreation opportunities in our capital city and has 
a national reputation that is second to none. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend the contributions 
and accomplishments of the Royal Regina golf course over the 
past century and congratulate them on their new clubhouse. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cross-Country Champion 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
members, I would like to bring to your attention Amber 
McGowen, a young lady from my constituency who has made a 
name for herself in our provincial cross-country and track and 
field world. 
 
She has won seven provincial championships in Saskatchewan 
high school women’s track and field events, and in three of 
these she has set records. The last record she broke was at the 
track and field championships in Yorkton this June. She flew by 
the 26-year-old record in the 1,500-metre event by 3 seconds. 
Amber has also won two provincial cross-country 
championships and set five records at the NESSAC (North East 
Saskatchewan School Athletic Conference) district level. 
 
Her achievements have been noticed in universities across 
North America and many have been attempting to recruit her. 
Amber has decided to attend Cornell University in New York 
and join a running program that offers many exciting 
possibilities for her. 
 
It is with pleasure, Mr. Speaker, that I ask the Assembly to join 
me in congratulating Ms. Amber McGowen on her list of many 
achievements and wishing her the very best in the future. Thank 
you. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Projects for Highways and Transportation 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, as we all should know by now, 
this government has budgeted a record amount of $311.7 
million for Highways and Transportation, and I would like to 
touch on just some of the new projects. 
 
An innovative road repair technology is currently being tested 
on a 13.2 kilometre section of Highway 31 in west central 
Saskatchewan between Plenty and Dodsland. Improvements 
have also begun on an 18.5 kilometre of Highway No. 6, north 
of Regina, at a cost of 2.5 million. Resurfacing 11.3 kilometres 
of Highway 13, west of Weyburn, will also be taking place. 
Work on this $1.7 million resurfacing project will create 31 
full-time jobs. And finally, road improvements for Echo Valley 
Provincial Park is scheduled to begin in mid-June. 
 
Mr. Speaker, fixing our transportation system is not just about 
paving roads, it’s about preserving our economy, creating jobs, 
and above all, connecting Saskatchewan to the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Commemorative Plaque Unveiled in St. Louis 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Sunday, June 10, I was pleased to join with the citizens of the 
town of St. Louis to celebrate the unveiling of a 
commemorative plaque dedicated to Mr. Hector Tremblay. 
 
In 1954 Mr. Tremblay, who was the president of the St. Louis 
Board of Trade, envisioned a park site dedicated to the memory 
of pioneers who had travelled the Carleton Trail through this 
area so many years ago. 
 
In the spring of 1955 Mr. Tremblay, along with many 
volunteers, embarked on making his vision a reality and 
established Pioneer Park. 
 
In 1966 a centennial project . . . for a centennial project, park 
improvements were made. Waterworks, a kitchen, and picnic 
tables were installed and pine trees were planted along the 
creek. 
 
Because this park was built and named in honour of the 
pioneers in 1955 and is the site of the original Carleton Trail 
overland crossings, the government declared it a historic site, 
and as such St. Louis was entitled to be the proud and happy 
recipient of one of only two existing authentic Red River carts. 
 
A few years ago, the St. Louis Lions Club took over the park 
and since then have made noticeable improvements, necessary 
repairs, and continue with the ongoing maintenance. 
 
To this day, this park stands as a tribute to the memory of those 
hardy, hard-working, and dearly remembered pioneers. And it is 
fitting to commend and thank all of those who have contributed 
to memorializing Saskatchewan history. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



June 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1807 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Praise for New Canada-Saskatchewan Assistance Program 

 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Assistance Program application process has recently been 
praised. 
 
Radio personality Kevin Hursh made reference to C-SAP as a 
rare bouquet for a government program earlier this week. He 
goes on to state that even though due to unforeseen problems, 
C-SAP was late getting declarations out to farmers, the program 
has been quick to issue payments. 
 
The declarations were mailed out to producers on May 25. 
Hursh himself filled out the declaration upon delivery and on 
June 11 received his cheque from Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance. In the words of Mr. Hursh, and I quote, “That is a 
fast turn around for a government program.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems that people in all parts of Saskatchewan 
have praise for the efficiency of this government. That is no 
surprise for the members on this side of the House. Efficiency 
and consistency have been staples in this government’s 
operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working with communities, producers, and 
industry to address the challenges facing agriculture in 
Saskatchewan. And unlike our bewildered opposition, we have 
a plan that supports this government’s goal of a responsive and 
effective government. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Business Expansion in Love, Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
privileged this afternoon to rise and bring recognition in regards 
to one of my constituents. Mary Marshande from the 
community of Love, Saskatchewan has decided that the time is 
ripe for expansion of her tourism business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mary has operated a private campground and 
convenience store since 1990 with moderate success. On last 
Sunday, June 10, Mary opened her new cottage development 
with myself having the honour of cutting the ribbon during the 
opening ceremony, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mary Marshande told me that she anticipates a change in 
government is on the horizon and plans to be prepared to 
participate in the booming economy to follow. It is because of 
the vision of entrepreneurs such as Mary Marshande that 
Saskatchewan’s future will be in good hands, Mr. Speaker. The 
opportunities for tourism expansion has its limits, Mr. Speaker. 
Fortunately we are no way near that limit. 
 
But visionaries such as Mary Marshande ensures that this NDP 
(New Democratic Party) government has not completely 
destroyed the good citizens of Saskatchewan’s initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly please 

join me in congratulating Mary Marshande in the expansion of 
her business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Strike by Health Care Workers 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
day six of the strike by CUPE (Canadian Union of Public 
Employees) members and day two of mediation between CUPE 
and SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations). And while there may be some movement at the 
bargaining table, as far as we know at this very moment there is 
still no deal. 
 
The head of the Regina Health District surgical department, Dr. 
Mark Ogrady, says the cancellations of surgery due to the strike 
are making an already terrible situation worse. He says waiting 
lists are already at an unacceptable level and there is an urgent 
need to increase the capacity of the system. He says, and I 
quote: 
 

We need to get back to a situation where we can retain 
physicians, nurses, and CUPE members. 

 
Mr. Speaker, already 412 surgeries have been cancelled 
according to the Regina Health District. Once this strike is 
settled, what plans does the Minister of Health have to help the 
system cope with the backlog of surgeries and the longer 
waiting lists as a result of the strike? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as we know, the parties are 
continuing their discussions and hopefully they can resolve this 
shortly. 
 
What happens after a labour disruption has taken place is that 
all of the parties get back to work and try to then sort out what 
are the things that need to be done. And so what we know is 
that district management will work together with the 
department and with their staff in their areas and they will make 
plans to deal with some of these extra burdens that are on the 
system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
we discussed yesterday in this House, the continuing labour 
dispute between CUPE and SAHO is having a very detrimental 
effect on the health of long-term care patients in Saskatchewan. 
 
Today the executive director of the Santa Maria nursing home 
in Regina says some patients have been confined to their beds 
for days. She’s concerned about patients developing bedsores, 
dehydration, and poor hygiene. Nutritional needs are also being 
compromised in many situations. 
 
Although they are extremely grateful to the volunteers and 
family members who have come out to provide care, these 
volunteers and family members are only making up about half 



1808 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2001 

 

of the level of care that patients normally receive in the home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hopefully mediation is making progress in this 
dispute. But in the meantime, what has the minister done to 
assess the level of care that is occurring in nursing homes across 
this province affected by this strike? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I have reported before 
and as is reported each afternoon since the strike has started, 
there is a method of contacting all of the affected districts to get 
information from the people who work there about the stresses 
or the places where there are some specific problems, to see if 
there can be some resources provided. The assessment 
continues on an hourly basis. If there is something that comes 
up, the calls come in. 
 
There is a formal assessment in the sense of a phone-around 
every morning and every late afternoon. And what we will 
continue to do is monitor this situation. 
 
Our concern is about these residents. We know that the stresses 
are in the long-term care area. 
 
We would encourage the parties just to continue to work on 
seeing whether essential service arrangements can be made for 
these people. We’re monitoring it very carefully. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have heard from the Regina Health District that CUPE may be 
reassessing its position in terms of providing extra care to some 
workers for Pioneer Village and the Santa Maria nursing home. 
After their original assessment decision not to send workers 
back to provide essential services, there was a lot of concern 
about the level of care that people were receiving in the home. 
And this news of them considering reassessing that position is 
welcome news. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health officials feel that the health status of many 
patients is worsening by the hour and could lead to more serious 
health concerns for these patients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister confirm that CUPE is doing 
another assessment and may be sending workers back to 
provide more services for Pioneer Village and Santa Maria 
home? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can’t confirm 
that specific question, but I do know that they are in ongoing 
discussions between SAHO and CUPE as it relates to a number 
of the districts. And so my sense would be if that’s the 
information that he has then its probably accurate. But I don’t 
have that specific information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
are very hopeful that this is indeed the case. And, Mr. Speaker, 

no one understands better than the long-term care workers who 
provide care on a daily basis just how difficult the situation is 
for out-of-scope people, for family members, and for volunteers 
to provide care on a daily basis. Long hours and staff shortages 
are something they deal with constantly, and the workplace 
issues that are part of this labour dispute must be addressed. 
 
These issues are also the same ones that were very much at the 
centre of the 1999 nurses’ strike but today we’re hearing more 
and more often from nurses that these same issues have not 
been addressed in any meaningful way by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems that no matter how well intentioned 
workers are they just are always let down by this government in 
terms of commitments about long-term working conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister give these health care providers 
his commitment that when a deal is reached any agreement 
dealing with workplace issues will be lived up to by this 
government for once? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the 
members opposite and the public of Saskatchewan that the 
people on this side of the House stand with the workers. We are 
people who stand with these workers. 
 
And what I would like to remind everybody is that on March 27 
that member opposite talked about these specific workers as not 
being important within the health system. We do not believe 
that, but we also believe in the processes that allow for 
resolution of these matters. 
 
And so what I would say to the member opposite is to work 
with the community as we encourage these people to resolve 
their differences so that the care can be provided for our 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 

Terms of Reference for Referral to the 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister of Liquor and Gaming. Mr. Speaker, 
last week the Saskatchewan Party asked the minister of Liquor 
and Gaming to table the terms of reference for Justice 
Wakeling’s investigation of Liquor and Gaming employees and 
the terms of reference of the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner’s investigation of the former minister. 
 
Yesterday the minister provided the terms of reference for 
Justice Wakeling’s investigation, but she is refusing to release 
the terms of reference of investigation into the minister’s 
fishing trip. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the minister refusing to release this 
information? What is she hiding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1809 

 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite 
will know, immediately following the request for the terms of 
reference on the Wakeling review and investigation, I released 
to him from SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority) in writing those terms of reference and again 
yesterday as a response to the question that they asked. 
 
SLGA, Mr. Speaker, would not be conducting or be responsible 
for the review by the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. That’s 
a totally different process and is not being driven in anyway by 
myself or SLGA. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Just a few more things, Mr. Speaker, to add 
to the list of what that minister is not responsible for. Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has been advised that Justice 
Wakeling has now completed his report. Has the minister 
received Justice Wakeling’s report and will she release it today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
understanding that Justice Wakeling has compiled a draft report 
and he has shared preliminary information with Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority. It’s in draft and he wanted a 
chance to speak with officials and others before he would 
complete the final report to me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when that is done, as I mentioned, action will be taken 
immediately following the release of that report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Purchase of Local Company 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the minister responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Last week the NDP government posted the worst 
year-over-year job loss since the Great Depression. According 
to Statistics Canada the NDP has driven over 20,000 jobs out of 
the province in the last 12 months. A lot of people are 
wondering why that is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well one of the reasons is the NDP’s government commitment 
to use taxpayers’ money to drive small business out of the 
province. 
 
Yesterday SaskTel announced the latest example: DLC-West 
(Data Link Canada West). That was one of Saskatchewan’s 
original, private sector Internet service providers. At least it was 
until yesterday when the company’s owner announced he was 
being bought out. And guess who’s doing the buying, Mr. 
Speaker? SaskTel. 
 
Will the minister confirm, will the minister confirm that 
SaskTel has bought a company that already existed here in the 
province? And if so, why does this government continue to 
drive Saskatchewan entrepreneurs from the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the Great Depression 
occurs every time that member gets up to ask a question. 

Mr. Speaker, first of all any time there is any adverse effect on 
small business in Saskatchewan, we don’t want to hear about 
that. And it’s disappointing if that occurs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the facts are, Mr. Speaker, that in this business they are . . . 
in the Internet business there is huge competition with AOL 
(America Online), Mr. Speaker, with Rogers. And, Mr. 
Speaker, in this particular case . . . though I do note the 
president sent a letter out — Mr. Jim Nickel sent a letter out to 
all his customers that says the following. It says: 
 

We have always focused on customer service. It is with that 
in mind that I am pleased to announce we’ve reached an 
agreement with SaskTel that will result in DLC-West 
customers being served with their products and services. 
 
Involving a large local provider (keeping dollars and jobs 
here in Saskatchewan) is the best solution — and SaskTel 
fits the bill perfectly. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says, the minister says 
he too is disappointed that the government is driving 
entrepreneurs out of the province. But he needn’t only be 
disappointed, Mr. Speaker, he ought to do something about it. 
He ought to stop Crowns from competing with small businesses 
in the province. 
 
And in case the minister is under any illusion that the owner, 
who he just quoted, that the owner of DLC-West is happy about 
being driven out of the province, here’s what Jim Nickel the 
president of DLC had to say about doing business in NDP 
Saskatchewan, quote: 
 

For the last number of years it’s become more and more 
difficult to operate a business here in Saskatchewan. 

 
That’s what he said, Mr. Speaker. He also said part of the 
reason for the business decision that he’s made recently is that 
SaskTel wouldn’t provide him a high-speed Internet 
infrastructure he needed for his business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder business and jobs are leaving our 
province when the NDP is forcing them to compete with 
taxpayer-funded Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is the NDP using SaskTel to 
drive businesses like DLC-West out of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In case the member opposite has 
forgotten, Mr. Speaker, he says we ought to be doing 
something. Well we are, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
doing things like we’ve done with Brigadier, with SecurTek. 
And I want to read this letter again, Mr. Speaker, where the 
president of Brigadier Security Systems Ltd. says the following, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

SecurTek has more than 16 dealers in Saskatchewan and is 
providing a much needed service to Saskatchewan people, 
protecting lives and personal property and all the while 



1810 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2001 

 

creating jobs and profits that stay in Saskatchewan. 
 

How can that be more positive for a province needing to be 
more diversified in its revenue and employment base, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
We are doing things, Mr. Speaker, and we’re partnering with 
local businesses and small businesses in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, so that they have an opportunity to stay and survive 
here in our province, competing with many of the large 
multinational companies that are competing here in 
Saskatchewan, not only against the private sector but against 
SaskTel as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the example the 
minister uses to demonstrate that they’re not competing with 
small businesses with the Crowns is SecurTek. It’s well-known, 
Mr. Speaker, that that very subsidiary of SaskTel is driving 
other alarm monitoring businesses out of business in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, while SaskTel is busy driving small 
business and entrepreneurs out of Saskatchewan, the NDP is 
using tactics . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

Advertising Regarding SaskEnergy Rate Increase 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, while SaskTel is busy driving small 
businesses and entrepreneurs out of the province, the 
government is also using taxpayers’ dollars to buy advertising 
designed specifically to prop up a dying government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of late we’ve all been hearing about the 
SaskEnergy ads on the radio and seeing them in the newspaper. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have learned that the cost of those ads is 
$75,000. Mr. Speaker, all of that to tell this story to the 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
These ads should be telling the following story: that the 
government is charging Saskatchewan SaskEnergy customers 
$6.30 a gigajoule while their counterparts in Alberta will be 
getting it for $4.95. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP running a $75,000 campaign 
claiming to save Saskatchewan families money while the 
government jacks up energy rates by 24 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, given the information that 
that member has provided for the public of Saskatchewan on 
SaskEnergy and its rates, there may be some logic in 
SaskEnergy wanting to provide the facts for the public of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. There may be some logic in that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, SaskEnergy is 
fulfilling its obligation to its consumers and to the public of 

Saskatchewan with respect to the rate changes, and that is why 
they are advertising. They’re first of all fulfilling their 
obligation to provide that information. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we live, and SaskEnergy does, in a 
competitive industry now, Mr. Speaker. Isn’t it also logical that 
they might want to provide for the public and their customers, 
Mr. Speaker, information about their rates as well? In an 
industry where the customer and business has an option to go to 
another sector, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s only logical that 
SaskEnergy might want to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The minister is just defending, using taxpayers’ 
dollars, to sell . . . to buy a $75,000 advertising campaign to sell 
a political message which is this: be grateful that we’re jacking 
your rates up by 24 per cent. That’s what the minister said just 
now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for weeks we’ve been listening to the NDP claim 
that they have the lowest gas prices in Canada. Both the 
Premier and the minister have committed to sell natural gas to 
families and businesses at the same rate SaskEnergy pays for 
the gas. 
 
The problem is, is that SaskEnergy has just increased its rate to 
$6.30 a gigajoule, while private companies in Alberta are 
charging their customers $4.95. And SaskEnergy could be 
purchasing gas over the medium term for less than the $6.30 a 
gigajoule. And now . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Must be able to 
. . . Order, please. Must be able to hear the question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Now SaskEnergy is spending $75,000 to try to 
convince Saskatchewan families that they should be grateful for 
paying more for gas than they should have to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is simple. Why is the government 
spending $75,000 in taxpayers’ money on an NDP propaganda 
campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Every time that member gets up, Mr. 
Speaker, he confirms in my mind, and I think in the public’s 
mind, and confirms that he in fact is not the expert that he has 
. . . that he in fact said he was not, so I agree with him again, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to — more for the public of Saskatchewan though, Mr. 
Speaker — I want to point out some of the facts with respect to 
the differential in rates between what SaskEnergy is proposing 
and what that member refers to in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all, it represents two very different buying 
strategies. SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, buys collars and insurance 
and hedges. ATCO, the company that the member opposite 
refers to, buys on the spot. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that price is guaranteed for how long — 24 
hours. Twenty-four hours, Mr. Speaker. It’s guaranteed for 24 



June 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1811 

 

hours. And, Mr. Speaker, if the price goes up and they find their 
gas variance account in deficit, what do they do? They go to the 
rate regulator — they can do that within three days, Mr. 
Speaker — and apply for a higher rate. 
 
The customers from the private company in Alberta have a 
guaranteed rate, Mr. Speaker, that rate for three days, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think I would prefer to deal with SaskEnergy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not just talking about this 
issue in the legislature today. People across the province are 
talking about this ad campaign and SaskEnergy rates. In fact on 
a popular call-in show earlier today, Mr. Speaker, here’s what a 
couple of callers had to say. 
 
Dennis from Balcarres said, SaskEnergy, they’re trying to tell 
me they’re saving me $170 this coming year in energy. Well I 
don’t know who they’re trying to make feel better, but it’s not 
working on me. He says no, I think they kind of jumped the gun 
a little bit by buying this gas right now because Alberta is 
buying it for a dollar or so less. 
 
And Dick from Regina phoned in to say, you know, for the 
second week the cabinet minister in charge of Crowns and now 
joined by the House Leader, he says, refused to answer 
questions from the Swift Current . . . (inaudible) . . . MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) on SaskEnergy rates. 
 
And finally, on the subject of this campaign, Mr. Speaker, Ray 
from Regina had this to say. They’re spending money here and 
there. The propaganda campaign that they’re publishing is 
actually putrid. That’s what Ray in Regina had to say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is he spending $75,000 on an 
NDP propaganda campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
asked a number of questions. I want to first of all respond to the 
first question again, and that is with respect to the differential in 
rates. 
 
Somehow he portrays and tries to portray for the people of 
Saskatchewan, the declining gas prices are a bad thing for 
SaskEnergy customers. Nothing could be more ridiculous, Mr. 
Speaker. Nothing could be more ridiculous. 
 
In the event of lower gas prices — and everyone has 
acknowledged including that member opposite, that we have 
some of the best experts in investing in SaskEnergy — they will 
ensure, Mr. Speaker, that with reduced gas prices, any savings 
that can be achieved will be passed on to its customers, Mr. 
Speaker. We provide that guarantee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in addition, as has been laid out by the independent rate 
review panel, if there is a surplus in the gas variance account 
triggered by the $20 million, they as well will go back and 
apply to provide reductions to SaskEnergy’s customers. 

Reduced gas prices are a good thing not only for consumers in 
Alberta, but they’re also a good thing for people in 
Saskatchewan, 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 

Medical Treatment Provided for Farm Accident Victim 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, today a Cut Knife area farmer, 
Glenn Blackstock, married with three children lies in critical 
condition in a Calgary hospital. How he got there is one of the 
uncounted horror stories in the failure of our health system. 
 
Mr. Blackstock suffered a serious farm accident on June 5. He 
was transported to North Battleford, given painkillers, and 
moved to Royal University Hospital. He was scheduled for 
emergency surgery in RUH (Royal University Hospital) but 
was bumped. His doctor offered to do the surgery in City 
Hospital which was scheduled but then cancelled. 
 
Several days later he was finally flown to Calgary — I 
understand with the intervention of the Health minister — 
finally underwent surgery on June 11 and during the intervening 
six days he was on IV (intravenous) with no food. That is five 
days after a near-fatal accident and in excruciating pain, not 
withstanding the morphine. 
 
My question for the Minister of Health: how does he explain to 
Mr. Blackstock and his family, six days of agony in Saskatoon 
and in the end the cost of a flight to Calgary and the 
compromised condition in which he was left for that many days 
without any treatment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are 
situations that are quite difficult. We know that throughout the 
system the people will work with the doctors and with the staff 
to get the care that can be provided. 
 
I don’t have all of the details around this specific matter. I 
would suspect that the arrangements have been made through 
the Saskatoon District Health around transferring the patient to 
Alberta. But what I would say is that we have to be supportive 
of those people who are making some of these very difficult 
decisions. I assume from what the member opposite has said 
that the man has now received his surgery and we wish him all 
the best. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe the Minister of 
Health does have the information on this file. And in terms of 
supporting the health professionals, his doctor did want to do 
the surgery, was prepared to do it in City if it couldn’t be done 
at RUH, and the system would not permit it because of the 
bureaucracy and administration. That’s my understanding. And 
I think the Minister of Health is in a position to answer that 
question. 
 
Mr. Blackstock’s condition was seriously compromised by 
waiting so many days in pain, on morphine, no food. And he 
continues to be in critical condition. 



1812 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2001 

 

What can the minister say? Is he looking into this situation? 
Does he take it seriously? He says we need to support the health 
professionals, but the fact is Dr. Dust was prepared to do this 
operation and was not allowed to proceed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the characteristics of 
the health system that we have in Saskatchewan, that we have 
in Canada, is that we hire professional people to do the jobs that 
are required. 
 
Our job, obviously as a government, as a legislature, is to work 
to provide resources and support for what goes on. 
 
What we know is that certain decisions must have been made 
within the Saskatoon District Health and then probably in 
conjunction with the Department of Health, not with my office 
but with people within the department, around providing this 
man’s care. I don’t have all the details of that and I’m not at 
liberty to talk about that. 
 
But I would say is that we know, in Saskatoon, that the 
surgeons and the people who are involved with the management 
of surgery within Saskatoon have been working with 
consultants from both within and out of the province to address 
a number of the issues around surgical times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Child Welfare System 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
inform you and members of the Assembly that today the 
provincial government announced a process to seek input from 
families, community groups, First Nations people, Métis 
people, front-line workers, and other stakeholders to explore 
changes to the province’s child welfare system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is a firm believer that there is a 
need to ensure more children and youth are safe and secure 
within their own families and communities. 
 
Based on the input of staff, stakeholders, and the Child Welfare 
League of America, we have made significant improvements to 
the child welfare system in this province over the last few years. 
We recognize that immediate action was required to address the 
most pressing concerns in the system and we also recognize that 
broader system-wide change may be required. 
 
Today I have announced that we are extending our 
consultations to include front-line service providers such as 
schools, health districts, and police. The consultations will 
focus on supporting the community to provide services for 
vulnerable children, youth, and their families and to reduce the 
number of children placed in foster care. 
 
On the other hand, we are also committed to providing higher 
quality care for those children and youth in the care of the 
minister. 
 

We also seek to increase the involvement of First Nations and 
Métis government, children, families, and communities in 
culturally appropriate child welfare services. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we will also focus on developing better accountability measures 
for child welfare services. 
 
Today I have also provided a detailed response to 
recommendations made by the Children’s Advocate to improve 
the system. For children and youth in care, our proposed 
direction will address and go beyond the issues raised in the 
Children’s Advocate report, Children and Youth in Care 
Review: LISTEN to Their Voices. We are committed to a 
comprehensive approach to set a broader framework for change 
rather than trying for a quick fix. 
 
The Children’s Advocate has identified all of government as 
being responsible for the care of children. Her 
recommendations affect a number of specific departments, such 
as Health, Education, and Justice, as well as Social Services. 
The process I announced today will involve these departments 
and other service sectors in responding to the needs of the most 
vulnerable children, youth, and their families. 
 
We are committed to a more open and transparent child welfare 
system and we will be implementing forums to provide the 
government with valuable information as we move in the 
proposed direction over the next three years. We are beginning 
this process now, Mr. Speaker, and I encourage all residents of 
Saskatchewan to take an active part in providing quality 
services to some of our most vulnerable children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2001-2002 provincial budget contains nearly 
$6.25 million in increased funding to address immediate 
concerns in the child welfare system. These measures include 
the addition of 54 positions in child welfare services at a cost of 
$2.25 million. 
 
A strong economy and government initiatives aimed at 
vulnerable families such as the building independence strategy 
have helped Saskatchewan become the only province to have 
experienced a decline in child poverty in each of two successive 
years as reported by campaign 2000. 
 
The Department of Social Services provides services to 
vulnerable children, youth, and families through child 
protection services, services for children and youth in care, the 
16- and 17-year-old program, and the adoption program. 
Approximately 6,700 families receive child welfare services 
from Social Services each year. In addition there are 
approximately 2,900 children and youth in the care of the 
Minister of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am confident that our process for developing a 
new direction in child welfare will build on our successes in the 
past and continue to provide more and improved services for 
the children of this province in the future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand today and make a few comments regarding the 
release that the Minister of Social Services has regarding child 
welfare in the province of Saskatchewan. 



June 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1813 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it certainly would be wise for us to 
compliment the government on finally beginning to listen to 
people and listen to children and listen to the Child Advocate. 
It’s taken this government a long time to realize that there are 
other people out there who have knowledge in the area of 
dealing with children and how we can provide those services. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to compliment the minister on 
looking very carefully at the Child Advocate’s report, taking the 
suggestions very seriously, and indeed, Mr. Speaker, beginning 
to review how Social Services and how children are dealt with 
through the department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, I was one of the many . . . one of the 
MLAs on the committee that’s looking into the issue of child 
prostitution in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if there’s one thing that our committee heard from the 
many presentations that were made to the committee, was the 
fact that it’s important for us to begin to listen to those directly 
affected rather than just listening to people who do not have a 
lot of knowledge, or may not be totally involved in making 
decisions without realizing the implications it may have on the 
people involved. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I believe that’s what the 
minister is talking about today in putting together this study and 
talking to families and to caregivers. Certainly compliment the 
minister on including the First Nations community, the Métis 
people, the front-line workers. 
 
As our committee did hear, these people want to have a voice, 
they want to express their views and put forward their ideas as 
to how we can reach out and meet the needs of the very young 
children as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have in front of us today is certainly, I 
believe . . . and I hope it will mean a move forward in the area 
of how we deliver services to children. I guess when we get into 
estimates, and certainly in other areas, we’ll have some 
questions. 
 
I’m not exactly sure if there was a timeline laid out in regards to 
this study process, Mr. Speaker, but we do believe it’s 
important to talk to people; but as well to get on with the 
process of developing programs, and indeed to meet the needs 
of children so that we don’t have reports as we had recently of 
the number of child deaths that were in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The fact that there are certain cases and needs out there that 
children face and, Mr. Speaker, I believe everyone feels we 
need to do everything we can to provide for the welfare of 
children in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, having said that, we certainly look forward to 
further dialogue with the minister and we look forward to 
hearing from community groups as well, as they make their 
presentations as to how we can deliver a much more efficient 
and caring welfare service to those in need in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, today I have 
received a copy of the annual report for the years 2000-2001 
from the Saskatchewan Information and Privacy Commissioner. 
I hereby table the same. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions no. 231 and 232. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 231 and 232 are tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 10 — The Oil 
and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure this afternoon to rise and make a few comments on Bill 
No. 10. Mr. Speaker, this Bill, The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Act certainly has provided us with some interesting research. 
We are certainly well aware on this side of the House that 
conservation is an integral part of Saskatchewan. It is 
something that as we look back over our history that at many 
times throughout the history of Saskatchewan, conservation and 
protection of our environment has not been well represented. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it has become as we reach that time in our 
history as a province that, that all of us, and especially on this 
side of the House, have come to understand that protection of 
the environment and such things as the Bill such as The Oil and 
Gas Conservation Act needed to be taken quite seriously and 
needed to be looked at and promoted; that our environment is 
protected for not only ourselves and our children, but certainly 
our grandchildren, which we hope, Mr. Speaker, are going to be 
able to find the opportunities to be able to stay here and work in 
this beautiful province. 
 
But as we go through the Bill, Mr. Speaker, we notice that the 
government is setting up a fund or wants to set up a fund in 
order to be able to deal with orphaned wells. Now as we have 
found out through some research and certainly help from the 
government is that there’s about a dozen abandoned wells in the 
province, oil and gas wells, that have not been appropriately 
decommissioned in an environmentally safe manner. 
 
And it’s because of reasons such as that, that the government is 
feeling a sense of responsibility that something needs to be 
done about these wells. And certainly that is quite rightly so. 
 



1814 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2001 

 

(14:30) 
 
But somehow for some reason or other the government of the 
day feels as though what would best help prevent instances 
from happening like this again in the future, Mr. Speaker, 
would be to put a tax on the oil and gas industry. And certainly 
we know that as we measure ourselves and the oil and gas 
industry in this province up against our neighbours, whether 
that be the East or the West or the South or the North, and 
certainly around the world, we find that we have an oil and gas 
industry that are to be the most highest taxed in the world. 
 
And so then we wonder why, Mr. Speaker, the government is 
not being able to find in their oil and gas revenue coffers the 
monies that are necessary to be able to handle these procedures 
as it is. But they feel it quite necessary that for some reason or 
another, Mr. Speaker, that in order for the opportunities that 
happen with these dozen gas wells that they never happen 
again, is that if we tax the industry even further that they may 
become more recognizable of their responsibilities. 
 
When in fact, Mr. Speaker, what could arise is that oil and gas 
companies out there decommissioning wells will begin to feel 
that there’s such a tax burden put upon them that any further 
expenses may actually increase the opportunities for 
inappropriately abandoned oil and gas wells. 
 
And that would be a great concern to those of us on this side of 
the House. And of course, Mr. Speaker, what it’s going to 
provide of course is a great burden on the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan who certainly don’t want to see that. 
 
But we have some questions that had been brought to us by the 
industry on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and it would probably be 
more appropriately if we had a chance to ask these questions in 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 11 — The 
Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Amendment Act, 
2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
in the House today and speak on Bill No. 11, An Act to amend 
The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would appear that this proposed legislation 
would impose a new tax on oil recovered from facilities such as 
cavern disposal, waste processing, water disposal, or water 
injection facilities. 
 
And it’s a bit of a concern, Mr. Speaker, when we hear about an 
added tax onto anything in the province, but especially in the oil 
and gas . . . on oil and gas revenue as we know the oil and gas 
industry is very vital to Saskatchewan. It’s very vital to the 
government in order to balance its budget. And without the oil 
and gas industry doing very well in the past year or two years, 
this government would not have been able to balance its budget. 

And it’s a concern to the people of Saskatchewan that there’s an 
added tax onto this particular area of the oil production. 
 
Now we’re talking about recovering oil from these sites that in 
the past have not been able to be produced. And it’s important 
to our reserves. It adds to our reserves, adds to our production, 
but also it’s an environmental factor getting the oil out. 
 
Besides enhancing our production, naturally getting more oil 
out increases our revenues and also increases the jobs and is 
very beneficial to the province. And when we hear about a new 
tax onto an area like this, it seems that it will be a detriment to 
oil production, and will not be enhancing our production into 
the future. 
 
In the second reading speech the minister responsible 
mentioned that this is a tax instead of a royalty. And that type of 
initiative . . . oil and gas groups have expressed concern time 
and time again. And many of the members on this side of the 
House have also expressed opposition to high royalty rates in 
this province on the oil and gas sector. 
 
We really believe that if the government would take a different 
look at the revenue structure, the royalty structure, the tax 
structure in the oil and gas revenue, we would, as a province, 
benefit much more than we are. We would be competing a lot 
better with the oil producers in Alberta. And of course when we 
do that we would increase our job creation and encourage more 
production in the province. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, deals with freehold lease mineral 
holdings, freehold minerals that are held by individuals, not the 
Crown. So one of the questions we have, Mr. Speaker, is in 
regards to the fair share of profits. The Crown will get their 
share of the profits, but what about the individual that holds the 
freehold oil and gas areas? 
 
Naturally another question coming out of this proposal is just 
how much will the royalties . . . will the government take in, 
and how that will be determined, and what will the number be. 
How much more taxes will this NDP government bring in out 
of this new royalty tax structure? 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, the concern is that raising taxes, or 
higher taxes, what effect that has on the economy, on the oil 
and gas production, when we should be looking at proposals to 
reduce taxes — not increasing them — and by reducing taxes 
make our oil and gas fields more productive and increase 
production in those areas so that we can create more jobs and 
improve the economy that this province needs so badly. 
 
This Bill also seems to give the minister responsible a lot of 
power in this area to change tax levy amounts; to change 
credits, deductions, exemptions, and we have some concerns 
about why the minister would need such sweeping powers, or if 
this is just another way of the NDP controlling the economy in 
this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this back to the 
stakeholders and discuss this Bill in more depth with the oil and 
gas industry and the individuals that hold the freehold areas. 
And at this time I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 



June 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1815 

 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 6 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 6 — The Planning 
and Development Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly am pleased 
to enter into the debate on Bill No. 6, The Planning and 
Development Act. 
 
Several of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, have already spoken to 
this Bill and most of them have indicated that . . . As we look at 
the Bill, it’s actually a very short Bill with a few minor 
amendments. But they are amendments to an Act that deals with 
land use and development and those sorts of things, so I think 
we have to be extremely careful and do our due diligence and 
look at the implications that these amendments may bring to the 
Bill. 
 
On the surface, Mr. Speaker, the Bill has the potential of 
making subdivisions . . . creating some hardships in that area, 
and that’s an area that we certainly don’t want to aid as far as 
making the difficulty of subdivisions. I mean within 
development projects there’s certainly good reasons to have 
bylaws to regulate those sorts of things, but, Mr. Speaker, we 
have to look at amending Acts so that they encourage 
development and not hinder them. 
 
These changes appear to give municipal board greater authority 
over appeals and with regards to subdivisions. And so there are 
some . . . we have some real concerns in those areas, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Although we have quite a number of questions and concerns 
with some of these amendments, I think we probably can have a 
lot of those questions answered in the Committee of the Whole, 
Mr. Speaker. And we’ll be looking forward to asking the 
minister some questions about this amendment and raising 
those concerns at this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 15 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 15 — The 
Credit Union Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is an 
honour for me to rise today to speak on Bill 15, The Credit 
Union Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as with any other Bill, our caucus has reviewed 
this Bill 15 thoroughly, and because The Credit Union Act was 
rewritten in 1998, the changes here — I think the minister’s 
words were, tinkering — there are a few changes, a few 
deletions. 
 

Credit unions have always played an important part in all of 
Saskatchewan whether it be urban or rural. And perhaps, Mr. 
Speaker, they play an even more important part now than ever 
before in small towns throughout this province. We see banks 
pulling out of the smaller centres and the credit union is there to 
ensure that the residents of those communities and surrounding 
rural areas have the available services of a financial institution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues dealing with the 
expanded role of the Conduct Review Committee and the 
impact that will have on the overall responsibility of the board 
of directors. 
 
We also have some concerns regarding the review of credit 
union transactions now that they are not under the direct 
purview of the board of directors and the impacts that will have 
on overall responsibility. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we feel with this too we will be able to ask 
these questions in Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 27 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 27 — The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2001 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we have a few more comments on Bill No. 27, The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act. 
 
The minister, in his comments on second reading back on May 
11, made some clarifications of some of the concerns that we 
had and I’ve had the opportunity to review them. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we do have a few questions that we will be posing to 
the minister in Committee of the Whole and I think those are 
more for clarification. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister makes reference to the fact that there 
will be competitors that will be now using SaskTel’s 
infrastructure and, as a result, there was a need to adjust the tax 
system to ensure that the charge that would be levied on these 
users would be the correct amount based on recent rulings by 
CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission). 
 
The changes that are suggested, Mr. Speaker, seem to be routine 
in that we have an identification or a definition that is now put 
in place for telecommunications capital. And we see the broad 
range of the physical kinds of things that we see at SaskTel, 
whether that’s buried cables or switching stations, etc. 
 
But there are also software programs that are suggested as being 
part of the telecommunications capital. And as a result of that 
definition, Mr. Speaker, you would then use a calculation to 
produce what is going to be referred to, I guess, as a 
telecommunications capital tax. 
 
The minister noted that this will be the tax that will be used to 



1816 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2001 

 

levy against users of the infrastructure system. And that, I think, 
needs to be clarified because in one sense he talks about users, 
and then in his other comments he said: well it’s just routine; 
it’s just putting in place what was required by CRTC. 
 
(14:45) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, those are some of the concerns that have been 
raised by us and by a couple of individuals that we have spoken 
with. 
 
The other clause, 58(1) indicates that it will permit the rate and 
calculation of the special telecommunications tax to be 
prescribed in regulations. No description as to how much that 
capital tax will be, whether or not it will be an impediment to 
any users of the infrastructure program if it becomes too high. 
 
So those are some concerns that I think we can clarify in 
Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker, and I would suggest that 
we can now proceed to have this Bill moved into the 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 28 — The 
Commercial Liens Act/Loi sur les privilèges à base 
commerciale be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take a 
few moments to address this Bill. There are a few 
considerations that I would like to bring to the attention of the 
House and the government today as a result of the particular 
Bill that is before us, The Commercial Liens Act. 
 
When the minister introduced this Bill some time ago, he said 
that basically it was a housekeeping Bill that was intended to 
clean up some of the outstanding Bills, some of the common 
law provisions for liens, and a variety of other things that he 
needed to attend to in this Bill. 
 
And if I could paraphrase some of the highlights of the Bill as 
the Minister indicated in his initial introduction of the Bill, I 
would like to do that now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Bill before this Assembly is intended to provide much 
needed updating of the existing outdated Acts and the common 
law rules regarding the creation and enforcement of liens. This 
Bill will codify the procedure for a lien attachment and 
enforcement. And this Bill will also restrict the value of a lien 
claim, to the agreed upon amount to be paid between the parties 
involved. 
 
Now most significant for a person who faces a lien claim is the 
innovation in this particular piece of legislation — and I must 
say it’s the first time I’ve encountered this — in this particular 
piece of legislation now, an individual facing a lien can have 
the validity of the lien and the amount of the lien quickly and 
easily challenged in court. That wasn’t something that was 
available to people who were facing the consequences of a lien 

previously. 
 
And from the perspective of a small business, the updated lien 
attachment and enforcement procedures set out in this Bill are 
apparently an improvement as they adopt the well-established 
and well-known procedures under the personal property registry 
system. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, having been involved in the farm machinery 
sales business for a number of years before I came to this 
House, I understand how important the personal property 
registry Act is to farm businesses, and also automobile dealers 
in this province. And to have that type of legislation in place as 
it affects liens, I think will be an advantage to various people 
who provide services to the general public in this province. 
 
Businesses will now be able to pursue the enforcement of 
legitimate liens from other provinces. And I think that too is a 
significant improvement in this particular piece of legislation. 
Previously if the piece of machinery or the particular vehicle 
that a lien was placed against was moved out of the province, it 
was almost impossible for the business involved, for the 
dealership involved, to pursue that lien across extra-provincial 
boundaries. 
 
So having that capability made available through this particular 
piece of legislation, I think, is a real improvement. That 
particular portion of the Act avoids . . . or provides for rather, 
the avoidance of having to re-litigate the case in the jurisdiction 
of another province. It can be transferable from this province to 
other provincial jurisdictions. 
 
And finally this Bill also does abolish certain common law liens 
as we mentioned earlier. And a whole series of existing liens 
statutes, such as the garage keepers lien Act; The Hotel Keepers 
Act; The Warehousemen’s Lien Act; and what is left of The 
Mechanics’ Lien Act. It sounds like there have been pieces of 
that particular Act disassembled from time to time in the past. 
 
But all of those particular pieces of legislation are now going to 
be replaced by this particular Act, Bill No. 28, The Commercial 
Liens Act. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to just make a few more 
comments about this particular piece of legislation. While I 
think that we are . . . on the surface of the provisions of this Act 
quite satisfied that it will accomplish what the minister has 
intended, there are some areas that might be a little more 
problematic that we may want to look at more closely in the 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
But having said that, I would move at this time that we let the 
Bill proceed. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 29 — The Student 
Assistance and Student Aid Fund Amendment Act, 2001 be 
now read a second time. 



June 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1817 

 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a few comments to make about, on Bill No. 29, The 
Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund Amendment Act as 
put forward by the government. 
 
I guess mainly this Act is looking at changing the way that 
student loans are administered and administrated . . . the 
administration of them from a private institution to the 
government. And that has some concerns in itself, in and of 
itself that the government will be looking after this now. 
 
I think there’s been some problems over the last couple of years 
and I’ve had calls into my office regarding different situations. 
Whether it was the Canadian millennium scholarship bursary, 
for example, where the federal government was putting some 
money into students and the provincial government pretty much 
swallowed that up. And I guess they spit it out but they spit it 
out in the proportion that the student would have got anyway 
just from the original loan. 
 
And so you know, as I say, there’s some real concern when the 
provincial government is going to take this over. And we’ve 
been hearing back from a number of groups regarding that. 
 
And it’s interesting that the government, when you start talking 
about student loans and post-secondary education . . . and I 
think back and I’ve heard different times as we’ve debated 
issues in the House and asked the government questions during 
question period. 
 
A couple of the questions were regarding the huge increases 
that students are going to be facing in the next year or two at the 
different universities. I believe it’s 17 per cent in Saskatoon and 
9 per cent — I may have those backwards — in the University 
of Regina. No, 15 per cent increase in the university of 
Saskatoon — Saskatchewan and 9 per cent. 
 
And listening to the Minister of Post-Secondary Education get 
up and go on his little minute — I guess is the only time — the 
amount, the amount that he’s allowed in question period, to 
slam back at ourselves for, you know, our policies during the 
last provincial election. 
 
But I do want to make mention to the minister, and also any 
Liberal members that may be sitting on the opposite side, that 
they had some pretty extravagant promises also in the last 
provincial election that they have fell far short of — far short 
of. 
 
I just remember, as a matter of fact . . . and one of the issues 
that I found very, very interesting was in the last provincial 
election — now I could stand to be corrected here — but I 
believe the NDP were promising the first year’s tuition free. I 
believe that’s what the promise was. It was pretty close to that 
— first year’s tuition free. And it was the Minister for 
Post-Secondary Education calls from his seat, yes that was a big 
hit. Well it was a big hit in rural Saskatchewan I’ll say, where 
they lost pretty much every seat that they held. 
 
But it was really interesting as we travelled during that 
campaign and that, that promise came out and that’s all that 
was, was a promise — first year tuition free. And to go from 
door to door and from farm to farm — and that’s right at about 

the time that there was a bit of a farm crisis going on — and 
people, to the person said, do you believe those guys? And 
nobody did obviously, that’s why they lost every rural seat in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But it was really interesting. And I hear the minister blast on 
about our platform, but then when you look at what they 
offered, a free year of tuition, and haven’t even come close. I 
mean this Act doesn’t even address it. I mean yes, they’re 
taking over the responsibility of student loans, but I don’t see 
anywhere in here that I could get a free year’s tuition. 
 
And you should have heard some of the people. And actually, 
you know, it was interesting going from farm site to farm site 
during the campaign saying, will that affect me if I am about to 
lose my farm, can I go to university for a year free of charge? 
And I said well as far as I guess the NDP government is 
concerned, yes, that’s what you can do. And they still didn’t 
vote for them, that’s right. I believe the NDP . . . or that was the 
NDP promise. That was the NDP promise. 
 
Now let’s revisit. I believe the Liberal promise — now I’m just 
trying to remember, I’ve asked a couple of people — but I 
believe the Liberal promise in the last provincial election 
regarding post-secondary education was a thousand dollars; 
okay, here’s a thousand dollars a year to go to university from 
the Liberal government, if they were to form government. 
 
Now I would like to know . . . We’ve heard all the influence 
that the Minister of Education and the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs have had on this coalition government. They’ve had a 
lot of influence on this coalition government. You know, 
you’ve got the government that promised a free year’s 
university and you’ve got the coalition partner that promised a 
thousand dollars, and what have we got? The government 
taking over the administration of the loan program and nothing 
about their promises. 
 
So when you hear the members opposite, the government — 
whether it’s the coalition members or the NDP members — 
talking about the things that they would have done during the 
election and now you listen to what they can do once they get 
into power or have been in power, you think that it was two 
different people speaking is what it sounded like, completely 
different. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, to go from . . . I guess if I was in 
grade 12 again and I was going through that last provincial 
election, just a few years back, when I was in grade 12, I would 
be looking at a free year’s university. But now, now I’m 
looking at . . . Some people are questioning that it would be a 
few years back. Quite a few years back. It’s relative. 
 
But I think that if I was looking at going to university and at 
one point thinking I was going to get my tuition free and now 
realizing that the tuition is going up 15 per cent at the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan), that is quite a slap in the face. To 
go from tuition that would have been free up to a 15 per cent 
increase really, really makes a person wonder. 
 
I believe right now that in this province, when you look at some 
of the numbers that have been released recently with the loss of 
jobs in this province over the last year, it is really astounding 



1818 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2001 

 

and astonishing that we could lose that many jobs in the 
province in one year. And I know the government talks about 
the agriculture sector. But a lot of the jobs that we’re losing are 
jobs that people coming out of post-secondary education are 
going to need to help repay back their student loans. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know, it’s just another slap in the face 
when, if I was in university right now and I’d be looking at the 
job market in Saskatchewan and reading not our statistics, not 
any provincial body statistics, but StatsCanada statistics 
showing the drop of jobs in this province, I tell you, I’d be very, 
very, very, very concerned and I would really question where 
I’m going to set down my roots coming out of university. 
 
I know I’ve accumulated student loans through the four or five 
or six years that I attended university. And I know certainly, 
that pretty much every student that goes through university that 
is building up and increasing their loans to finish school, are 
looking at some day these are going to have to be paid back. 
 
But when you look in the province of Saskatchewan and you 
see that, I believe it’s 21,000 jobs last year were lost, you’ve got 
to be thinking, are they looking in Saskatchewan to repay their 
student loans? I don’t think so. They’re going to be looking out 
of province. And you know, that’s the opposite of what we need 
to have happen. 
 
We need to employ every student that comes out of our 
universities in this province, as well as bring a lot of students 
into the province that have been educated somewhere else, 
where their education has been subsidized by some other 
province coming into our province as opposed to subsidizing 
education for our residents and then have them move out. 
 
It’s a backwards cycle that we’re in, Mr. Speaker, and if it’s not 
turned around in the near future, we’re going to be dire straits. 
And I think nine and a half or ten years of NDP government has 
put us in those straits, Mr. Speaker. So we’re going to have to 
turn that around. 
 
So the student loan amendment Act and student assistance 
amendment Act certainly, although it’s more of just perhaps an 
administration, it just brings back a lot of memories of what 
promises that have been completely broken and it brings back a 
lot of concern of the direction that this government is going, 
which is the wrong direction to help employ the students after 
they get their student loans. 
 
So due to those concerns and more feedback that we’re hearing 
all the time, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we would adjourn 
debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(15:00) 
 

Bill No. 20 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 20 — The 
Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I have the 
opportunity to speak to a Bill that really in my estimation is 
quite important and substantive in some ways, even though it’s 
only an amendment to a piece of legislation that was brought in 
last year. These amendments apply to The Land Surveys Act, 
2000, which was passed by this House just last session, and it 
recognizes the modernization of the survey system in this 
province. 
 
The modernization of course, as you well know, Mr. Speaker, 
was coordinated with the revised and computerized and vastly 
expensive land titles system. Now these amendments to The 
Land Surveys Act were brought in after consultations with legal 
surveyors in this province and the legal community, the lawyers 
that act on behalf of a lot of the property transactions. 
 
I noticed with some interest that both professions identified 
certain changes that would improve the clarity of this particular 
piece of legislation brought to the House last year, and its 
application and also the operation of the legislation. And they 
requested amendments and those amendments have been 
included. 
 
The interesting fact about that, Mr. Speaker, is that this Act 
isn’t even a full year old and we’ve already had to bring 
amendments in after we talked to the groups that were 
interested. It begs the question I suppose, who did the 
government consult before they brought the Act in. It’s 
apparent that some of the changes that were necessitated by that 
piece of legislation were quickly brought to the attention of the 
government by the land survey groups and the legal 
community. 
 
This Bill is really more of a housekeeping measure than 
anything. It’s, for example, clarifying what the search of survey 
records will entail and it revises the sections that pertain to 
monuments. Now monuments are, in the vernacular of the 
surveying world, devices, objects, or landmarks that reference a 
certain parcel of land. 
 
I’m rather happy to see that this kind of Act has come into place 
and that the whole system will be modernized and updated. 
 
And I’m happy for one specific reason, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just over a year ago I had a constituent call my office in which 
he expressed considerable concern with a situation that had 
arisen between himself and a neighbour and a company that 
was doing some oil exploration work in his, in his area. And 
what had happened is the oil company wanted to come in and 
drill a hole. When they found it successful, they needed an 
access road. And to put an access road in they wanted to survey 
the particular route. 
 
When the survey was done — at the expense of the oil company 
I might add — when the survey was done, it was found that the 
current survey was quite a bit different from the results of the 
original survey in that particular area. 
 
Now as you know, Mr. Speaker, this province was surveyed 
quite some time ago with what was considered to be modern 
equipment at that time, but it is not modern in any comparison 
to what we have available today. The new technology that 



June 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1819 

 

surveyors are using for these types of surveys are much more 
precise, much more exacting and produce some different results 
in some places. 
 
What it, what it provided in this particular situation, Mr. 
Speaker, is virtually a dispute between two adjacent landowners 
because the new survey indicated that the old surveyor, the old 
survey mark was out of whack quite a bit. And there was land 
that had been farmed by one individual but actually, legally, 
must have belonged to the other. And now we had an oil 
company that wanted access there and needed to know exactly 
where they could put their road. 
 
You can appreciate the concern that this would engender in a 
situation like that. And the potential for these kinds of conflicts 
could be quite enlarged around the province. 
 
Fortunately having checked this out, most of the original 
surveys done by surveyors more than a hundred years ago were 
very accurate. In most instances over a distance of 1 mile, a 
survey marker has been out, as a rule, no more than about a 
foot. And I got that information from a gentleman who works 
with the Sask geometrics department here in Regina. 
 
But the fact is in rural situations, you know an accurate survey 
would make the difference between disputes concerning fence 
lines, where you’re going to dump your rocks after you’ve 
picked them, who’s going to have access, where you can put 
gates, and who’s farming whose land. So the practicality of this 
particular piece of legislation, updating the survey Act, is 
obvious I’m sure. 
 
We’re encouraged to see this particular modernization of an 
essential government service and we believe that in this 
particular case it was overdue. Now as you are probably aware, 
Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation was necessitated 
by the modernization of The Land Titles Act as well. And with 
the computerizaton and the changes that were happening in the 
land titles provisions of the Act, this survey had, this survey 
material had to be upgraded as well. This particular land 
surveys amendment was necessary to complement The Land 
Titles Act. 
 
As has been mentioned in this House many times in the last 
several weeks, because of the controversy concerning the ISC 
(Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan) issue, 
Saskatchewan was virtually the last province in the country to 
computerize its land titles and land surveys system. 
 
And as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, we believe seriously that 
the Government of Saskatchewan in setting up their new Crown 
corporation to look after land titles really attempted to reinvent 
the wheel unnecessarily, that computerized systems were 
available in other jurisdictions across the country, and that any 
mistakes or errors that had been found to apply to computerized 
systems in other provinces could have been rectified. 
 
Those changes could have been made in a similar system, based 
on the changes in new technology, could’ve been introduced 
here without going through the whole process of coming up 
with our own specialized and unique system. As it turns out, it 
was a very costly system. 
 

When the idea of a computerized land titles Crown corporation 
was introduced in this House, the justification for that was solid 
but the cost estimates weren’t. The cost I think at the time of the 
introduction of that particular piece of legislation was, at the 
outside, $20 million. And as you know from the debate that’s 
happened in this House over the last several weeks, the amount 
of that particular incorporation of a Crown corporation for land 
surveys and land titles has now reached $60 million, and that’s 
after an $11 million loss by the corporation last year. 
 
So while there is a legitimacy to the idea of having a 
computerized, modern system in this province, we think that it 
proved to be far too costly. In fact there was no clear, 
cost-benefit analysis done, or nobody would’ve allowed this 
project to run to a $60 million tab, which is being picked up by 
the taxpayers of this province. 
 
Nowhere in this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, do we see any 
mention of cutting costs either. In fact as is the case with most 
things, when government gets involved with technology, it 
usually ends up costing the taxpayers a whole lot more than was 
originally planned. And the ISC losses and cost overruns that I 
just alluded to a few moments ago, are perfect proof of that 
particular assertion. 
 
Even more troubling, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the cost 
overruns and the controversy that ISC has engendered, is the 
events surrounding a leaked memo that had been written by the 
previous Economic Development minister, Janice MacKinnon. 
If you’ll recall, Mr. Speaker, in that memo, the minister 
expressed her concerns regarding ISC’s mandate, regarding its 
business plans and the potential for unfair competition with the 
private sector. 
 
And what it really amounts to is that the government has just 
given outside companies even more reason not to consider 
investing in this province. When you have a Crown corporation 
with the full authority and all the reserves of the provincial 
government behind it, it doesn’t provide much incentive for 
other companies and other smaller operators to come here in 
any attempt to compete for that particular business. 
 
And we’ve heard of that type of situation developing repeatedly 
throughout this session, where Crown corporations have been 
used to expand into the sectors where really small businesses 
legitimately ought to work and thrive in this province. 
 
So this Bill only serves to enhance the government’s family of 
Crown corporations. It does not look at ways to encourage 
private sector growth. 
 
And we also know that the former Economic Development 
minister had very serious concerns about ISC’s plans to sell its 
LAND (Land Titles Automated Network Development Project) 
system. Now LAND is an acronym that is used by the ISC 
people to describe their land titles program. 
 
The former minister said that she felt that it was far too costly to 
develop to begin with, but worse than that, the chances of 
selling it effectively to any other jurisdiction were virtually nil, 
and would not allow for the corporation to recover, to recoup its 
investment costs, let alone its losses. 
 



1820 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2001 

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, we know that the former 
minister’s warning has so far proven accurate. 
 
And to date, we have one contract on behalf of a $60 
million-plus Crown corporation worth a mere $150,000 which 
comes from the Ukraine in Eastern Europe. 
 
That reminds us of many other ill-advised Crown ventures into 
the IT (information technology) industry, like NST (NST 
Network Services of Chicago) Cable; Clickabid, the failed 
auction house, the e-mail auction house — the on-line auction 
house, I’m sorry; IQ&A, the ag dealer dot-com fiasco; not to 
mention other big money losers, like Channel Lake and 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) and a few others. 
 
So we can’t help but wonder how much the . . . we can’t help 
but wonder how much the head of this new Crown corporation 
spent in travel last year. You know, you’ve got to travel all 
around the world to try and sell a system that apparently no one 
else wants. The $150,000 contract from the Ukraine may barely 
be enough to cover the travel expenses that the head of this ISC 
Crown corporation spent. 
 
We know that the Crown travel expenditures totalled nearly $2 
million in three years, and we’re wondering how much that cost 
is piling up now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government calls that kind of expenditure just the cost of 
doing business. Well efficient and effective businessmen know 
that you have to keep your costs in line, and you have to be very 
wary about what you spend without the promise of very real 
returns. And so far we’ve found that the returns are only a small 
percentage of the travel expenses, let alone the original 
investment costs. 
 
The opposition believes that with today’s technology a lot of 
the cost of doing business that the government has said is 
necessary could have been handled by e-mail, by fax, by phone, 
by video conference, or many other forms of technology that 
are available. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while this Bill will certainly move to clarify 
and streamline some of the operations surrounding the new 
Land Surveys Act, it does not address the bigger issues such as 
the lack of planning and poor spending habits of this particular 
government. Nor does it address the issue of this government’s 
unfair competition with private enterprise. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I will move that this particular 
Bill move to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 19 — The 
Land Titles Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

speak to Bill No. 19, The Land Titles Amendment Act. 
 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is trailing every other province in 
Canada in computerizing its land title’s system. But trailing the 
nation is not new for Saskatchewan under this NDP 
administration. Now we trail the nation in population growth, 
job growth, and water quality. About the only thing we don’t 
trail the nation in is hospital waiting lists. 
 
Why did this have to take so long and cost the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan so much money? User groups affected by the 
new system will no doubt be pleased once the system is finally 
up and running. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Realtors, surveyors, lawyers have had to wait for extended 
periods of time for land titles documents to be completed with 
waiting periods of up to four weeks — with average waiting 
periods of about two weeks when in BC (British Columbia), 
Alberta, and Ontario the waiting periods are one day. 
 
Hopefully, Mr. Speaker, these amendments will reduce waiting 
times for those who depend on land titles transactions for their 
livelihood and those who are buying and selling their own 
property. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of our major concerns on this side of the 
House is the government’s move last year to create another 
Crown corporation, Information Services Corporation. At that 
time it was estimated that ISC would cost 40 to $50 million. We 
now know, Mr. Speaker, that the newest Crown corporation lost 
$11 million last year, while expected spending has increased to 
60 million for the Land Titles Automated Network 
Development Project, or LAND. 
 
On top of that, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also learned that the former 
Economic Development minister had serious concerns about 
ISC’s plans to sell its land system to other countries through the 
Internet. That we know of, they’d only managed to secure one 
contract worth $150,000 from the Ukraine. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have an article before me from the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix dated Tuesday, May 1, 2001. And I 
quote from the article, Mr. Speaker: 
 

A money-losing Crown corporation set up to computerize 
Saskatchewan’s land titles system and sell the technology 
to the world has strayed beyond its mandate and may 
jeopardize private-sector and government investment in the 
information technology (IT) sector, says a memorandum 
written by MLA Janice MacKinnon, then minister of 
economic development and a member of the Crown 
Investments Corp.’s board. 

 
The article goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In an interview, MacKinnon said she had two main 
concerns when she wrote the memo. “First of all, the 
corporation needed a business plan that showed how it 
would become profitable.” 
 
Her other concern dealt with how the entry of ISC into the 



June 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1821 

 

IT sector would affect private (companies). 
 
She says: 
 

“There is a role for Crown agencies. But there also has to 
be a role for the private sector to grow, particularly in 
information (sector), because it’s so important to the future 
of (our) province.” 

 
This brings us to a host of other foolish Crown ventures such as 
NST, Channel Lake, SPUDCO, Clickabid, and IQ&A but it also 
speaks to the issue of due diligence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Did the officials of ISC look at just how marketable their 
system would be in other jurisdictions? Land title systems, Mr. 
Speaker, differ from one country to another, one jurisdiction to 
another, one state, one province to another. Didn’t someone 
look into this? Since every other province in the country has 
already developed a system of this type, why, Mr. Speaker, did 
this government have to reinvent the wheel? 
 
Unfortunately nowhere in this Bill do we see any mention of 
due diligence being followed. In fact, as with most things, when 
this government decides to get involved, it usually ends up 
costing the taxpayers a lot more than originally planned. 
 
Even more troubling, Mr. Speaker, are the former Economic 
Development minister’s concerns regarding ISC’s mandate, 
business plans, and potential for unfair competition with the 
private sector. 
 
We’ve also heard, Mr. Speaker, that the security of property 
titles may be at risk by exposure to potential computer hackers. 
We ask, Mr. Speaker, just how secure is this system used by 
ISC? Can this Bill really guarantee confidentiality? 
 
We also have concerns on this side of the floor, Mr. Speaker, 
surrounding the money spent to date. We are wondering how 
something like this could go so much over budget. What about 
the software — will it need to be updated? And if so, when? 
How much will that cost, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Then there’s the labour issue. We know that countless hours 
have been spent transferring the manual system over to 
computer, and that more hours have yet to be budgeted for. Has 
this been part of the reason that costs for this program have 
skyrocketed? Have the many man-hours even been factored into 
the cost? This Bill does not certainly look at this matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, overall while we’re encouraged by the fact that the 
consultation took place and that recommendations were put in 
place following consultation, there are still some issues that 
need to be addressed in this Bill, such as government’s lack of 
planning, and poor spending habits. 
 
Was the labour issue considered in the . . . included in the cost 
overruns on this project or not? And many other issues that 
we’re still receiving feedback from, Mr. Speaker, on this side of 
the floor. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

Bill No. 9 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 9 — The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 200l be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
enter the debate on Bill No. 9, the amendment to The Power 
Corporation Act, June 13, 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very important Act that this session of the 
legislature is considering. And it’s interesting to note, Mr. 
Speaker, I do not believe that the Act was accompanied by a 
government press release as many major issues, major pieces of 
legislation are. 
 
Often, Mr. Speaker, as you know, the government will table 
significant . . . when they’re tabling significant legislation that 
will fundamentally change the province, they will also put out a 
press release or maybe hold a press conference and tell the 
people of the province about the details of this Bill. To my 
knowledge, Mr. Speaker, to my knowledge the government did 
not do it. They didn’t do it in the case of Bill 9 and so you have 
to have a couple of questions as a result of that. 
 
The first question is . . . well, maybe it’s an inconsequential 
Act. Maybe it just deals with minor issues that wouldn’t warrant 
a government press release or a press conference to talk about 
the details of it. But the fact of the matter is that it is a very 
consequential piece of legislation. It’s very important, Mr. 
Speaker, and could fundamentally change the electrical industry 
of this province forever. 
 
So then the only conclusion you can draw as to why the 
government wouldn’t accompany this particular . . . the 
introduction of this Bill with a press release is that maybe they 
didn’t want a lot of people to know about Bill 9. Maybe they 
didn’t want the residents of the province to know too much 
about this amendment to The Power Corporation Act. 
 
And if that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, then you’ll have to pardon 
Saskatchewan people for asking why? Why wouldn’t the 
government want people to know about this Act? 
 
The answer, Mr. Speaker, is that this Act clearly, clearly paves 
the way for the deregulation of our electric industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan. That’s what this Act is all about. 
Day after day when we’ve raised issues of energy and 
electricity in this legislature, government ministers have stood 
up and decried deregulation. They have criticized what has 
happened in other jurisdictions — namely, deregulation. 
 
And they were doing it, Mr. Speaker, ironically enough at the 
very, very same time that this Bill No. 9, this deregulation of 
the electrical industry Act, was being introduced into the 
legislature. They continue to do it as this Bill was debated in 
adjourned debates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Make no mistake about it, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 9 paves the 
way for the deregulation of the electrical industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 



1822 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2001 

 

Now it’s true that I think the Bill was precipitated by the 
announcement last year by the then minister for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) that the city of Swift 
Current and the city of Saskatoon — who are the two cities in 
our province that had the foresight and the vision not to sell out 
their electrical utility to the Crown, to SaskPower — that this 
government would allow those cities to in fact purchase their 
power from someone other than SaskPower. 
 
The minister of SaskPower last session stood in the legislature 
and announced that the monopoly restrictions on whom Swift 
Current and Saskatoon could buy electricity from would be 
lifted, and in fact that they could buy power from whomever 
they chose. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate that, the 
government of course had to make it possible for other potential 
suppliers of electricity to get their electricity to the cities of 
Swift Current and Saskatoon in the event that they chose 
another supplier other than SaskPower. And so we see that 
clearly that’s part of the reason for Bill No. 9. 
 
But it goes much further, Mr. Speaker. People should 
understand that it goes much further. Because in addition to 
providing the mechanism for the cities of Swift Current and 
Saskatoon to purchase their power and then transmit that power 
from sources other than SaskPower, it also paves the way for 
the deregulation of the electrical industry. 
 
And it begs the question: why has the government been so silent 
about it? Why on one hand have they criticized ad nauseam the 
deregulation approaches of other jurisdictions, like the province 
of Alberta? Why have they done that when they have 
introduced a Bill to deregulate, when they have introduced a 
Bill to deregulate the electrical industry? 
 
Anybody who has followed the news . . . and the member for 
Regina South reads the newspapers. He follows the news very 
closely; he’s very aware, he’s very aware of current events. He 
will know that the argument, the discussion they’re having in 
Alberta with what went wrong there is framed around not the 
structure of the company that’s delivering the electricity or the 
gas, but the structure of the industry, i.e., that it is deregulated, 
that it is a deregulated industry. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what 
this Bill will do here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So the government introduced this Bill, Bill No. 9, into the 
legislature knowing that it paves the way for deregulation. They 
didn’t issue a press release. Not a word about it to anybody. I 
think it would behoove this government to stand up and explain, 
explain how this deregulation Bill avoids the pitfalls of 
deregulation in other jurisdictions. 
 
And the member for Regina South says he will enter the debate, 
and I look forward to that. And we look forward to asking these 
questions in committee, Mr. Speaker. And those will be the 
questions that we have to ask of this government. 
 
If deregulation was the problem — and everybody seems to 
agree that it is; the manner in which the electrical industry was 
deregulated in Alberta was the problem that precipitated the 
crisis that they’ve just now seemingly come through — then we 
need to ask very important questions about Bill No. 9 because it 

will indeed deregulate the industry in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you take a look at section 8.2 of this Bill, that 
particular section will allow third parties or companies to 
transmit electrical energy over the transmission lines of 
SaskPower. And there you have it, Mr. Speaker. I mean, right 
there in a nutshell is a clear indication that this government is 
readying the province for the deregulation of the electrical 
industry. 
 
In section 9.1, Mr. Speaker, they introduce an amendment into 
section 9.1 that also clearly points the way to deregulation. So 
does section 38.2. It’s all through the Act, Mr. Speaker. It’s all 
through the Act. 
 
And we have not heard word one of assurance from this 
government that their deregulation of the electrical industry will 
indeed avoid the pitfalls, of the experience of Albertans, and 
indeed other jurisdictions such as California that are still in the 
news today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we will be looking for the answers to those questions in 
committee. And more to the point, we will be looking for 
answers from the government as to why — as to why — they 
didn’t tell anybody about this Bill to deregulate the electrical 
industry. It’s passing strange, Mr. Speaker, that they wouldn’t 
issue their normal press release and have a big press conference 
about a very weighty piece of legislation that will 
fundamentally change the electrical industry in the province. 
 
But maybe it’s not surprising after all, Mr. Speaker, because 
this is the government that has stood up on countless occasions 
and indicated their unequivocal opposition to any privatization 
at the same time that they were in the backrooms planning the 
sell-off of 20 to 30 per cent of SaskTel; when they were in the 
backroom of completing the privatization of the former 
SaskComp; the privatization of Husky Upgrader shares; the 
privatization of Cameco shares. All along, Mr. Speaker, 
standing in this legislature and in town halls across the province 
saying they opposed privatization, and in the backrooms cutting 
deals and selling the assets of the people of the province. 
 
Is that what this Bill is all about, Mr. Speaker? That’s a 
question that we’re going to have because they’ve also decried 
deregulation in any form, as they’ve stood up in this House. 
And they’ve met with people across the province and quietly, 
without any fanfare, without the normal attendant press releases 
and media events, they introduced Bill No. 9 into the legislature 
of this session, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 9 is all about deregulation. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, with those remarks, I would be happy to 
move the adjournment of debates on this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:30) 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion of the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation that 
Bill No. 9, The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2001, be 
now read a second time. 
 



June 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1823 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
An Hon. Member: — He moved adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll have to retract that. I’ll have to ask the 
members to just go back for a moment. I interpreted the 
member’s remarks — and I ask for his intention — was to 
move into Committee of the Whole. Was that the member’s 
intention? 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think, if you check the record, 
you’ll note that I did move adjournment of debates and that was 
my intent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, we’re in a little bit 
of a dilemma here. We have to make a decision really. 
 
I would ask leave of the Assembly to allow the member to 
restate his intention. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to my 
colleagues for leave to move adjournment of debate on Bill No. 
9. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
Subvote (SS01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, it’s my pleasure, on behalf of 
the Minister of Social Services, until he’s able to return to the 
committee, to speak on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to introduce the officials for the members of the 
committee, Mr. Chair. To my immediate left is deputy minister, 
Bonnie Durnford, and to her left is acting assistant deputy 
minister, Shelley Hoover. 
 
To my right, acting assistant deputy minister, Bob Wihlidal. 
And immediately behind me is Darcy Smycniuk, acting 
executive director of financial management. 
 
We have several officials who are seated behind the bar, Mr. 
Chair, and I’ll just introduce them. Executive director of income 
support is Phil Walsh; Marilyn Hedlund, associate director of 
income support; Richard Hazel, executive director family and 
youth; Dorothea Warren, associate director family and youth; 
Brenda Dougherty, assistant director child daycare; and Larry 
Moffatt, executive director of community living. 

And I look forward to the questions of the hon. members, and 
we’ll do our best to respond to them. Thanks, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, first of all, 
before we get into full debate, I just want a clarification. Is the 
minister going to be joining us shortly? I’m not exactly sure 
how far or which way to proceed on some of the questions. Not 
taking anything away from the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education and his abilities to fill in. But I think some of the 
discussion is going to centre around some important issues like 
the Child Advocate report. And I would like to understand from 
the committee how soon the minister might be able to join us so 
that we’re not leaving the minister out of the debate. And 
maybe the Minister of Post-Secondary Education could just 
indicate where we’re at in that regard and how we should 
proceed at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the minister I would expect will 
be here by about 4 o’clock, but the position of the government 
is consistent regardless of who the minister is and we’ll 
welcome the hon. member’s questions, and in the spirit of 
responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan, we’ll do the best 
to provide the answers we can. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. 
Minister. And we’ll take your word for that as the member from 
Regina South said, just fire away; it doesn’t really matter who’s 
sitting in the minister’s chair because it’s government policy. 
So we’ll accept that fact. And if the minister takes offence to 
the fact that he may have wanted to be involved in some of the 
debate, well that’s fine. Maybe on a later date we can get into it. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I’d like to raise a few questions about the 
most recent news release. And I believe this news release in 
regards to consultation on child welfare came about as a result 
of the report of the Children’s Advocate — the most recent 
report — and a number of the issues, a number of the concerns 
that were raised at that time. 
 
And it’s seems to me, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, as I was 
indicating in my responses earlier to the Assembly, that the care 
of children is certainly important. And how we care for our 
children is a strong indication in our society as to the value we 
place on a child’s life. 
 
And a number of issues, a number of concerns were raised by 
the Child Advocate in regards to the care of children, certainly 
the care of children that happen to be entrusted to the care of 
child and family services. 
 
And I think what the minister was indicating, that the study that 
he is asking to be undertaken is now a response to the report of 
the Child Advocate and the fact that he is now asking input 
from families, community groups, First Nations people, Métis 
people, front-line workers, and other stakeholders, to explore 
whether or not changes may be required to the province’s child 
welfare system. 
 
I think, if I’m not mistaken, I understood the minister wants to 
hear the role of the family, role of these different groups, and 
working with the department in providing care and providing 



1824 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2001 

 

services to children. And I appreciate that; I applaud the 
minister for that. 
 
Because, Mr. Minister, as part of the group, or one of the 
members on this committee, that’s trying to address the 
problem of children in the sex trade in the province of 
Saskatchewan and having listened to a number of presenters, it 
was interesting, Mr. Minister, to hear presenters talking about 
some of the family backgrounds, some of the social situations 
these young ladies . . . mostly were ladies that we had come to 
speak to our committee were involved in. 
 
And one of the issues that really came to the forefront on a 
number of occasions was the movement from one . . . from, first 
of all, the family home setting into a foster care setting, and 
then an ongoing movement from one family to the next and the 
feeling of instability and the fact that there was really no value 
on their lives, Mr. Minister. 
 
And so I think it’s certainly important that we take the time to 
not only listen to the stakeholders, but maybe we need to take a 
bit of time as well to listen to the children that are directly 
affected so we get a sense of where they’re coming from. And I 
believe the Child Advocate brings that point to the forefront in 
her report, about the fact that the concern that children have 
being moved from one caregiver to the next. 
 
And I’m just trying to find it here. I had it underlined here a 
moment ago, but I’ll just go from memory about the concerns 
that were raised by a family member about a child that had been 
taken from their home, was placed in the care of a foster home, 
and then without really notifying the family or the child, being 
moved to another foster care setting. And the family contacting 
the Child Advocate indicating that really had upset their child in 
regards to the movement from one family to the other. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, having said that I’d like to get a better, a more 
broad understanding, of what this study is going to do; what 
you hope to accomplish by the . . . or the government hopes to 
accomplish through the study; and whether or not it will make a 
difference at the end of the day. I realize we’re going to have to 
take the time to study, to get some ideas together, put our heads 
around the recommendations that may come out of the study 
and then begin to implement them. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, maybe you could give us an idea of what the 
department is really hoping to accomplish in light of the issues 
that have been brought forward by the Child Advocate, and now 
the study that is being commissioned. 
 
And as well, Mr. Minister, could you give us an idea of what 
timelines the department is looking at in regards to the study 
and when it hopes to receive a report regarding this most 
recently announced study? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for his 
question and, first of all, too would want to acknowledge the 
importance of the hon. member’s involvement on the committee 
of the Legislative Assembly that is addressing the abhorrent 
phenomenon of children involved in the sex trade in 
Saskatchewan. And I would want to in a very . . . to personally 

commend the member and the other members of that committee 
in that important work and to say that I will personally look 
forward to the final report of that committee. 
 
Regarding the consultations that the hon. member raises in his 
question here today and having to do with the minister’s 
announcement earlier this day, which was held at Ranch Ehrlo, 
I think it’s fair to say, Mr. Chair, that there are two objectives in 
the announcement. One is, as the hon. member has indicated in 
his question, to respond to the advocate’s report of last year; 
and then, secondly, to take the . . . to look at the bigger picture, 
the broader look at children services. 
 
On the matter of involvement of youth and the concerns that 
were raised by the Children’s Advocate, Mr. Chair, and the 
importance of young people having voice in their own 
well-being and their own care, I would point out that the 
Department of Social Services has developed the youth and care 
network, effective May of 2000, and has also been working 
hard to improve both the policy and the practice around case 
planning for individual children, specifically with the objective 
of involving children in that planning process. 
 
It’s fair to say that the consultations to date have been largely 
internal. That’s not to say they’re not important, because 
certainly review of policy very legitimately involves those who 
are the professionals charged with the carrying out of case 
decisions in the care of children consultations, so to this date 
have largely involved the staff of the department, but also have 
involved the Child Welfare League of America. 
 
What the minister was announcing then earlier today was a 
broader consultation, which will specifically invite input from 
some important sectors of our province. We will want to have 
input from Métis people, from First Nations, as well as from 
health districts, from school districts, and from police. Those 
who are directly involved, and will have their own important 
perspectives in terms of guiding the shaping of policy and 
practice for the department in the care of children, and the 
planning of their cases. 
 
That is not to rule out the opportunity for input from others who 
will have a vested interest as well. So it’s not intended to be 
purely limited to them, but it is also fair to say that the process 
is intended to be an ongoing process, and that I think probably 
three to five years is seen to be the time over which there will 
be an ongoing process of review, and within that, revision of 
policy and practice as appropriate. 
 
And therefore it’s difficult to respond to your final question . . . 
the hon. member’s final question, Mr. Chair, regarding the 
timeline. It’s seen as a process that by it’s nature, doesn’t have a 
definitive conclusion to it, but an ongoing process of review of 
the policy and practice in the best interests of children. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, so as I understand 
from your final comment then, there isn’t a specific timeline 
wherein you’re going to ask these community groups to do their 
consultations and then do a . . . make a report. If I would 
understand from your response, it’s not necessary to report to 
the legislature, but an ongoing consultation and report to the 
department. 
 



June 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1825 

 

Is that what you’re saying in regards to a specific time period to 
give a report in regards to the consultations that you’re 
beginning within your department regarding the child welfare 
programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Let me first of all thank my colleague for subbing in for me. 
And just point out to the opposition that they did ask last year 
for an opportunity to have both the Minister of Social Services 
and the Minister for Post-Secondary Education in estimates at 
the same time, and now they’ve had it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the question of consultation, just to make it 
clear, we’ve had our own debate internally about whether what 
we’re doing is a consultation or are we redesigning. 
 
And one day we say, no, we’re doing a child welfare redesign. 
We know what the principles are, we know where we want to 
go, we know what we want to do. Or is it a consultation to get 
further input from the community as to where it is that we think 
we need to go, but touching base with other service providers, 
groups, stakeholders in the community. 
 
And at the end of the day, and I might say it was at the end of 
yesterday, we took the point of view that we should not say that 
this is a redesign and that this is where we’re going to so but 
that we should opt for additional input from the community. 
 
So we don’t see this as a process where someone independent 
or someone will write a report and come back and say here’s the 
result of all the discussions that we’ve had; but instead that we 
will do the consultation, that we will seek confirmation that the 
principles that we’ve outlined are the right principles, that the 
values that we think should underlie this process are the right 
values and that, at the end of the day, that those are right and 
that those then logically lead us to make enhancement and 
improvements in programs. And that’s the direction that we’ll 
be going. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, just a quick 
follow-up and then a couple of my colleagues need to get some 
questions in before they have some other commitments. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Minister, I guess the quick follow-up I 
would do right now and then we’ll get into a little more 
discussion on it later, is if you’re talking about listening to 
groups and redesigning where you’re going, I would just 
suggest that I hope that it really means that you’re going to seek 
some direction and guidance. 
 
And rather than going to the groups and saying this is where we 
hope to go, can you help us get there or this is what we want 
from you so we can achieve our goals, what I’m reading into 
this is that you actually want to listen to some interested . . . and 
groups that really would be affected for their input as you try to 
design a system that really reaches out to meet the needs of the 
young people and the individuals involved who actually, 
unfortunately through circumstances beyond their control, need 
to seek your services. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to just invite 
other members to play some questions and then we’ll get to 
further debate on this issue. Thank you. 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, thank you to 
my colleague for allowing me to ask a few questions, and 
welcome to the minister and his officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just have one area I’d like to touch on briefly 
today and that is on the early childhood development. I know 
that it was announced in the budget that there was going to be 
$23 million, I believe, from the federal government over five 
years into early childhood development. And I see how it has 
been broken down within your department between Social 
Services, Education, and Health. 
 
And I know that the government has been putting resources into 
early childhood development for the last number of years. But 
within the breakdown of the budget this year, I don’t see how 
much money was spent on that last year. Can you give me an 
idea of what was spent last year? 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, before I provide 
the answer to the question that was posed by the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena, I’d like to just revisit again the comments 
by the member for Moosomin to point out that . . . and to thank 
the member for Moosomin for not calling me on this. Because 
last year, when the Children’s Advocate presented her report to 
the Legislative Assembly, I said that I would undertake to 
provide our response within a year. I believe her report came 
down in late April and today’s response, June 14, that’s a little 
bit more than a year. 
 
And the reason for that is that we did want to take the time to 
consult very widely with our stakeholders, very importantly 
with the staff who deliver our services and programs, and to 
begin the work of fleshing out what a child welfare strategy 
might look like. 
 
And I might say included in that was very extensive 
consultations with the Child Welfare League of America. It’s 
on the basis of that work for the last year that we’ve put forward 
some principles, some values, a vision as to how we see child 
welfare redesign taking place. 
 
And it’s the result of that efforts that we now want to get input 
from the community because it has wide-ranging implications 
for many groups in our society. And we feel we need the 
comfort of their input and their advice as we move forward and 
make the changes necessary to what we think is the right way to 
go, depending on that community input. 
 
Mr. Chair, with respect to the question by the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena, in terms of early childhood, the dollars 
that are in the budget this year is I believe some $2.9 million, 
specifically for Kids First. And she asked what did the 
government commit for that last year. Well the answer is zero. 
 
But there are other programs within governments that deal with 
the question of early childhood development, for example, 
ECIP (Early Childhood Intervention Program) programs that we 
supported last year to the extent of $1.8 million. 
 
There would be . . . I suppose one could take our day care 
expenditures, which last year was about eighteen and a half 



1826 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2001 

 

million dollars. 
 
There would be other activities in our teen and young parent 
programming where some of our staff would be working with 
teen and young parents and one could say, legitimately, that 
that’s early childhood development work. Oh, you could value 
that at another million dollars. 
 
There would be involvement of some of our parent aides and 
our child welfare programs. Some of the work that they would 
be doing might be akin to early childhood development work or 
early childhood intervention work. But again I wouldn’t be able 
to put a dollar figure on that. 
 
And that would be in addition to whatever preschool activities 
and programs might be in place in the education system. 
 
Programming by public health nurses in the health districts to 
deal with the health needs and sometimes the social needs of 
young children; post-birth or pre-natal programming; whatever 
might be going on. And I wouldn’t be able to provide you with 
a figure of that. Hopefully the Minister of Health would be able 
to do that. 
 
I think suffice to say that Saskatchewan, like all the provinces, 
we’re investing dollars in early childhood development broadly 
speaking, under that umbrella. But the additional dollars from 
the federal government enables us to become far more focused 
on some aspects of early childhood development — in this 
particular case, fetal alcohol syndrome and the need to provide 
better supports for families where there are risks to children 
growing up normally and healthy — that it’s enabling us to do 
that. And we appreciate that. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I do thank 
the members opposite for their indulgence as I introduce guests 
that are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
It’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to all members of the 
Assembly, Jeanette Martin, who is a constituent but also a good 
friend of mine. She’s accompanied this afternoon by Pat and 
Bob Vadus from Connecticut, USA (United States of America). 
We’re very pleased that they would be able to come into the 
Assembly and view some of the proceedings. And I’d ask all 
members to join with me in giving them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 

Subvote (SS01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And welcome 
to the minister’s guests. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know you said that you spent about $1.8 million 
last year. I had an opportunity to visit with the Early Childhood 
Development Board in Moose Jaw this week, and they talked 
about the funding that they had last year and I . . . I guess there 
must have been some funding directly from your department, 
and I guess that was the $1.8 million. 
 
They were concerned, of course, about the amount of funding 
that they will get next year. And I remember the news release 
from the federal government, jointly with your government, 
talking about the money that was going to be coming forward 
this year. So I thought this is probably an opportunity that they 
weren’t aware of, saying hey, there really is going to be some 
focus on the children that are in need this year. 
 
So when I looked at the budget and I saw 2.889; I don’t see the 
1.8 that you spent last year and I’m sure that there’s going to be 
. . . this money that came from the federal government is going 
to be on top of the provincial government money. 
 
So I’m wondering if you can tell me how your budget is 
flowing out for this department this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, part of the budget 
allocation for early childhood development, (SS10) is the 
subvote, and it’s $2.889 million, also includes $370,000 which 
was . . . I announced that, I think, about a week or so ago. 
 
These were funds that are being sent to ECIP programs across 
Saskatchewan to help them reduce, if not eliminate, the waiting 
lists that they have for their programs. And I would think that 
would also extend to the ECIP program in Moose Jaw. And that 
would be additional to the funds that are allocated in the budget 
for ECIP programs under our community living budget which is 
a separate subvote. 
 
But we felt that it was legitimate to take some of those 
additional dollars for at-risk children and to use that to 
eliminate . . . reduce or hopefully eliminate the waiting lists 
under the ECIP programs. We’re confident it’ll do that and 
we’re confident that the ECIP programs will be able to continue 
to provide the very valuable service that they provide for 
children with developmental delays and disabilities in our 
community. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, can 
you tell me how much money you got from the federal 
government this year for the early childhood development 
program, from the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — A total figure between our 
department, Education, and Health is $10.089 million. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So then you spend 
$1.8 million last year. We’re spending all of the federal 
government money that there was transferred through. So then 
you’re not putting the 1.8 in, that you put in last year directly 
from the provincial budget? 



June 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1827 

 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, these federal dollars 
would be in addition to the funds that we budgeted last year for 
ECIP expenditures and we will be expending again this year. So 
total expenditures would be $10,089,000, but then in addition to 
that, to carry on with commitments from previous years — 
whether it’s the $1.8 under ECIP or the eighteen and a half 
million dollars in child daycare, the funds that we expend in the 
teen young parent program, for our staff and community 
supports in those areas. So those expenditures that were in our 
budget last year will be carried on. This $10 million is 
additional dollars on top of what was expended in the previous 
years. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So where does the 
$1.8 million from last year show up in this year’s budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — It would show up under the 
subvote for community living. (SS06). It’s not broken down 
specifically, but if you look at the description, it’s assistance to 
agencies and parents, in program planning for children, adults 
with mental disabilities. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So then, all right, is 
it fair to say that groups like the group in Moose Jaw will 
receive some funding from subvote (SS10) and some from 
(SS06) because that was where the funding came from last 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — We’ll send it to them in one 
cheque, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So, Mr. Minister, then they are going to be 
able to get additional funds this year. You said there was 
375,000 that was announced recently, but then . . . I think, 
there’s 17 regions I believe is what they told me. Are they all 
going to be able to divide up some of this money and they can 
all expect additional funding this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Yes. I don’t know if all of them 
can expect it. We went through a process with their provincial 
board, ECIP Saskatchewan, where we examined the waiting 
lists in the various regions, where the greatest needs were. I’m 
not sure that every region necessarily had a waiting list of any 
import. And some communities may have received more than 
others. But again, depending on the waiting lists in those areas, 
subject to a consultation that we did with their provincial board 
. . . (inaudible) . . . Saskatchewan. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. Yates): — Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Merci, M. le Président. Je vous présentez une 
groupe des étudiants de l’École Oman. Mr. Chairman, joining 
us in the east gallery is 48 students from Oman School, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
They are grade 5 students; nine of them are in the French 

immersion program at l’École Oman School. And they’re 
accompanied today by teachers: Mr. Franz, Mrs. Mann, Mrs. 
King. And also joining the group are chaperones: Mrs. Wiebe, 
Mr. Berger, Mrs. Funk, Mrs. Dyck, Mrs. Carter, Mrs. 
Giesbrecht, and a good friend, Pastor Tim Ramage is also with 
them today. 
 
I think they’ve already enjoyed a visit to Regina. They’ve seen 
many of the attractions, maybe saving the best to last, Mr. 
Chairman, coming to the legislature. And I want to welcome 
them here. It’s a pleasure to have kids from Oman. It’s also the 
school of my kids, and a great school in the city of Swift 
Current. 
 
So I just ask all members to join with me in welcoming this 
group of grade 5 students from Oman School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
Subvote (SS01) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, back on 
May 3, I discussed with you a case in Kelliher, Saskatchewan 
that a constituent . . . on behalf of a constituent of mine. What I 
might do is just to . . . I believe this constituent has written to 
your department on behalf of the problems she is having with 
her son. And we talked about the program that the mother was 
made aware of or searched out on her own; it’s called 
Opportunities for Independence in Winnipeg, Manitoba. 
 
At that time you had indicated this, that as far as your 
information that you had, it was a non-residential program. 
Well in fact, Mr. Minister, we have information and letters from 
that program that says it is a residential program and that they 
do not, to quote from a letter that my constituent received from 
the people with Opportunities for Independence: 
 

They do not preclude referral from other provinces. 
 
Now the mother wrote to your department on May 3, 
coincidentally the same day as we discussed this issue in 
estimates, asking for your help. And on May 25 your 
department . . . you replied to her indicating that she should 
contact the acting director of adult care and community living 
for further discussions and so on, with a treatment and services 
for her son. 
 
(16:15) 
 
So she did that. And since that time she has again been in 
contact with my office and feels that nothing is really being 
done; that her son is falling through the cracks. In her letter, Mr. 
Minister, to your department, she states: 
 

That it seems everyone is waiting for the next person, and 
in the process, they are just waiting for my son’s problems 
to expand. 



1828 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2001 

 

And in fact, Mr. Minister, it saddens me to report, but her son’s 
problems have expanded. He is presently . . . and he was at that 
time when we discussed this issue, he was in a special care 
home in Yorkton with an ankle bracelet. He is in the court 
system. 
 
I am told that he was working at the Saskatchewan Abilities 
Council in Yorkton, and I believe very recently he 
inappropriately touched a female co-worker, and was charged 
for that action and will be in the courts, I believe it is later on in 
July here. 
 
The mother is very, very concerned that her son, who is 20 
years old now, and according to the information she’s provided 
me with, and also to you in her letter, with an IQ (intelligence 
quotient) that is, I believe, in the 57 to 60 range. That there 
really, according to the information that she’s been able to get 
from your department, there really . . . Saskatchewan doesn’t 
have a program for her son that you referred to community 
living program. 
 
In the estimates, the last time we discussed this in estimates I 
believe you mentioned and I was made aware of a pilot program 
that’s in operation here in Regina. And the mother talked to Mr. 
Jeff Reddekopp about the possibility of her son getting into his 
program, and she was told that there’s absolutely . . . there’s no 
space for him. 
 
And the mother feels that the only ray of hope for her son is this 
Opportunities for Independence in Winnipeg. And it is, as I 
said, it is a . . . they do have a residential component in their 
program. And one of the problems in her mind, and I think in 
mine, is that there is no funding. She’s been told there is no 
funding for her son to get into the program in Winnipeg. 
 
And I guess my question to you, Mr. Minister, is that if there is 
. . . if this service isn’t available for this individual in the 
province, will you consider funding that individual so that he 
may be placed in this program in Winnipeg? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I would like to say to 
the member that I would encourage the mother of the boy to 
continue to work with the department to see if the programming 
response that’s there now might meet his needs. Having said 
that, if in the opinion of the department the programming does 
not meet the young man’s needs, we could look at extending the 
Regina pilot project to the Yorkton area so that he might be 
served by that program. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, so what you’re saying 
then is that if the current programs that your department has 
aren’t sufficient to deal with this individual, you will make a 
commitment to the mother that the pilot program that is 
presently operating here in Regina will be . . . it’ll start one in 
Yorkton. Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Yes, we’ll find a way of meeting 
that young man’s needs, Mr. Chair. We’re very concerned 
about the situation. We’re not entirely convinced that the 
regular work of the department might not meet the young man’s 
needs. My understanding is that he is in a home where he is 
being cared for, in Yorkton; that we can and do provide 
programming assistance. But if that doesn’t meet his needs, 

then yes, we will look to extend services from elsewhere to 
meet his needs. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well thank you for that commitment, Mr. 
Minister. I would just advise you of some of the comments that 
the mother has made to myself in the form of a letter. In your 
letter you had advised her to contact Mr. Wayne Phaneuf. I’m 
not sure if that individual is in Yorkton, acting director of adult 
care — it’s in Yorkton? Yes, I see by her letter, yes, he is in 
Yorkton. And she talked to him, to Mr. Phaneuf: 
 

And he advised me that his department . . . 
 
This is the letter I’m quoting that she sent me: 
 

. . . that his department can do nothing about the situation; 
the only thing they do cover is the residence of her son. 

 
In other words, basically I am told that rather than having her 
. . . rather than her son being in jail, he’s in this special care 
home with an ankle bracelet. And as I had indicated earlier, was 
participating in activities at the Yorkton special facility for 
people that . . . a facility that deal with people with his 
problems, and where he reoffended, I guess. 
 
And she feels that your department is looking after his 
residence and his daily needs but nothing to do . . . you’re not 
treating his problem that deals with inappropriate sexual 
behaviour. And to date, she hasn’t been given any indication 
that there is anything within your department other than this 
program here. And her greatest fear, Mr. Minister, is that after 
her son goes through the court system, the justice system, that 
he’ll end up in jail. And this is certainly not an appropriate 
place for him. 
 
And so will you have committed then that there will be 
something for him in the near future then? Because she feels 
very strongly. She’s done a lot of work, spent a lot of time on 
the telephone talking with the folks in Winnipeg. And they have 
written her, and from the letters that she’s provided me with 
copies of, they feel that — they obviously require more 
information and so on — but they feel that they may be able to 
help her son. 
 
So what you have said here today is that you will provide those 
services to her in Yorkton then . . . or to her son in Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, we agree with the 
member that it’s far better that we ensure that the treatment 
support is there to help this young man, as opposed to paying 
for his incarceration at a later date. So we will undertake to 
ensure that the services that he requires will be provided to him. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good evening to 
the Minister of Social Services and to his officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to just bring to your attention some 
concerns that social workers have presented to me surrounding 
limited term positions. What I’m hearing from them is that 
they’re . . . one thing is that they’re really overworked, but 
they’re wondering why the limited term positions are the 
positions that they can get. And they say this is not good, 
because brand new intake workers don’t know the system when 



June 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1829 

 

they come in. The worker has to relearn the system again, and 
basically sometimes workers are in for five years before they 
get orientation training. 
 
So I guess part of the question I have for you is, why does the 
department insist on limited term positions for intake workers? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I wanted to take some 
time to review what in fact has been taking place. 
 
The Department of Social Services, indeed I think the 
Government of Saskatchewan, has taken the position that there 
should always be a rigorous process within the various 
departments so that where positions are being filled on a 
temporary basis, on what’s called a non-permanent basis, that 
we review that and look for ways to convert those full-time 
equivalents which are being filled on a temporary or 
non-permanent basis, to make them permanent full-time 
equivalents. We’ve been I think fairly aggressive about that 
since 1991 . . . so as one of the complaints about the previous 
government about allowing too many positions to become 
non-permanent full-time equivalents. 
 
Last year in the budget, I believe in Social Services, there was 
an increase in 200 full-time equivalents, approximately 200 
full-time equivalents, roughly about 10 per cent of the staff. 
Because we did have people on staff. They were working, but 
they weren’t there on a permanent basis, and we changed that to 
a permanent position. 
 
I’m interested to hear the member’s questions, because other 
questions that have come from the opposition side have tended 
to criticize us for taking on staff or turning non-permanent 
positions into permanent full-time equivalents. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, to me 
today it makes no difference about arguments between political 
parties and what should be done. To me what’s important is that 
there is limited term positions that social workers are told that 
are available to them. They are saying that when they accept a 
position, start in a position, and try to get to work, for one thing, 
they need to have some training. 
 
They are saying that oftentimes — just aside from the training 
issue — they’re saying that they are turned over too frequently 
and then another hiring is done for another person to come into 
that same position. Now they’re wondering why there is not 
more continuity with giving them full permanent jobs rather 
than just these term positions. 
 
And the other concern that they wanted me to relay to you, Mr. 
Minister, is that they’re told that they will be able to access 
training so that when they get on the job, they’re basically ready 
to go, and they understand the system and know it well, but that 
the training is only offered at specific times. 
 
And they’re also told that if workers . . . if you can’t manage the 
time, then if you can’t manage to do it because you’re 
overworked or you got to, you know, apply yourself to your 
work so you can’t get to the training at the specified time, well 
basically, that’s too bad, you don’t get it. 

So that it seems to me a very . . . it’s not a very valuable service 
that’s offered to these workers if in fact there is no sort of 
structure in where they can get training, maybe before they start 
their job. 
 
They pointed out to me too — and I hesitate to mention Alberta 
again because I know how it aggravates your members— but 
they said that in Alberta there is a really positive structure put in 
place. When someone is hired they get a one-week training 
period, then three weeks of practical work, and again a 
one-week training period, and then three weeks of work again. 
And this is done throughout a three-month period to ensure that 
these workers have their training and they can make the best use 
of their time when they’re on the job. 
 
So that was just a suggestion that they thought was a very good 
thing happening in Alberta, and they’d like to recommend that 
possibly it happens in Saskatchewan also. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, in addition to that, there came a concern to 
me . . . came to me rather from a school counsellor who is 
finding that there can be no sharing of files when this counsellor 
is trying to work with a child in the school. And she felt that 
there should be a sharing of files between social workers, social 
counsellors, and mental health so that people can . . . there can 
be a continuity of service for the child that they are tending to. 
 
Apparently they can’t, or they will not, share any files as to 
what they have found out about the child or the child’s, for 
instance, the child’s mental health, which would be really 
valuable to a counsellor coming into the school to ensure that 
they’ve got some background on the child and they know they 
can more effectively help the child and help him quicker. And 
because there’s policy in place that there’s no sharing of these 
files, it’s making it very difficult for specific people that come 
to try to help the child. 
 
So I’m just wondering if you could comment on why the 
sharing of files cannot be a policy of your government, and if 
you’re going to be doing anything to change that. 
 
To my knowledge, Mr. Minister, there’s been a lot of talk about 
integrated services, sharing services in schools and so on. And I 
guess it’s one thing to be mentioning that and the value of that, 
but if you don’t give people the tools they need and the rights 
they need and the authority they need to be able to share those 
services better for the benefit of the children, what good is it 
just talking about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, there is in fact an 
extensive protocol that enables us to share information, even if 
we don’t provide all of the file, the specific file to someone 
outside the department, we are in a position to share 
information from those files with, say, teachers or guidance 
counsellors or school administrators and people in other 
departments. 
 
If there is some concern or need for information because of 
some behavioural problem or whatever that a child might be 
exhibiting and that child is in our care, then we are in a position 
to share that information, subject to a protocol that has been 
established and in a way that respects the privacy concerns of 
the individual involved. Because you will know that through 



1830 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2001 

 

legislation there are limits on the extent to which one can 
provide information — for example, about young offenders — 
to the public or to other people, but there are protocols that are 
there that enable this sharing of information to take place. 
 
Now if there is a specific problem somewhere, then for sure 
don’t hesitate to call our office and we can track that down. But 
I would tell you that there is a very extensive protocol to ensure 
that that kind of sharing information can take place and is 
taking place. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, as it 
was described to me, this is not taking place. There is not only a 
resistance but an absolute unwillingness to do this. 
 
And you know, if I can just give you sort of an example of what 
can happen when this sharing is not taking place. If you have a 
mental health worker who then, you know, moves out of a 
community of work, goes somewhere else and does not have 
the file accessible, for instance, for a school counsellor, but 
nonetheless the child is left at the school for care and for 
counselling and so on, if the school counsellor does not know of 
the mental health background of that child, she would have to 
start, you know, doing some very basic fact-finding and so on 
that would really delay helping the child. 
 
So this is where the problem comes in. They are not able to be 
able to access files by other workers that have been working 
with that child. And it’s simply been brought to my attention 
that that is the way it is. 
 
And I understand that you say there’s a protocol that provides 
for sharing of this information. Well in actuality, from what I’m 
hearing, it’s not happening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — All I can say, Mr. Chair, I’m very 
surprised to hear that in light of the fact that we do have 
extensive case protocol for sharing of information among, 
between professionals in the community to deal exactly with the 
issue that the member raises. 
 
But if there is a specific case or a problem in a community 
somewhere in Saskatchewan that the protocol isn’t being 
observed, and if that pertains to my department, I would 
certainly encourage the member to call my office, to give us the 
particulars so that we can track it down and make sure the 
protocol is working as it is intended to do. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I certainly will get 
back to the people that brought this concern to my attention and 
invite them to do that very thing. I’m just hoping that the 
protocol as it is in place right now, or you say it’s in place, is 
made known to all social workers, mental health workers, 
everybody out there that are trying to work with these children. 
Because if they have no knowledge that this is the case, then 
that would cause a problem in itself. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a constituent of mine that has written to 
you. Her name is Sandra Richard. And, Mr. Minister, I think 
that you would recognize the name of Sandra Richard as being 
the foster mother of Karen Quill, or the past foster mother of 
Karen Quill. 
 

Now the very unfortunate death of Karen Quill has brought a lot 
of attention, public attention to this legislature, as well as to the 
attention of people across the province. There was a whole 
investigation done into the death of Karen Quill; the Child 
Advocate did that and she came up with some 
recommendations. And one of those recommendations was that 
there should be an assurance by Social Services that there is not 
going to ever be overcrowding in homes again. 
 
Sandra Richard brings her case to me and her case points that 
out. She points out that to this day things have not changed, and 
this letter dated to me was on March 19 this year. 
 
She says: 
 

But to this day things have not changed because I know of 
homes around here that are still overcrowded. 

 
So, Mr. Minister, I think you better take a serious look at that 
because we have had a number of deaths of children again 
reported by the Child Advocate in this province, and whether or 
not you’re looking into that and finding out why, I’m not sure 
— I would hope that you are. 
 
In addition though, Mr. Minister, to Sandra Richard making that 
point, she informed me that she’s not any longer able to have a 
foster home. She tells me that before the time of Karen Quill’s 
death when her home was overcrowded with children, she 
brought this overcrowding to the attention of her supervisor. 
 
And whenever she would bring that to the attention of her 
supervisor, that she had too many children, that she could not 
handle them all, that in fact it was jeopardizing the children’s 
safety and well-being, Social Services would just simply tell her 
that she was a good foster mother and to go ahead. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, because of that negligence by Social 
Services, especially when it was drawn to the attention of 
supervisors — and I’m not sure if supervisors brought it to your 
attention or not at that time — but nonetheless this woman took 
the right . . . went through the right channels. She took the 
correct approach and she informed Social Services that her 
home was overcrowded. 
 
Now Karen Quill died as a result of this woman not being able 
to attend to . . . However, the death of Karen was ruled an 
accident, which meant, I guess, that nobody was at fault. Ms. 
Richard brings to my attention that even though nobody was 
deemed to be at fault, there were a lot of accusations towards 
her. She lost her right to have a foster home and she is now 
without a job. 
 
She has asked for a meeting, and she received a meeting, at 
which Yvonne Skrudland from Social Services met with her on 
May 9 of this year. She says that she was asking for some 
compensation because this was not her fault and she, as a result, 
lost her ability to foster. 
 
She also went through a waiting period of a year while there 
was deliberation over whether or not she would be entitled to a 
home again, and in that year she was kept on hold not knowing 



June 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1831 

 

if she would be able to find another job, go look for another job, 
move out of the province, or what she should do. 
 
So basically she stayed put. This woman feels she should have 
some compensation coming. She states that the birth parents, or 
relatives of Karen Quill, received $45,000 for being blood 
relatives. That was a compensation paid by the province to 
them. So they were taken care of. 
 
She says that no Social Services supervisors lost their job 
because they were negligent in not taking her cry of help 
seriously. They are all working; they all have their pay. She is 
sitting now without any avenue for having any way to make any 
money, and certainly is unable to continue her home. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I, first of all, would like you to address this 
for me in all aspects, I guess, of what I put forward to you. But 
first of all, I’d like to ask you why when this woman cried out 
for help to Social Services, that cry was not being heard. She 
did the right thing. And I’m wondering if the supervisor in that 
area brought to your attention that this home was overcrowded. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, first of all with respect 
to overcrowding, is overcrowding in foster homes still a 
problem? There continue to be some situations where the limit 
for the number of children in a foster home is exceeded, and 
that limit is four. And there are four situations where this 
happens. 
 
One is to try to keep siblings together. We have a foster home 
and we take five siblings into care; we will, if you like, exceed 
the limit of four by placing those five into one home. There may 
be situations secondly, to place a child into a familiar setting 
when a child is returning to foster care. On occasions to 
accommodate emergency placements. And four, to help other 
foster families taking respite, we will also do some doubling-up, 
if you like. 
 
We do have an automated tracking system in place to monitor 
these situations and to assure proper support. 
 
If the member, in addition to hearsay, has specific instances of 
overcrowding that do not meet these criteria, we would be 
pleased to receive that information and to investigate. But as the 
member can appreciate, we cannot proceed on the basis of 
hearsay that she is presenting before the Legislative Assembly. 
 
With respect to the specific case that the member raises, I could 
not comment on a specific case as such. I would say that where 
complaints are raised with respect to foster parents, generally 
speaking we investigate. We involve the Saskatchewan Foster 
Families Association to provide support for the foster family. 
But I would not go any further to comment on the specific case 
in public. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and at this time I would move 
the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I’m advised that 
Her Honour is here for Royal Assent. 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 16:53 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 30 - The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to this Bill. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 16:54. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:56. 
 
 


