















































Hansard: April 02, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 273 
 April 2, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, I stand to present a petition on behalf of the citizens of 
Cypress Hills, including the communities of Claydon, Frontier, 
Gull Lake, Hazlet, and Shaunavon. And the petition concerns 
the implications of the government’s report entitled the 
Saskatchewan EMS (emergency medical services) development 
project which calls for provincially run and centrally operated 
ambulance services. 
 
The petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present petitions on behalf of the people of the 
Humboldt constituency who are concerned about losing their 
community-based ambulance services. 
 
And the petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 

And the petitioners that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, 
are all from the town of Cudworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish 
to present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
conversion of paved highways to gravel. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel, commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents, and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 

 

And the petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Briercrest, Moose Jaw, Hearne, and Claybank. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to present 
another in a great many petitions from the people of Swift 
Current regarding the hospital in that community. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Wymark, 
Abbey, from Swift Current, from Beechy, from Gull Lake, 
Hazlet, Carmichael, Tompkins, and Webb, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of residents of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
who are concerned about the EMS (emergency medical 
services) development project report. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And this is signed by residents of Radville, Minton, Lake Alma, 
and Bengough. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens 
of Assiniboia with reference to the cuts at the Assiniboia 
Pioneer Lodge. 
 
And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that, at the very least, 
current levels of services and care are maintained at 
Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this comes from people at Wood Mountain, Assiniboia, 
Verwood, Limerick, Lisieux, Rockglen. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 



274 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister responsible for Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance: how much money out of the personal injury 
protection plan did SGI pay directly to health districts and 
Saskatchewan Health for rehabilitation services in 
2000-2001 fiscal year? 

 
And also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 15 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: how 
many vehicles will SaskEnergy and SaskPower be 
purchasing in the 2001 fiscal year; and how does this 
compare to the Crowns’ vehicle replacement programs of 
previous years. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
pleasure that I introduce to you the 15 members of Crystal 
Formations. This is the Brant Figure Skating Club of Brantford, 
Ontario. They were in Regina this past weekend for the 
Canadian synchronized skating festival, and they won the silver 
medal. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, they are also joined by their 
coach, Judy O’Donoghue, parents, including Sylvia Ard of 
Brantford, and proud great-uncle, Walter Ard, of Meota, 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I, too, would like 
to extend a welcome to the members of the Crystal Formations, 
silver medal winners in the novice division. 
 
In particular, though, I would like to extend a welcome to one 
of the skating Silver Blades, whose uncle has had some 
experience in skating on thin ice himself, over the years, in the 
rink, and that is the rink that is the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
Leanne Schrum’s uncle is Ed Tchorzewski, our former wizard 
of Finance, who as much as anyone made Friday’s excellent 
budget possible. Ed is a proud grandparent a few times over, 
and I ask members to welcome Leanne and all the Crystal 
Formations synchronized skating team to the Saskatchewan 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I also would like to welcome the group 
into the proceedings today. And I hope you enjoy the 
proceedings, and please be welcomed by the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

A Budget for Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Harper: — More good news for Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re on the way, the bus is headed down the road, 
and the road is getting fixed. Friday’s Saskatchewan budget is 
the talk of coffee row, the boardroom, the union hall, the 
schoolroom, and the accountant’s office. 
 
It’s a budget made in Saskatchewan, by Saskatchewan people, 
for Saskatchewan people. We did not have to ask permission of 
the Calgary businessmen to bring down our eighth consecutive 
balanced budget. Our budget increases spending and services in 
key areas such as education, transportation, and health care; a 
budget that continues to lighten a personal tax load of 
Saskatchewan people. Nothing but good news. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the opposition have a choice: they can either 
get on the bus or get out of the way because we’re off to a 
prosperous future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Raymore Rockets Win Hockey Championship 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last Friday 
night the Raymore Rockets won the Senior A Men’s Provincial 
Hockey Championship when they defeated the Cupar Canucks 
6 to 3 in the second of a three game series. The Canucks . . . the 
Rockets won an earlier game by a score of 5 to 3. 
 
The Raymore Rockets have a long history of being provincial 
champions. They’ve won the Men’s Provincial C Hockey 
Championship on a number of occasions in the past years. The 
team is coached by Brian Bentz, managed by Howard Dobson, 
and the trainer is Cal Leganchuk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to offer my congratulations to 
the players, team officials, and fans on a job well done. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Nations Initiatives in Saskatchewan’s Budget 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. There was so much good news in 
Friday’s budget that some of it might get passed over because 
of the major announcements in health, education, highways, tax 
reduction. And there is so much good news and it’s so fun to 
repeat, Mr. Speaker, our eighth balanced budget. So much to 
tout and so little time to do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One item in particular must be highlighted, Mr. Speaker. And I 
am surprised the opposition’s Finance critic, an educator 
himself, had nothing to say about it, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan’s strategy for Metis and off-reserve First Nations 
people will help make the budget theme of connecting to the 
future a reality for too many who have too often been left out, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As the document says, a prosperous future for Saskatchewan 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 275 

 

depends on the full participation of all its people. All people, 
Mr. Speaker, ensuring that all are able to participate in our 
society and in our economy is critical to our future economic 
well-being. 
 
More importantly, Mr. Speaker, it is crucial to our moral status 
as a compassionate community. We must act, and we are acting 
now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget includes $10 million in incremental 
funding for new or expanded services to ensure that we make 
rapid progress in education, in employment, in housing, and in 
general social well-being for all citizens, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Birch Hills Public Library Receives Award 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
this afternoon to inform our honoured Assembly of a 
remarkable achievement pertaining to the town of Birch Hills, 
and more specifically, Mr. Speaker, to the Birch Hills Public 
Library. 
 
The public library has been an integral part of the Birch Hills 
community since 1958 and was even featured in a National 
Film Board production entitled Books for Beaver River released 
in 1961. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the hard work and dedication to reader 
services by librarian, Helen Shilling, circulation for the year 
2000 is up 34 per cent over the previous year. 
 
The local Library Board is also to be commended for its efforts, 
Mr. Speaker. The board’s hands-on approach in fundraising has 
had a tremendous effect on keeping the library on solid 
financial footing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the fabulous year the Birch Hills 
Library has experienced, the Wapiti Regional Library has 
awarded Birch Hills the 2000 Wapiti Award. This award given 
annually since 1986 recognizes outstanding public library 
services and also recognizes the contributions made by the local 
board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
town of Birch Hills and their public library. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SGI Donates Van for Nipawin Youth Programs 
 
Mr. McCall: — Stop the press, Mr. Speaker. More good news 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
The Nipawin youth group along with the Nipawin School 
Division outreach program received a special gift from SGI on 
February 28 of this year — a 1998 Chevrolet van. This van will 
give young people in the Nipawin area who do not have access 
to transportation the opportunity to attend programs in the town 
of Nipawin after school, in the evenings, or on weekends. 
 

This story provides yet another great example of the strong 
commitment our Crown corporations have to the people of this 
province. Our Crowns are good corporate citizens, good 
corporate neighbours, and they are always looking for ways to 
pitch in and help the Saskatchewan community at large. 
 
In this case, Mr. Speaker, it was by providing a van to be put to 
good use by the youth in the Nipawin area. In other cases it is 
through sponsorship of local amateur sports and recreation. 
 
I am proud of the good work that our Crown corporations do in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. Strong community support from our 
Crown corporations plays a crucial role in making certain that 
this province and its people continue to make progress on the 
road to an ever-brighter, more prosperous future. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Free-Fall Laboratory Proposed for Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s obvious that 
I’m excited about what I have to make a statement about today. 
 
Saskatchewan has always been noted for its inventiveness and 
its innovation, traditionally due to the way the agriculture 
community manage to survive. And some of that innovation 
inventiveness has become evident in our scientific community 
and, probably most notably, out of Saskatoon. 
 
One of our scientists out of Saskatoon made an announcement 
the other day, which I think is rather interesting, and that is to 
use one of the existing but abandoned old mine shafts from the 
potash mines as a place to test for the longest free-fall 
laboratory in the world. You can actually have 14 seconds of 
absolute free fall and you can slow that down a little bit to 
simulate gravity on other planets. So it’s been picked up in a 
major sort of a way by the scientific community throughout the 
world, Mr. Speaker and I think that’s exciting for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And not only is that a great example of free fall, but I think 
since last Friday the NDP budget is another example of a major 
free fall of a political party in this province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Trades and Technology Competition Held in Moose Jaw 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
speak today about the Skills Canada Saskatchewan Competition 
that took place this past weekend in Moose Jaw. 
 
Saturday was an intense day of trades and technology 
competitions by Saskatchewan’s youth. About 300 young 
people demonstrated their skills and what they have to offer the 
world. 
 
Saskatchewan has a lot to be proud of, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan spirit was strong and alive in Moose Jaw this 
past weekend. 



276 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

Skills Canada Saskatchewan encourages all young people to 
find rewarding careers in trades and technology, both within our 
province and around the world. These young people are great 
role models for other youth throughout our province. More and 
more, people are recognizing the tremendous career opportunity 
Saskatchewan trades and technologies have to offer. 
 
The result for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is skilled workers 
earning good wages, quality work, satisfied paying customers, 
profitable business, and a growing economy. 
 
Congratulations to everyone who participated this past 
weekend. The future is bright in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Spinal Cord Injuries Research Team 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are all familiar 
with spinal cord injuries, especially since the high profile injury 
sustained by actor Christopher Reeve. In that specific instance, 
I’m pleased to mention that Mr. Reeve has recovered some 
touch and pressure sensation in his torso, hands and thighs and 
some mobility in his shoulders. 
 
This sort of thrilling progress is made possible by research 
teams like one at the University of Saskatchewan that are 
experimenting with new therapies. The University of 
Saskatchewan team’s research was recently published in the 
prestigious Federation of American Societies for Experimental 
Biology Journal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much of the damage caused by a spinal injury is 
caused by swelling after the injury is sustained. The University 
of Saskatchewan research is successfully investigating the 
methods of reducing that swelling using experimental drugs. 
The team leader is Dr. Bernhard Juurlink. The team includes 
neurosurgeon Robert Griebel, pharmacy professor Phyllis 
Patterson, post-doctoral fellow Huse Kamencic, and clinical 
research fellow Elisabeth Shultke. 
 
This research will benefit many people around the world, Mr. 
Speaker. I call upon this Assembly to join me in congratulating 
this team of talented Saskatchewan researchers on a job well 
done and in praying for their continued success. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Staffing and Taxation Implications of Budget 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today my 
question is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Friday’s budget laid out a clear plan to grow the 
government and absolutely no plan to grow Saskatchewan. 
Bigger government, more departments, 570 more civil servants 
— that’s the NDP (New Democratic Party) plan. Keep taxes 
high, grow the government. 
 

In the meantime our tax base is shrinking. Saskatchewan has 
lost 13,000 jobs and we’ve lost 6,700 people in the last year. 
And what’s the NDP’s solution? Keep taxes high, hire 570 
more civil servants, and grow the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the NDP budget contain a plan to grow 
the government and no plan to grow Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I do not know what it is 
that the Leader of the Opposition has against tax cuts when the 
small-business corporate tax rate in this province has been cut 
by 25 per cent in Friday’s budget. Warmly, warmly welcomed 
by the business community across Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition asks about those new 
public servants that are included in this budget. It is, Mr. 
Speaker, this opposition who has called for improvements and 
work in our highways and roads across Saskatchewan. Are they 
now saying that we shouldn’t have the people to do it? 
 
It is this opposition, Mr. Speaker, and their members, who have 
called for a response to the Child Advocate’s report. Is it the 
opposition’s point of view that we should not have child care 
workers to look after these children? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget has been received across 
Saskatchewan warmly by business people, working people, 
farming people, rural people across Saskatchewan. Only in this 
House, Mr. Speaker, do we find this kind of opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the Premier, the 
Saskatchewan Party wants to grow Saskatchewan; it’s your 
party that just wants to grow the government. And that’s the 
problem with the NDP plan. It’s unsustainable unless the tax 
base is growing. And, Mr. Speaker, thanks to the NDP, the tax 
base in Saskatchewan is not growing, it’s shrinking. Thirteen 
thousand fewer jobs in the last year, 6,700 people moved right 
out the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The NDP is growing government, yes. But it’s shrinking its tax 
base and that’s a recipe for disaster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did Friday’s budget contain absolutely no 
plan, no vision at all for growing our tax base and bringing new 
jobs and new people into the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote a friend of 
mine . . . operates a small business in Moose Jaw. He says, 
quote: 
 

You’re talking about a 25 per cent reduction in the tax rate. 
That is fairly substantial. When you talk about 25 per cent 
in your income tax rate anybody, for example, paying 
$10,000 just saved $2,500. This is a part-time staff member 
for probably six months. 
 

Mr. Speaker, across Saskatchewan the business community, the 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 277 

 

small business community that is the economic engine that 
creates many of our jobs in this province, are greeting this 
budget with gratitude and applause. 
 
The only place we hear this kind of criticism is from this 
opposition and that leader, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I ask that all remarks be directed through the 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the 
Premier must be in a dream world because all over 
Saskatchewan his budget or his Finance minister’s budget is 
getting the thumbs-down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s own budget document show how little 
confidence they have. They don’t have the confidence in their 
own ability to create new jobs. In the 1999 election campaign, 
they sent around a paper to everybody in Saskatchewan saying, 
we’ll help create 30,000 more jobs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in this budget they’re projecting perhaps 
20,000 jobs over the next five years. In reality, Mr. Speaker, 
there is no way they’re going to even reach 20,000 given the 
disastrous budget they just introduced. 
 
In the last year alone, Mr. Speaker — and the Premier doesn’t 
seem to get this —Saskatchewan lost 13,000 jobs, and that’s 
thanks to his government and its policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question: why is the NDP growing 
government when it has no plan to grow the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, over the course of this 
weekend in response to the budget, people in Saskatchewan, 
people like road builder Brent Warner says the budget was 
pretty popular. 
 
Gary Shaddock, SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association), the school trustees: we see this year’s budget as 
an investment in our children. Wayne Clements of the STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation): we are quite excited. 
Lyle Leys, Chair of SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations): certainly there are positive things here. 
Greg Ahenakew: it’s a good first step. Peter Gilmer, 
anti-poverty ministry: we’re happy to see funds. 
 
Road builders, community builders, the economic, 
small-business people of our province are in agreement, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a good budget — good for the people of 
Saskatchewan and good for the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been talking to Saskatchewan people. I get 
the feeling the Leader of the Opposition’s been back in Calgary 
having another dinner. Maybe some of his friends over there 
don’t like it. But, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
across the province are applauding this budget and this Minister 
of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I would say to the Premier if 
he’ll listen, we did have a dinner in Calgary, and we met with a 
lot of people who used to live in Saskatchewan. And yes, Mr. 
Speaker, we did raise some money, and we brought it back to 
spend here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we want to bring people 
back to Saskatchewan after years of the NDP driving them out. 
That’s the problem, Mr. Speaker. The NDP has no plan to 
attract people and jobs from other provinces, and then they 
condemn the Saskatchewan Party for even talking to the 
business community in Calgary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to continue talking to the business 
community in Alberta and other provinces, and we’re going to 
tell them that Saskatchewan will be a great province to do 
business in, to create jobs in, once we get rid of the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, how on earth does the 
Premier expect to attract new investment and jobs from other 
provinces when he won’t even sit down and talk to these 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know who the 
Leader of the Opposition talks to and I don’t know who he 
listens to. But I know that we’re listening to Saskatchewan 
people. And I’m listening to the voice, for instance, of the 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business director, Marilyn 
Braun, who says about this budget, what that will do — 
referring to the reduction in the small-business corporate tax 
rate — what that will do is to encourage small firms to grow 
and expand and that is something we recommended to the 
government and it’s apparent they’ve been listening, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, listens to the small-business 
community. We listen to the people involved in agriculture, we 
listen to the people involved in our resource industries, we 
listen to people in the community, and we make our decisions 
based on that kind of opinion. We do not go and hold 
$250-a-plate dinners in Calgary to get our advice from there, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We get our advice from Saskatchewan people. It’s 
Saskatchewan people who are applauding this budget all across 
the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course small 
business are going to lose all of that tax-cut benefit because 
they’re going to pay higher municipal taxes courtesy of the 
NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happened to the NDP’s election promise if 
they said we will create an additional 30,000 new jobs within 
the next five years? Thirty thousand jobs, new jobs, was the 



278 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

NDP’s election promise. But now in their own budget they 
admit that they are not going to meet this goal. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, according to Statistics Canada they’re losing jobs — 
13,000 jobs in the last year. Meanwhile they hire 570 new 
government employees. Mr. Speaker, it’s a growing 
government and a shrinking province. That’s the NDP plan and 
it just simply does not make any sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP growing the government and 
shrinking the province? Why are they backing away from their 
job creation projections of 1999? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
happy to answer this question on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, and I want to say to members opposite that our 
commitment is to grow jobs. But I tell you what our 
commitment also is — the professional civil servants who serve 
this people and have well. 
 
And I want to tell you the difference between members opposite 
and members on this side, and I quote from the Leader of the 
Opposition: 
 

Before I agreed to run for the leadership I asked MLAs, do 
you know where the deadwood are? Do you know who the 
skunks are? They assured me they know those people. Civil 
servants can be very powerful. Look what they did to the 
Devine government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there is a difference. We respect the men and 
women who work in the Crowns and who work in the civil 
service. They don’t. We’re going to build this province working 
with civil servants, not working against them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Personal Tax Provisions in the Budget 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my questions are also for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP took in over $500 million in windfall oil 
revenues last year. They socked away over $500 million in their 
election slush fund. And how much of that money did they give 
back to Saskatchewan families in the form of new, personal tax 
cuts? Zero — 500 million in the slush fund, millions of dollars 
to hire 570 new civil servants, and no new tax cuts for 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP ignoring the needs of families 
hurt by higher SaskEnergy rates, higher SaskPower rates, and 
higher property taxes? Why is the NDP refusing to give 
Saskatchewan families a break by cutting their taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, after the budget on Friday, I 
went out for Chinese food with some family members and 
friends and we had a very nice meal at the Peking House in 

Regina. And my fortune cookie came along and it says, Mr. 
Speaker, and I quote, “strong and bitter words indicate a weak 
cause.” And that’s . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Because I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
and the people of the province, they said they wanted us to fix 
the roads. We’re fixing the roads, Mr. Speaker. They said they 
wanted more money in the schools. We’re putting more money 
in the schools, Mr. Speaker. They said they wanted us to cut 
income taxes. We’re cutting income taxes, Mr. Speaker. They 
said they wanted us to cut business taxes. We’re cutting 
business taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what are they complaining about? Is it the nine credit rating 
upgrades in a row, Mr. Speaker? Or is it the eighth consecutive 
balanced budget, something they would never deliver in a 
dozen years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting — the Saskatchewan Party 
believes in listening to Saskatchewan families and taking 
advice. The Minister of Finance is taking advice from a fortune 
cookie. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday the Minister of 
Finance said we didn’t want to give taxpayers a break because 
he didn’t want to reach into his bank account. That speaks 
volumes about NDP’s arrogant attitude. 
 
First of all, it’s not his bank account — that money belongs to 
the taxpayers. And second, when the minister says he doesn’t 
want to reach into his bank account, he’s really telling 
Saskatchewan families he’d rather reach into your bank 
account. He’d rather reach into your bank account for higher 
energy bills, for higher power bills. Meanwhile the Minister of 
Finance is sitting on a $500 million slush fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does the minister justify sitting on a $500 
million bank account while the NDP continues to attack 
Saskatchewan families’ bank accounts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House 
all know, and the people of Saskatchewan already know, that if 
those members ever get their hands on the purse strings of this 
province there will be no surplus, Mr. Speaker, because they 
will spend every penny that comes in and more so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if we had listened to the members opposite last year, Mr. 
Speaker, and spent all the money — because that’s what they 
told us to do last year — we would be in deficit this year, Mr. 
Speaker. That is the record of the members opposite and 
amazingly enough, Mr. Speaker, they have learned nothing 
from the past. That is the plan of the members opposite today. 
To spend all of the money that the people have, Mr. Speaker. 
That would lead us back into deficit and debt. 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 279 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had eight consecutive balanced 
budgets, nine credit rating upgrades, and that’s our plan and 
that’s where we’re going to continue to go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, it’s particularly galling that the NDP is 
telling Saskatchewan families to tighten their belts while at the 
same time the NDP is loosening the government’s belt by 
several notches. 
 
The NDP will hire 570 new civil servants and spend 50 million 
more on government salaries this year. At the same time they 
are telling taxpayers we have no new money for any new tax 
cuts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the NDP tell the Saskatchewan families 
that they have no money for new tax cuts, no more money for 
further energy rebates, when they have millions of dollars to 
hire 570 new government employees this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is how nonsensical 
the position of the opposition is. They say they want us to fix 
the roads, but they don’t want us to hire anybody to fix them, 
Mr. Speaker. Think about the logic behind that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, I want to tell the members opposite, I was on the 
open-line this morning on CKRM and a fellow called Al 
phoned, who was a Saskatchewan Party supporter, he said — 
and he also said he approved of the budget, Mr. Speaker — and 
he said that this government is doing a good job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think Al and a lot of other people in the province, Mr. 
Speaker, are starting to question whether the Stockwell 
Day-inspired, voodoo snake oil from the opposition makes any 
sense. And I think the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
know that it doesn’t make any sense, and they’re going to look 
at our plan for education, for health care, for transportation, and 
for the information highway, and they’re going to support our 
plan and reject the snake oil economics of the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister has raised a very 
important point about how that government is going to grow its 
size — how it’s going to become bigger. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you about an article of this morning, 
the order-in-council. The NDP has hired the first of its 570 new 
civil servants — his name is Dennis Gruending. That’s the 
defeated MP (Member of Parliament), NDP MP, Dennis 
Gruending. By the way, that’s Nettie Wiebe’s brother-in-law, 
Dennis Gruending. He’s going to be a communications advisor 
in the Premier’s office. 
 
That’s the NDP priorities. No new tax cuts for Saskatchewan 
families — government jobs for defeated NDP MPs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does the Premier justify telling Saskatchewan 
families to tighten their belts while creating new jobs for 

defeated NDP MPs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what this 
government won’t apologize for is hiring qualified people to do 
jobs within executive government and other areas. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, think of the silliness 
of the position. We in this budget are hiring 86 full-time 
equivalents to work on highway construction and repair. We are 
hiring 60 full-time equivalents to respond to the Children’s 
Advocate report on social services — our kids, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s deadwood? 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, those members are on very much a 
misguided path. The people of Saskatchewan want good, 
decent, and responsive government. It takes people to deliver 
that and we will ensure that the qualified people required in this 
province are going to be there to do the job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Municipal Governments 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Municipal Government. 
 
Well the verdict is in, Mr. Speaker. Cities, towns, and villages 
in Saskatchewan are giving two thumbs down to the NDP’s 
budget. The Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association 
says the NDP’s budget is going to drive property taxes up 
between 3 and 6 per cent. That means an NDP property tax 
increase for urban taxpayers of between 15 and $20 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government had a choice. They could 
have cut taxes and reduced the size of government, but instead 
the NDP chose to raise property taxes and hire 570 new 
government civil servants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Municipal Government 
explain why he is supporting an NDP budget that raises 
property taxes to pay for 570 new government employees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to tell you and the 
members opposite that this government is committed to all the 
municipalities throughout this province. And we have been 
responsive and we have been listening to them and we ask for 
their input. And I would just like to, I would just like to quote 
from a media release on January 24, 2001: 
 

Local governments seek education tax relief from the 
Finance minister. The presidents of three local government 
associations met with Finance minister Eric Cline on 
Wednesday to remind the government of the need for 
education tax relief for property taxpayers in the upcoming 
provincial budget. 

 



280 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, did people here hear what is going to go into 
education this year? Twice the amount, twice the amount, Mr. 
Speaker, of what the interest is going to be on the debt that was 
racked up during the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister says he’s been listening to municipalities. Well Friday 
afternoon that minister should have been listening to six mayors 
and Mike Badham that had a press conference. Here’s some of 
the things they had to say, Mr. Speaker. SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) president Mike Badham 
says, and I quote: 
 

Urban governments are looking at property tax increases 
that could average between 3 and 6 per cent. 

 
Saskatoon Mayor Jim Maddin said a copy of the budget was the 
only thing the NDP people had for his city. 
 
Regina Mayor Pat Fiacco said, and I quote: 
 

Municipalities are completely shut out of this budget. 
Urban centres have been absolutely blanked. 
 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister, is that the influence that Liberal 
member from Melville has brought to the cabinet table? A 
budget that completely shuts out cities, towns, and villages, and 
forces a big fat property tax increase for Saskatchewan 
families? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I just remind the member 
opposite to be careful what he asks for. As the Finance 
minister’s fortune cookie says, he may get what he asks for. 
 
Let me just remind the member opposite . . . And I recall the 
other day, he was asking about the Liberal influence on this 
particular budget. Well I just want to remind members here that 
in 1999, our platform, the Liberal platform, the coalition 
government here, said that highways were a major priority. 
 
Well guess what? When the Minister of Finance announced the 
amount of money, the excessive amount of money for our 
highway system in this great province, Mr. Speaker, it knocked 
the hon. member from North Battleford right out of his chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — This budget has the largest increase in 
education ever seen in this province, Mr. Speaker. Those were 
priorities of the Liberals. 
 
And now that we’re in the coalition government, I’m amazed; 
and I accept the humility by the member from North Battleford 
for not accepting a lot of the credit because he had a lot to do 
with this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
to the minister, it’s not only us that are asking for money for 
municipalities. It’s reeves and mayors and aldermen and 

councils from all over this province. He should have listened to 
what they had to say and they wouldn’t have been shut out from 
this budget. 
 
The mayor of Saskatoon says his city was shut right out. The 
mayor of Regina says his government . . . this government, is 
ignoring cities altogether. Is that Liberal influence in this NDP 
cabinet, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, why are the Liberals MLAs for Melville and 
Saskatoon Northwest propping up an NDP government that 
shuts out their communities and raises property taxes for their 
own constituents, while growing the size of government by 
hiring 570 new government employees? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Municipal Government do the 
right thing and oppose — I repeat, Mr. Speaker — oppose the 
NDP government’s plan to ignore urban municipalities and 
drive taxes even higher? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
are confused again. I remind the members opposite of their 
platform where they talked about decreases on personal income 
tax and they talked about more money for highways and they 
said they were going to freeze all other spending to the rate of 
inflation. 
 
(14:15) 
 
And what that means, Mr. Speaker, their vision, their platform, 
would have meant actual increases to property taxes on the 
municipal and education side. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, on the education side, if 
we would have targeted the amounts to inflation, there would 
have been $60 million more under their plan in the foundation 
operating grant. In essence, it’s over $60 million they would 
have off-loaded onto property payers all across this province, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s not our plan, our plan is to do the best 
we can for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
government, I’m very pleased to table the response to question 
no. 5. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 5 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — On behalf of the government, I am very pleased 
to table the response to question no. 6. 
 
The Speaker: — Six is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — Request for conversion to motion for orders 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 281 

 

for return debatable for question no. 7. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 8 is converted to motion for 
return debatable. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s great to be back here on a Monday and to continue 
with the remarks on the budget that was proposed last Friday. 
 
I had an opportunity on Friday, Mr. Speaker, to just touch on a 
few brief areas where we saw this government move in a totally 
wrong way. And I want to develop a few more concepts, Mr. 
Speaker, this afternoon because I think very clearly I had the 
opportunity to listen to people across this province over the 
weekend, to listen to talk shows, to look at the articles in the 
paper. And we have recognized that there are about five or six 
key areas. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, this budget has created a bigger and 
more intrusive government, that’s number one. 
 
Number two, there’s a total lack of vision; there is no plan. 
There is no plan to grow this province, there’s no plan to 
address the property tax. There is just no plan. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, we will have higher taxes for 
Saskatchewan people because of this budget. 
 
The fourth point, Mr. Speaker, is that job creation is just not a 
priority of this government. And finally, the government — not 
people; not the small businesses — they will be the 
beneficiaries of this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is not written by a government with a 
serious interest in the long-term interests of Saskatchewan. This 
is a budget written by a government worried only about its own 
short-term political interests. Very little mention, Mr. Speaker, 
about future economic growth. What will we see for this 
province? 
 
As the Leader of the Opposition pointed out in question period 
this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, their goal of 30,000 jobs 
announced in their 1999 election campaign has now been 
reduced — it’s now only 20,000. And people in this province 
don’t have confidence in that number, let me tell you that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There is a concept out there that says that the political future of 
this government is more important than the future of families in 
this province. We see more money spent in some areas. And 

while it is welcome and I do want to congratulate the 
government for the specific spending in certain areas — we see 
extra spending in Highways — we’re not sure exactly in how 
much over last year. 
 
We see extra spending in Education. We know what the 
increases have been for education. Education has been calling 
for at least $32 million just to break even. There is no plan to 
address the 60/40 concept on property tax. 
 
We take a look about health care and the fact that this 
government is touting a $2.2 billion expenditure on health care. 
The question, Mr. Speaker, that has to be asked — and people 
in this province are asking — what did this government promise 
to spend last year in relationship to what they’ve announced this 
year? Those are numbers we have to take a look at. 
 
I am concerned that this government’s sudden decision to 
loosen the purse strings in these areas is not accompanied by an 
overall plan. This is a government that doesn’t know where it’s 
going or where it wants Saskatchewan to go. That’s a recipe 
that allows a lot more money being spent on services that are 
the same or worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at the Health budget, as I’ve said. 
The Health budget is now $2.2 billion. You know, Mr. Speaker, 
five years ago it was $1.5 billion. Yet even with such a large 
budget increase in a relatively short period of time, has service 
improved? I’d venture to say, Mr. Speaker, if you’ve talked to 
people who are on waiting lists — not just waiting lists for 
elective surgery, waiting lists for urgent surgery; those lists are 
growing — those people don’t believe that they have improved 
services. 
 
I think many Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, will tell you 
that and will tell you very clearly that the closure of health 
facilities, that the reduction of acute care beds, has placed a 
further burden on them, not only emotionally but financially as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know of dozens and dozens of people that are travelling 
longer and longer distance to receive acute care services. Mr. 
Speaker, let’s take a look at the mid-year financial report in the 
area of health expenditures. 
 
Last year’s budget — as the Minister of Finance bragged about 
— was one of the largest expenditures in health care. And then 
during the course of the year, there was an update contained in 
the mid-year financial report, which is the Minister of Finance’s 
own document. In this document, Mr. Speaker, he indicates that 
the Transition Fund, the $150 million that was set aside in last 
year’s budget, was now being increased by a further $33 
million. 
 
Where was that money coming from, Mr. Speaker? Well, that 
was federal transfers. In the fall of 2000, the federal government 
announced a billion dollar program for medical equipment 
across Canada; Saskatchewan’s share being about $33 million. 
So the province took that and it increased its Transition Fund to 
$183 million. 
 
At the same time, in the mid-year projection, it said that this 
government projects to spend on health 1.987 on regular health 



282 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

care services. So let’s add those two numbers up, Mr. Speaker 
— 1.987 plus the $183 million from the transition medical 
equipment fund, we now have $2.17 billion projected to be 
spent in the fiscal year just ended two days ago. And this 
government stands last Friday and says, we’re now spending 
$2.2 billion on health care. 
 
Well let’s look at that, Mr. Speaker. 2.207, 2.170 projected to 
have just been spent. Mathematics tells me that’s a difference of 
$37 million. That’s the only increase in health care, Mr. 
Speaker. Not 200-plus-million dollars. An actual expenditure 
over last year’s projections of $37 million. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, and as my colleagues pointed out, when 
you’re looking at a $2 billion budget, and you have an increase 
of only $37 million, that’s less than two per cent. That’s less 
than the inflation rate. 
 
So while the minister over there talked about the fact that we 
couldn’t freeze costs because they wouldn’t meet the 
expectations of health care. They’re not only not meeting the 
inflation, they’re spending less than that, Mr. Speaker — less. 
And they’re talking that this is the greatest thing for health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate that these numbers are 
contained in the mid-year financial report — very clearly, they 
are indicated. They are the Minister of Finance’s own numbers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at what we might see over the 
next five or six months. You know what I predict? I predict that 
members opposite will convince themselves that all problems 
and areas such as health care or highways have now been 
solved because budgets have been increased. That’s what 
they’re going to do. They’re going to convince themselves that 
all the problems have gone away because they’re spending $2.2 
billion on health care. That’s just not going to cut it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Of course spending money is the easiest thing for a government 
to do. But if that government’s vision stops at simply writing 
the cheque, the taxpayers aren’t going to get much for their tax 
dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last fall a problem, which I’m sure was occurring 
in many areas of the province, was taking place in the East 
Central District health area of which part of my constituency 
lies in that district. There was a public meeting called to discuss 
the future of the four acute care beds in the community of Foam 
Lake. I want to remind the members and you, Mr. Speaker, that 
East Central District is the district that currently does not have a 
board. It does not have an elected board; it does not have an 
appointed board; it has a one-member board. 
 
This gentleman, Dr. Klippert, was sent to East Central to 
manage the affairs because things had gotten, well, I guess a 
little out of hand, and there was a concern that people were very 
worried about health care delivery in that East Central region. 
 
At this public meeting, Mr. Speaker, in October of 2000, over 
700 people turned out to question Mr. Klippert, or I should say 
Dr. Klippert, on what he would intends to do. 
 
And I want to read a quotation, and it’s a direct quotation of Dr. 

Klippert as to why he was there. And this is his quote, and he 
says, I quote: 
 

In light of my mandate here which is largely an economic 
one and not a medical one . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have a person in charge, in East Central 
District, determining the health care needs — the health care 
needs of the people of the East Central District with a financial 
mandate, not a medical mandate. Couldn’t care whether or not 
the services are maintained in Foam Lake or whether people 
have to drive 65 miles to get the next acute care level. Doesn’t 
matter whether there’s 2,000 or in fact, as the committee has 
indicated, much more than that, over 2,000 people that need that 
care, but it’s a financial question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the problem. This government is not listening to the 
needs of the people of Saskatchewan. The letters have been 
many, Mr. Speaker. These are people that want this government 
to be aware of the concerns of everyone in this province, not 
just the specific people in their constituencies. They have to be 
aware of what’s going on out in Foam Lake, Saskatchewan as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is no vision. And I just want to share another example 
that further emphasizes that fact that this government lacks a 
vision. We saw an example of this lack of vision just a week or 
so in the area of highways. The member from Thunder Creek 
told us about Highway 43. Along this highway are a number of 
businesses, including manufacturing businesses, that depend on 
the highway to transport their products. 
 
Many people are employed in these businesses. But rather than 
take into consideration the economic importance of this 
highway, we heard the minister say just the other day, the 
government will be plunging ahead with a plan to build a 
parallel grid road in the area instead of fixing the highway. This 
despite the fact that employers say this decision could cause 
their businesses to move. No plan, Mr. Speaker, no concept 
about listening to the people and doing what’s right for them. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Lack of vision, Mr. Speaker, I think has to be emphasized to the 
Minister of — so-called, I guess — the so-called Minister of 
Rural Revitalization and the current Minister of Highways. I 
think that person has to sit down with officials from both sides, 
or maybe sit down with herself, and have a discussion about a 
rational highway policy in this province before the money that 
has been made available simply disappears down the black hole 
of political necessity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened with intent to the Finance minister on 
Friday talk about the need to grow the number of civil servants, 
the number of people working for the Department of Highways. 
And I noticed that the Minister of Highways, in the Saturday 
edition of The Leader-Post, says that the Department of 
Highways will hire 90 workers to cope with extra construction. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if those 90 workers are there to replace the 
workers that this government previously removed, and are there 
to fix the potholes and maintain the roads and ensure that we 
have safe driving conditions, then we need to hear that from 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 283 

 

that government. But I think, Mr. Speaker, those 90 workers are 
there to compete with the public sector and the private sector 
now, as far as road construction. 
 
I have a number of road contractors in my constituency, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m sure every one of the constituencies has a 
person who is involved in road construction. 
 
I want to tell you about two contractors, Mr. Speaker. Frank 
Rioch and Son’s Construction Ltd. in my hometown of 
Invermay has been very concerned in the last number of years 
by the fact that there just isn’t enough work to keep their 
machines operating. They employ a number of people, they are 
good contractors, and there just hasn’t been enough work. Merv 
Alberts Construction, out of a small community of Lintlaw, has 
a great number of earthmoving machines ready to go to work, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if this government is talking about extra contracts — and we 
applaud them for that — if they want to build some new road, 
improve some new road, if they’re wanting to do that, put those 
tenders out there, Mr. Speaker. There are contractors ready to 
do the work. They don’t have to hire new, departmental people 
— that’s a given. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at again the Minister of Finance’s 
numbers on highway and Highway budget. You know last year 
again, mid-term report, I recall the Minister of Finance in his 
press conference saying how proud he was of the fact that the 
estimated $250 million being spent on highways for the last 
fiscal year was in fact being upped by 25 million. 
 
And we heard the former minister of Highways tell us many a 
time over — I think he announced that $25 million a couple of 
times but I’m not sure — and he says that for sure there was 
going to be an additional $25 million worth of highway 
spending for last fiscal year. And we said great — 250 in the 
budget, 25 million additional spending — that’s 275. 
 
Then along came the mid-term financial report, windfall oil and 
gas revenues. And the Minister of Finance, Minister of 
Highways, said we will spend $50 million a year for the next 
three years to improve highways — 150 million was put into 
the fund for each of the three years following. 
 
Every person in this province knew that the minister had 
announced 25 million more for spending for last year, that was 
275; an additional 50 million projected, that was going to be 
325 million. That’s the math, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well let’s take a look. The budget says 311 million. So the 
expectations that this Finance minister and this government put 
into the minds of the people of Saskatchewan was a spending of 
325 million. Only 311 million this year, Mr. Speaker. In fact 
there are going to be reductions in terms of some of the things 
that were already planned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at rural revitalization. We see 
now that when the new Premier came up with this term during 
the leadership campaign, all it was was really a slogan. Even the 
Minister of Rural Revitalization seems to have trouble 
explaining what the new department — or should I say the new 
bureaucracy? — really is going to do. 

What we do know from this budget is that it will employ eight 
people in downtown Regina at a cost of $800,000. I’m sure the 
people of rural Saskatchewan are jumping for joy today 
knowing that they have those eight people in the bureaucracy 
here in Regina. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this type of forward-looking rational 
planning, rational planning, is needed throughout government 
based on the long-term needs of Saskatchewan. And that long 
term should simply not be based on surrender to current trends 
— trends that show our population falling and growing older. 
 
But under this government the situation continues to worsen. 
During the last year Saskatchewan lost the net of over 6,600 
people to other provinces. That’s a situation, Mr. Speaker, that 
we can’t be proud of. We can’t be proud of the fact that we are 
continuing to lose. And Statistics Canada has reported that at 
current trends, Saskatchewan will be one of three provinces to 
lose population over the next 25 years. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in the recently released HSURC 
(Health Services Utilization and Research Commission) report 
that I’m sure my colleague, the critic for Health care, will talk 
about, in that report HSURC projected what the population will 
be for Saskatchewan, but they also looked at the various age 
categories and tried to project what group of people we will 
have in the various age groups. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the alarming thing — and I say 
alarming for everyone, including the government, including the 
opposition, including everybody in this province — is the fact 
that the age group 20 to 49, that group by the year 2015 will 
decline by almost 40,000 people. We will have 40,000 people 
less in the age category 20 to 49, and it’s contained in the health 
report. That is something that is going to be very, very painful 
for this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That group of 20 to 49. Let’s look at who that is. That’s people 
probably with families. That’s people are probably in the latter 
part of their working careers who are maybe at the top end of 
salaries. Those are people that we need, that we need to grow 
this province. And we’re going to be 40,000 people less than 
what we have today. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, that’s only if you accept, if you 
accept the trends that this government is willing to accept. And 
we’re not willing to accept those trends, Mr. Speaker. We want 
to see this province grow. 
 
We’ve also heard about the government’s own report that a 
number of schoolchildren in Saskatchewan . . . the number of 
schoolchildren in Saskatchewan is expected to decrease by 
30,000 over the next eight years. Mr. Speaker, currently in the 
K to 12, in the K to 12 public sector, we have about 188,000 
students. That number is going to decline by 30,000. 
 
Well I think everybody who knows — if they listen to the 
statistic that the HSURC report has put forward — that we’re 
going to see a loss of people in the age category 20 to 49, that’s 
also the people that have families. And if those people are not 
here, you know what the numbers are going to do for the public 
school system, Mr. Speaker. 
 



284 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

That has to turn around. We simply cannot be satisfied that in 8 
or 10 years we’re going to be down to 150, maybe 155,000 
students in this province. That’s just not acceptable. 
 
We want to look at ways to attract and keep young people in 
this province. We need to mitigate those losses. But instead it 
appears that the current government believes that there is no 
hope for turning this around. They seem convinced that there is 
no way to attract more people to our province, so why even try? 
 
We reject that bleak NDP vision for the future. We think 
Saskatchewan can be made stronger, both in the short term and 
the long term. 
 
The long-term needs should include a desire to turn these trends 
around. We don’t have to simply accept that our province is 
destined to have one million people or less. But in order to 
make that so, we have to put in place a long-term vision that 
will attract people and investors to this province, and where 
jobs and opportunities are created in place other than 
government. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I listened to the debate on the budget 
over the last 10 days. And I was surprised by the comments 
made in the Hansard edition on March 26, 2001, when the 
member for Regina South, the government member stood in 
this House, and he said the following, Mr. Speaker: 
Saskatchewan today draws the single lowest, the single lowest 
proportion of its revenue from income taxes of any province in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an admission that we’re happy with the fact 
that we have the lowest number of people actually working and 
paying income tax. Does the member realize what his words 
have meant? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it’s a time that we have to turn this around. We have to 
be wanting to move to the position where we have a great 
number of workers in this province paying income tax. I want 
people paying large income taxes amounts, those with high 
salaries to stay here, instead of to be located in Calgary. 
 
We want those people to stay here and pay Saskatchewan tax, 
and these plans of this current government, this budget, will not 
do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
History is well-known. In 1941, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
was the third most populous province in Canada. That’s pretty 
hard to imagine, ladies and gentlemen, when we take a look at 
the fact that ’41, next to Quebec and Ontario, we had 7.7 per 
cent of the population. Saskatchewan passed the one million 
mark six decades ago, and has not managed to get much above 
that. 
 
After reaching a high of 1.032 million people in 1987 it has 
remained pretty much stagnant in terms of overall numbers, but 
it is growing older, Mr. Speaker. All hon. members should 
know . . . or should know that if something bold is not done 
quickly to turn this situation around, providing services even at 
the current level will become unsustainable over the next few 
decades. 
 
This is something that should concern everyone in this Chamber 

who has children or grandchildren. As far as I can tell, the 
members opposite see no need to turn this situation around, 
preferring to concentrate instead on righting their own political 
ship. If we are to turn this situation around and make sure 
Saskatchewan remains strong in 2010 or 2020 and beyond, we 
have to begin attracting people back to this province. And also 
keeping the people that are already here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We don’t have to accept a stagnant or falling population. It’s a 
shame that the members opposite do seem to accept it as an 
unavoidable fate for this great province. And we hear nothing 
from this government on how they believe the best way to do 
that is. There is no vision, Mr. Speaker, no plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has made it clear in our 
belief that you begin doing that by attracting investors to this 
province through competitive tax rates and an atmosphere 
where the private sector and business people are not made to 
feel like that public enemy number one. 
 
On a positive note, Mr. Speaker, we have seen the small 
business income tax reduced by two points. But one gets the 
sense that if business expects anything more from the members 
opposite, veering very suddenly and very markedly to the left, 
they can forget it. 
 
To put the small business income tax reduction into context for 
this member, let’s take a look at really what does 8 per cent 
reduction down to 6 per cent mean on July 1 of 2001. Mr. 
Speaker, I think the minister’s own numbers indicate that a 
percentage point on the small business tax is worth about $16 
million worth of revenue. One point: 16 million. So we see a 
reduction of two points on July 1 of 2001. 
 
So what did this really mean for the government of this 
province? Well 8 million in total, Mr. Speaker, 8 million in total 
is all we’re going to see in the way of a reduction. 
 
Members know the Saskatchewan Party has proposed making 
Saskatchewan a small business tax-free zone. The Premier 
stood in the House today, Mr. Speaker, and said that, you know, 
businesses were excited about the fact that we were dropping 
from eight to six. And I’m sure they are. They’re pleased to see 
some additional dollars that they can use to pay for the 
increases in SaskPower and SaskEnergy and probably property 
taxes. 
 
But can you imagine if this province delivered a message, not 
only to the businesses here in this province but to other 
businesses in other parts of the world, and said Saskatchewan is 
a small business tax-free zone? Eight is going to be zero. Can 
you imagine what that message would have been? 
 
(14:45) 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, it would have allowed the province to 
bridge that loss of about $65 million on the entire elimination of 
the small-business tax. I think it would have showed people in 
this province and in this country that Saskatchewan wanted 
people to come here to not only set up their businesses, but to 
grow the population. And in opposition to what the member for 
Regina South was saying, we would actually have more income 
tax payers, Mr. Speaker — more. 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 285 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been said many times but it’s worthy repeating 
— small business is the engine of job creation. We desperately 
need to grow the number of small businesses in this province. 
The two-point reduction in small-business income tax is a nice 
symbolic gesture, but it’s going to take more than symbolic 
gesture if we are to prime the pump for job creation in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But do we really believe the government has any real interest in 
convincing more small businesses, more investors to set up in 
Saskatchewan. Their idea of good business environment is one 
where potential investors must know that they could end up 
competing with the Government of Saskatchewan at any time if 
the NDP takes a notion to get into a particular business. 
 
Just talk to the people who are involved in cable TV delivery, 
into the security system, about how now suddenly those private 
businesses are competing with government businesses, 
government businesses who have tax dollars and they’re using 
that dollar to compete with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in studying the budget I was intrigued by the fact 
that a paragraph on page 54 talked about Crown corporation 
debt. I don’t recall the Minister of Finance saying much about 
Crown corporation debt so I want to share a paragraph on page 
54 of the document Connecting to Future, and I quote from that 
page, Mr. Speaker. It says: 
 

Crown corporation debt is projected to rise from $3.4 
billion at March 31, 2000 to $3.5 billion at March 31, 2001, 
and gradually rise to $3.7 billion over the medium term. 

 
No explanation, Mr. Speaker, as to where that money is going 
to be spent. Is it going to be put aside to compete with private 
businesses and create Crown corporations? Is it going to be 
spent in other countries to put SaskPower and SaskEnergy into 
the other countries of this world? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s many people in my 
constituency who are still waiting for the rural underground 
power program to reconnect again. There are many farms and 
many communities that still do not have the power supply 
underground because the Crown corporations cancelled that 
project. 
 
So here we see we have no clue as far as members in this 
legislature, both I think on the government’s side and this side, 
as to what the Crowns are planning to do. Why are they going 
to increase their debt by almost a half a billion dollars from 
where it was last year to where it will be in a few years from 
now? Half a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, that’s not acceptable. 
 
You know, last year the government and this province, Mr. 
Speaker, lost 13,000 jobs — the worst job creation record in 
this country. And the only plan this government has to create 
jobs is to hire nearly 600 more civil servants. That may make 
Barb Byers dance a jig in the hallways, but it does nothing for 
the long-term growth of Saskatchewan. 
 
Government salaries will increase by a whopping $50 million 
— $50 million increase to government salaries. We have clearly 
entered once again into an era of big government — more civil 
servants, more interference in the economy by government, a 

growing number of Crown corporations. What’s next? 
Nationalization of the potash mines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does that $50 million in higher salaries for 
bureaucrats represent? Let’s put it into a context, Mr. Speaker, 
put it into a perspective that I think many people can understand 
— $50 million of additional salaries is the amount needed to 
raise the personal exemption for every person in this province 
by a thousand dollars. That thousand dollar exemption for both 
people in a two-person family, Mr. Speaker, would be about 
$230 of tax savings. 
 
Now let’s take a look at $230. That’s not a lot of money, Mr. 
Speaker. But when we hear from people now talking about the 
SaskEnergy rate increases, the SaskPower rate increases, the 
projected 3 to 6 per cent of property tax increases, wouldn’t that 
have been a small step forward. Not a huge amount of loss to 
this government. In fact they could have traded that $50 million 
expenditure on additional bureaucrats to pass that money back 
to the people of Saskatchewan by increasing the exemption 
from 8,000 to 9,000. That would have been a good move, Mr. 
Speaker. But there is no vision on the side opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at the assistance provided to 
people . . . and I recall the minister on Friday reading, and I 
took a look at last year’s budget speech and I took a look at this 
year’s budget speech, and he almost read word for word the 
numbers on the income tax exemptions. Talked about the fact 
that we were decoupling, that we were going to a percentage for 
three different classes. That was all announced last year. There 
was a seniors’ exemption announced last year. All of the 
information provided to us on Friday about personal income tax 
reductions is a repeat of the year before. Nothing new. 
 
So I’ve had calls over the weekend, Mr. Speaker, from seniors 
who say, well just a minute, I took a look at what the Minister 
of Finance said was going to be a tax reduction and I looked at 
my pay stub and . . . or my income stub for January, for 
February, for March, and I’ve compared it to the pay stubs from 
the previous year — there’s no extra money in my pocket. So 
we’re waiting for the Minister of Finance to indeed show us that 
there is a tax reduction. 
 
Minister has said, be patient, at the end of the year, year to year, 
there will be a tax savings. Well people in this province are 
looking at that, and as my colleague has indicated, smoke and 
mirrors, Mr. Speaker. It’s smoke and mirrors. There may not in 
fact be any income tax savings, and for sure there are no new 
income tax savings. 
 
So we take a look at last year. Well there was a change. But 
also included with that income tax change, there was a PST 
(provincial sales tax) expansion. The provincial sales tax 
expanded to include used car sales and a number of things. 
Treasury has estimated that that’s going to be approximately 
$161 million of additional monies to this government. 
 
So with the left hand, they passed out a savings. With the right 
hand, they took it away. No real savings for the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had a call at my office this morning from people 
in my constituency who are very concerned. These are seniors 



286 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

on a fixed income. They don’t have additional money coming in 
from investments. They are relying on pension income and 
they’re very concerned. They’re very concerned that $25 rebate 
from this government for increases to the SaskEnergy rate, to 
increases to the SaskPower rate will put them in a deficit 
situation. 
 
While the government has a profit, sits on $500 million in a 
slush fund, the people in Saskatchewan are now going to be 
operating on a deficit because of the policies of this 
government. 
 
You know, and the other point, Mr. Speaker, is that people in 
this province know that the nearly 600-person increase in the 
civil service does not include a single nurse, single doctor, a 
teacher — doesn’t include any of those because all of those 
professionals fall outside of the Public Service Commission. 
But the priority for the NDP in this budget was to grow 
government. 
 
We not only do not see tax relief in this budget, we see the seed 
sown for tax increases all over this province. 
 
Saskatchewan Party has made no secret of the fact that we 
believe taxes have to come down if we are to spur economic 
development. But every time we see the NDP announce lower 
taxes, the actual levies on people and businesses tend to go up. 
We have seen the government totally ignore calls from cities 
and towns in this province for a fairer share of the pie in terms 
of revenue-sharing grants. We have seen the government 
respond with not a single penny. 
 
This will undoubtedly result in property tax increases. It was 
heard today in question period, Mr. Speaker. We hear from the 
mayors of many of the cities and towns in this province 
indicating that they probably will be increasing their mill rates 
between 3 and 6 per cent. Couple this increasing mill rates with 
the reassessment that for many businesses will be crippling and 
we see the end result is higher taxes and fewer jobs. But the 
people of Saskatchewan can take comfort in that there will be 
more civil servants to help the ministers push their pencils. 
 
The last thing we need in this province is a tax increase of any 
kind. But the NDP has decided that last year’s hike in the PST 
was not bad enough. This year the thing to do is to raise 
property taxes, which is essentially what they’ve done. 
 
If they truly cared about this province they would see that 
increasing the tax burden on people in the name of increasing 
the size of government is the wrong thing to do. Property tax 
increases coupled with higher and higher utility rates will make 
our job creation record worse rather than better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget is a failure because it will end up with 
higher taxes and a less economic . . . and less competitive 
economic environment. Mr. Speaker, this budget will do little to 
turn around the long-term trends of Saskatchewan which show a 
declining population and fewer taxpayers to carry the burden. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was astounded by a number that was presented 
to me the other day. When we start to look at the taxpayers in 
this province — and we know we’re at about a million people 
in total — and we start to look at those people that actually have 

a net payment of tax after they’ve had the benefits taken off, 
and if we exclude the people working in not only the 
government but also the teachers, the nurses, and those kind of 
people that are dependent upon government grants, you know, 
Mr. Speaker, the amount of people that are actually paying 
income tax, net income tax, is just over 130,000 people in this 
province; 130,000 thousand people of a population of one 
million. If that trend continues, that downward trend continues, 
Mr. Speaker, in a number of years our children and our 
grandchildren will not be able to sustain the province that we 
live in. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s so much in this budget that has 
to be revealed to the people of Saskatchewan. It has to be 
explained to better understand that the plans put forward by this 
government are lacking. There is no vision — that the numbers 
that they have put forward are a repeat of numbers that we’ve 
seen announced in the past; that the real numbers have to be 
explained. 
 
And we need to look at areas of education, of post-secondary 
education, and the need to establish a vision that will ensure 
that the college of medicine remains in Saskatoon. We need to 
look at agriculture and all of those different departments. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I know that the members on this side of the 
House and the various critics for those departments are anxious, 
Mr. Speaker, to get at those very topics. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks, and I will move, 
seconded by the member for Swift Current, the following 
amendment to the main motion: 
 

That all the words after Assembly be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 

 
urges the provincial government to cancel its plans to 
expand the civil service by 570.5 positions and instead use 
the money saved to provide $30 million to municipal 
governments to allow them to hold the line on property 
taxes. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise to 
second this motion, to speak in favour of seconding this motion, 
on behalf of the member for Canora-Pelly, particularly because, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a constructive amendment. More than simply 
opposing a budget that many people in Saskatchewan are 
already agreeing deserves to be opposed on principle, it 
suggests an alternative. 
 
And specifically, Mr. Speaker, it suggests an alternative for the 
Liberal members of the government opposite. Because certainly 
they are less hidebound to support a budget that is clearly 
wrong for the province, than members of the governing NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have an opportunity now, especially 
considering that one of those Liberal partners in the coalition is 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

 

the Minister for Municipal Affairs, they have a unique 
opportunity to vote with the official opposition to vote in favour 
of the amendment proposed by the member for Canora-Pelly. 
They don’t defeat the budget, Mr. Speaker, but they will make 
it better to be sure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — They have a unique opportunity to improve on 
one of the woefully inadequate portions of the budget, Mr. 
Speaker, and that portion deals with municipalities — that 
body, that third level of government in our province, that 
arguably affects economic development more than any other. 
 
That was the area of economic development that I practised for 
some time, Mr. Speaker. And I can tell you that municipalities 
have a very clear impact on job creation and on job retention. 
And perhaps most important in that formula, in the formula of 
local economic development, is the level of local taxes that both 
residences pay and that businesses pay, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The level of local taxes is absolutely crucial not only in terms of 
attracting new jobs to your community, Mr. Speaker, but in 
terms of retaining . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, but in terms of 
retaining jobs that are there already. 
 
And so this amendment affords the opportunity for the member 
from Melville who has a duty to his constituents as well as to 
the rest of the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it affords him the 
unique opportunity to vote for the amendment and improve the 
budget, not defeat it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at issues like a provincial 
budget, we look at them from different perspectives I think as 
legislators. We look at them from a local perspective, from the 
perspective of our constituents, and we also look at them from a 
more provincial perspective, maybe from our critic duties or 
just generally its impact on the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Just very briefly as it relates to the local economy of Swift 
Current and surrounding area, I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, just 
to mention a few brief points from that perspective, I can tell 
you that it falls far short for the people of southwest 
Saskatchewan, this budget does. Now, more than ever, now 
more than ever, the people of Swift Current and the people of 
southwest Saskatchewan were looking for a long-term plan; 
they were looking for a long-term commitment to the reduction 
of personal taxes. They were looking for a long-term vision for 
job creation, a reason to stay, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in our 
province. 
 
They won’t find it in the budget. They won’t find it in the 
budget that was presented this last Friday in these legislative 
chambers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because there is nothing in the 
budget on tax relief, save for a very, very thin, a very, very thin 
reduction in the small-business tax in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The other perspective from which they will look at this budget 
in my constituency and in the southwest is as it relates to health 
care. Mr. Deputy Speaker, health care is the number one issue 
that we field in our office, and they’re going to look toward to 
this budget in terms of the impact that this new funding has in 

Swift Current, because, to tell you the truth, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the past hasn’t been all that great in Swift Current, in 
terms of new funding allocations from the province and them 
actually trickling down to places like Swift Current, far away 
from the province’s capital. 
 
But that will be the measure of this budget in Swift Current in 
terms of health care. How it impacts our hospital, our clear need 
for a new regional hospital in Swift Current, and how it intends 
and how it allocates resources to reopen long-term care beds 
and medical beds that have been closed by this government in 
the Swift Current constituency and across the southwest? 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in more general terms, I think when 
people look at any budget in any given year from a provincial 
government, or a federal government for that matter, they’re 
going to look at it from the basis of both its impact on the year 
in question, in this case 2001-2002, but they will also look for a 
long-term plan — a medium and a long-term plan. At least 
some commentary in every budget about the government’s plan 
for the future, about its plan for expanding the economy, or 
perhaps its plan for at least retaining the economic base we have 
now that funds health care, social services, and all the things 
that we prize here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I think they look for long-term commentary in the budgets 
of new governments, and more specifically, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in a budget that comes from a new Premier. Arguably 
the government is the same tired old bunch that has sat to your 
right hand since 1991 but, by their own declaration, they put a 
new face on it. They have a new leader; there’s a few Liberals 
interspersed amongst the benches across the way. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think people in Saskatchewan were 
looking to this budget . . . they were looking for clear signals in 
terms of the direction that this new Premier would go, that the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale would take this government. 
And so in that context, they were looking for a long-term plan, 
perhaps even more than were they looking for just the 
short-term 2001-2002 budget. 
 
And I could tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was surprised when 
I went home for the weekend, after all of the ballyhoo on the 
budget from the government on Friday, I was very surprised 
when I went home to my constituency this weekend, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and found that people back home simply 
weren’t talking about it. They had almost completely ignored it. 
In fact, if I didn’t raise the question with them, if I didn’t say 
what did you think of the provincial budget that came down 
Friday, they absolutely had no comment. 
 
They had heard — and frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many of 
them didn’t believe it — they had heard that the government 
had the gall in the budget Friday, when it needed to present a 
long-term plan for sustained tax reduction and job creation, 
when it needed to do that, it introduced a budget of a bigger 
government, of a 1970s-style government, of 570 new 
government bureaucrats. That was its answer for Swift Current 
and area. That was its long-term plan for the people of 
southwest Saskatchewan — a 1970s budget. 
 
It’s not hard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to understand why there was 
that influence, why this tired old government turned to an 



288 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

approach that has been rejected around the world in terms of 
government budgeting. And it’s because of the people that have 
surrounded them in terms of their staff. 
 
We know that the premier, through the 1970s, Mr. Allan 
Blakeney, is one of the most key advisors to this current 
Premier if you can believe it. The man who was premier in this 
province through most of the time that I was in elementary 
school and junior high and into high school, I guess, for some it, 
he is now the key advisor to the Government of Saskatchewan, 
to this Premier. And you don’t have to look very hard to have 
been able to see his mark on this budget. 
 
It is a budget for bigger government. It is a budget that basically 
presents to Saskatchewan people the tired, old, and rejected 
concept that government has the answer, when there are issues 
that we need to resolve in terms of our economy, you look to 
the government. That’s what this budget says, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
We on this side of the House, hold strongly to the view that 
when there is difficulties facing any jurisdiction, when there are 
difficulties facing our economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you don’t 
look to government for results. You look to the people of the 
province. You look to our small-business sector and you get out 
of the way. You do everything you can by lowering taxes and 
ensuring that labour legislation in our province is friendly. You 
do everything you can to lower red tape and you get out of 
people’s way. 
 
They don’t understand that across the way, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they never have, and the budget clearly indicates that 
they do not today. 
 
As my colleague, the member for Canora-Pelly, has indicated, 
the other thing that people will know when they look at this 
budget is that it does is completely lack a vision. There is 
nothing in there that speaks of the year 2011, 2012 — 10 years 
down the road. There is nothing in there that would give any of 
us hope to believe that there is a long-term vision presented in 
the budget on Friday. 
 
There is no specific long-term and proven commitments in 
terms of job creation in our province. There’s absolutely 
nothing in the budget on that. What we know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that in jurisdictions around the world, those who 
have in earnest have tried to create jobs by lowering taxes on a 
sustained basis and taxes of all description, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, those are the jurisdictions that have had success. 
 
And that’s why we look to this budget for more of that. We 
look to this budget for that sort of direction, and it’s not there. 
In fact the record belies what members opposite are now 
shouting from their seat — that we have in fact lost 13,200 jobs 
in the last year. Those are Statistics Canada’s numbers, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And isn’t it amazing — the member for Saskatoon Nutana 
should take particular note of this — that every other 
jurisdiction in Canada, Newfoundland included, in that same 
period created jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker; including Manitoba, 
they’ve created 7,000; Alberta created 42,000. 
 

And what happened here in the province of Saskatchewan? 
What happened here? We lost 13,200 jobs under the direction 
provided by those captains of industry across the way, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. That is the record of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — I noted in the budget feedback though, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that there was one unqualified voice of support 
for the government. And even the ones that were being quoted 
today by the Premier and by the Minister of Finance, third 
parties who were commenting on the budget, you notice they all 
sort of qualified their response to the budget. 
 
And it’s interesting that that’s all the government could find 
today in question period; those qualified quotes from third 
parties in the province, were all that they could point to as to the 
success of their budget. Quotes like, well it’s better than a kick 
in the head. Obviously I’m sort of summarizing them. But 
basically . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and paraphrasing them. 
Thank you. 
 
But basically that’s what they were, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
except for one. There was one, there was one unqualified 
supporter of the budget, and I hope I have his name correct, but 
I believe it was Doug Blanc who is president of the SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union), 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
He is the only voice of unqualified support for this government 
and it’s not hard to see why. He just got 570 new members at a 
cost of 50 million taxpayer dollars, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s 
why he’s happy. He got more union dues which he will in turn 
be able to pay to the parties of his choice, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— that’s what he got from the budget. And I’m not sure what 
party that is, but he’ll be able to make that choice. 
 
He is the only voice of unqualified support for this 
government’s budget, is the president of the SGEU. That is the 
fact; that is a matter of record after Friday’s budget. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important as we look at 
the budget, in light of the amendment that’s been put forward 
by the member for Canora-Pelly, he specifically is talking about 
property taxes. And of course property taxes are an issue 
whether you live in urban or rural Saskatchewan. They’re an 
issue across the province. 
 
But clearly, as was pointed out by many of the cities in the lead 
up to the budget, property taxes are a huge issue in the cities of 
our province. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a number of the cities 
made that case in the lead up to the budget, including the city of 
Regina who I believe met with the government caucus, who 
also invited us to meet with them. I think they demonstrated a 
very, very, very positive and heartfelt commitment on behalf of 
their taxpayers in their approach to both the government and the 
opposition parties. 
 
And I can tell you that it was the week preceding Monday, 
February 5, where they were meeting with different government 
officials and as well as members of the official opposition. And 
I am quoting from the city of Regina press release dated 
Monday, February 5. It’s an executive summary of a press 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 289 

 

missive entitled “City Council Meets with MLAs to Seek Help 
From Province”. That’s what it was titled. And I’ll just read one 
very quick quote over there that puts everything that we’re 
going to be talking about later this day in the context that we 
need to look at it in. 
 

The Province, over the last ten years, has slashed our 
funding (ours being the city of Regina) by 70 per cent, from 
$18 million to just $5.4 million. 
 

That’s what the mayor of the city of Regina said in an executive 
summary dated February 5. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And it formed the basis of the case that he made passionately — 
and very reasonably and rationally, I might add — to the 
Government of Saskatchewan and to the members of the 
government caucus from the city of Regina. They made a very 
strong case and then they offered a solution, and that solution 
was an increase in funding of $20 million. They felt that 
perhaps, even though it wasn’t anywhere near the money that 
has been taken almost exclusively just from the city of Regina, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, even though it’s not even near what they 
have taken from municipalities across the province, they ask for 
that reasonable number — and again I ask for the members for 
Regina to pay attention — they ask for that very reasonable 
number of $20 million as a way to hold the line on property 
taxes, to ensure that they could hold the line on property taxes 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all know what happened on 
Friday. We all know exactly what the cities of this province got 
on Friday. They got absolutely nothing for their efforts, for their 
rational and well-thought-out presentation, for their meeting 
with their own MLAs whose job it is to represent them in the 
caucus and in the cabinet opposite. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
got absolutely nothing. 
 
And so the title on their press release, the title on their press 
release changed as of today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today it says 
mayor’s office offers news release: “Municipalities (got) Shut 
Out By (the) Province.” That’s what the headlines say today, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And if you look across the province, the same is true, the same 
frustration is there for many other centres. I know in my own 
city of Swift Current, in the last decade they have watched the 
revenue sharing drop from $1.3 million annually to $688,000 
annually. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’ll be able to go 
ahead with their budget planning as usual because instead of 
betting that the government would listen to cities in this budget, 
they were betting that the government would ignore them. They 
bet that the government would ignore them and so they were 
going ahead and planning for absolutely nothing from this 
government. And it proved to be prudent planning because once 
again that’s exactly what they got, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s 
exactly what they got. And that’s progress. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, SUMA, which of course represents many 
urban governments across this province, they also had some 

words to say to this provincial government and this budget. 
 
And here’s a different issue. I’ll be getting back to the tax issue 
in a moment here, based on what SUMA had to say, but here’s 
what SUMA had to say about another promise that this 
government made. And the Minister of Justice will be interested 
in what SUMA had to say: 
 

The province is also taking only a small step forward to 
provide the additional 200 police officers promised to 
communities during the last provincial election. 

 
And I recollect that promise and who made it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It was made by the former premier of this province to 
a convention of police officers gathered here in Regina, and 
there was a lot of ballyhoo and there was a lot of hype around 
that promise. And no doubt, no doubt, police officers in this 
province may indeed have decided to support a government that 
would make that commitment, that solemn commitment to them 
at their convention. 
 
Where is the commitment today, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
Halfway, halfway into this government’s mandate where it’s 
promised to create 200 jobs, SUMA points out that: 
 

Only 20 new positions are being funded . . . 
 

And I’m quoting, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

Only 20 new positions are being funded this year, in 
addition to the 25 added last year. This leaves us less than 
one quarter of the way to the target despite being half way 
through the four-year . . . (term of the government). 
 

Basically SUMA is questioning, and so are we and so are the 
people of Saskatchewan, whether this government has broken 
another promise. 
 
And I would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to allay that concern 
that the Minister of Justice at his earlier opportunity stand either 
in the legislature or gather the media together and make the 
commitment, make the commitment, reaffirm the former 
premier’s commitment that there will be 200 new police 
officers for municipalities in our province before the next two 
years are up. I would recommend that the Minister of Justice do 
that. I do that through you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
On the issue of taxes, SUMA had something to say as well. And 
I’m quoting from their president, Mr. Badham, now: 
 

“We have given the Provincial Government fair warning 
about what will happen if there is no commitment to 
re-instate our transfer payments . . . Urban governments are 
looking at property tax increases (Mr. Deputy Speaker) that 
could average between three and six per cent this year, 
combined with cuts in local services like street (repairs 
and) repaving.” 

 
And the quote continues: 
 

“We shared the pain of eliminating Provincial deficits, and 
that pain will continue after this Budget . . . We have been 
left on the waiting list, and this continues to put our 



290 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

economic development at risk.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what the urban municipalities of the 
province of Saskatchewan have to say, and what’s alarming 
about that is that this group, SUMA, represents the third level of 
government that controls so much of the taxation in our 
province. And they are left to no recourse but to increase taxes. 
 
I understand the city of Saskatoon announced today they’re 
looking at a 3 per cent plus tax increase for property owners in 
that community. I understand that confirmation has come as of 
today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So for the government to claim that there are no tax increases in 
this budget is frankly misleading. There is clearly tax increases 
in this budget. We heard about the first one in Saskatoon. 
 
We’re going to hear more as the full impact of this budget is felt 
at city halls across this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 
were let down again by the government and now they have 
nowhere to turn but to the beleaguered taxpayer of the province 
of Saskatchewan, those ones that have chosen to stick it out so 
far here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the day of the budget, there were six 
major centres here, represented in these chambers — the mayor 
of Regina, the mayor of Saskatoon, the mayor of Estevan, the 
mayor of Weyburn, the mayor of North Battleford, and the 
mayor of Yorkton. And they issued an immediate statement: 
“Municipalities Shut Out By (the) Province” was their 
immediate statement. 
 
And they began their statement, and I quote, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker: 
 

Today, six mayors of major Saskatchewan cities angrily 
denounced the Calvert coalition government’s budget.  

 
Angrily denounced. You know, the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs and the Liberal coalition member of this government 
generally has to go to a Liberal convention to be angrily 
denounced, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — But the mayors of our province were prepared to 
do it here and outside the Chamber, and they did it in reaction 
to a budget that lets cities down and that lets the property 
taxpayers in those cities down. 
 
Just very briefly to read from this statement from the mayors of 
those six centres: 
 

The Province (and I’m quoting, Mr. Deputy Speaker) the 
Province misrepresented funding to municipalities in the 
budget briefing by saying they put new money into the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program. The increase 
actually represents new federal money for infrastructure.  

 
So even in those elements, even in those elements where the 
government was touting itself by demonstrating that it increased 
spending in this area, it was taking credit again — it did it in the 
Throne Speech; it didn’t learn its lesson so the government was 

doing it again in the budget — taking credit for a federal 
initiative. And that is just sad, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
A budget with the chance to demonstrate to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan that there is a vision for our 
long-term future instead takes credit for a federal program. 
That’s pitiful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is what that is, and the six 
major centres recognized that. 
 
Interestingly, interestingly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the cities went 
on. They said: 
 

In addition the Grants in Lieu of taxes from the Province 
will be based on last year’s tax assessment and tax rates. In 
other words, (and I’m quoting still) the Province will 
provide funding based on 2000 rates while Saskatchewan 
residents will be required to pay this year’s reassessment 
and a possible increase in mill rates.  

 
So they retroactively basically carved themselves in at the lower 
rate of this year so they don’t have to go through the mill rate 
increase that they themselves knew would result from their 
budget. 
 

It’s clear the Province is saying (and I’m quoting again) it’s 
clear the Province is saying the property tax system is 
unfair and they provided . . . themselves a one-year tax 
break in paying the new rates. 
 

It sounds all too familiar, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It sounds like 
their approach to Crowns. When Crowns need a rate hike to 
ensure that they remain actuarially sound, they’ve got no 
problem in asking for rate hikes. We hear there’s one coming at 
40 per cent for SaskEnergy. 
 
But where do the people of Saskatchewan turn when their 
government continually knocks on their door for more money? 
They have nowhere to download it to. They have absolutely 
nowhere to go. That’s what this government fails to realize in 
documents like this budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the cities have been clear on this budget, 
and municipalities have across the province as well. I heard the 
president of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) issue very real concerns about this budget 
because it does represent downloading. The fact that 
municipalities are frozen out again by this government — again 
— represents or is an indication that they have been frozen out, 
and is a further indication that we can look forward to local tax 
increases in the coming years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And my encouragement to ratepayers and to citizens across this 
province is that instead of phoning when the mill rate hikes are 
announced — like apparently they were today in Saskatoon — I 
encourage them not to contact their local city councillor 
because I believe those city councillors and those reeves and 
those rural councillors are doing all that they can do with what 
they have. 
 
I encourage them to phone the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains, Mr. Deputy Speaker; to phone the Minister of Health, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I hope they phone the Minister of Finance 
and the Minister of Highways. I hope they phone every 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

 

government member, Mr. Deputy Speaker, NDP or Liberal, 
when they look at their local tax bill going up. Because that’s 
where the fault lies, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s where the fault 
lies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to 
conclude with what I feel are some pretty good summary 
comments that came courtesy of the editorial board of the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix. 
 
And of course we all don’t agree with editorial boards — all the 
parties in this Legislative Assembly have been taken to task by 
them — but every once in a while they get it right. And I think 
this was an example over the weekend, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 
an editorial board getting it right on a budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, just very quickly, to quote from the 
editorial. It says, I’m quoting this, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

. . . Cline projects that Saskatchewan’s economy will 
continue to grow over the next 12 months, albeit at 2.2 per 
cent, down from 3.4 per cent last year. Meanwhile, he pegs 
oil prices to remain relatively stable at $25.50 US (a barrel) 
this year and $23 in 2002, along with commodity prices for 
potash, wheat, barley and canola. Only natural gas is 
expected to decline significantly. 
 
Yet, despite it all (and I’m still reading), here’s the message 
Cline gets out: “The 2001-02 budget will once again be 
balanced despite a projected revenue decrease of about 
$750 million from 2000-01.” 
 
Consider that the tax take over the next year, after the 
reforms, are projected at . . . (3.1) billion, down just slightly 
from . . . (3.2) billion in 2000-01. Meanwhile, resource 
revenues actually are projected to hit (Mr. Deputy Speaker) 
$877 million this year, up considerably from the . . . (700) 
million last year. 
 

And yet when municipalities ask for a very reasonable $20 
million to hold the line on municipal taxes, they were told there 
were not enough resources. Apparently there’s enough to hire 
570 new bureaucrats at $50 million salary increase to the 
government. Apparently there’s enough money for that. 
 
Apparently there’s going to be more resource revenue to the 
government this year — over a hundred million dollars by the 
minister’s own numbers — but there’s not enough to give 
municipalities $20 million, $20 million, so that they can hold 
the line on taxes so that municipalities will have a chance to do 
what this government can’t — to retain its business and maybe 
to attract new ones. 
 
And so for those reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I take a great 
pleasure in being able to tell you that I will be supporting the 
amendment put forward by the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
am pleased today to speak to the most excellent budget 
presented by our most excellent Minister of Finance. And you 
know why, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It’s because again we’re 
seeing a balanced approach. 
 
We have solid finances, solid public services, and solid 
economic growth in this province. Building on the base of eight 
consecutive balanced budgets, we are now embarking on a 
course of connecting to the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
education, transportation, and technology. 
 
(15:30) 
 
I just want to highlight these kind of three key areas and then 
I’ll get into more detail. 
 
In Education, the spending is now at 1.1 billion — a 9.9 per 
cent increase; a 16 per cent increase to the operating grant — 
and this is the largest expenditure on education in the history of 
this province. 
 
Now if the opposition wants to say that’s not important, they 
obviously haven’t understood the role that education plays in 
creating productive, skilled citizens who are able to be involved 
in the economic development and the future of the province. 
 
And I would have to say that with the new addition of 42 
community schools we have doubled the number of community 
schools twice in the history of this government. And the fact of 
the matter is the families that are helped and the kids that are 
helped in the community schools are the kids that we most need 
to get into the workforce because otherwise they risk a rather 
bleak future. And I see this as being directly connected, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to the economic well-being of the province. 
 
I’d like to throw a little factoid in. I don’t know if you know 
this, because you’re kind of a young guy, but in 1993 this 
government was spending more money in interest on the debt 
than it was on education. Now I’m sure you would never let 
your credit cards get out of control like that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. You’re probably a little more disciplined. But the fact 
of the matter is, if you were spending more on debt than you 
were on your kids’ education, you’d have to think hard about 
what your priorities were. 
 
And I’m happy to report that the education budget this year, we 
now have doubled the spending on education than we spend on 
interest on the debt. So we’ve got our priorities straight, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I would have to add, just to support the 
Minister of Finance, that that’s progress, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
As well we have a 25 per cent increase in highway spending. I 
know that this probably brought cheers into the opposition 
caucus office when they heard this, because this has certainly 
been something that they’ve thought was important. And you 
can see the importance that we placed on it by the amount that 
we dedicated to that purpose. 
 
In technology: 70 million over the next six years to ensure that 
every community, every business, every household, every 
municipality, every health provider, every education institution, 
and all government services will have access to the same 



292 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

broadband, high-speed Internet services. Because it’s not 
enough for us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to have these services for 
the government. We believe that these are services that the 
entire community should benefit from so we’re going to ensure 
that these broadband Internet services are there. 
 
And you know, the members opposite are a little bit critical 
about that, but do you know that we have the highest 
penetration of personal computers on the rural areas in this 
province of even urban or all other areas. Over 71 per cent of 
rural households have personal computers. 
 
Now at the moment, for those who aren’t connected to the 
Internet, they use those primarily for farm management, for 
asset management, those kinds of things. But the fact of the 
matter is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the agriculture and the rural 
community is well positioned to take advantage of all the 
business opportunities, technical information, and 
communications exchange that can take place in this new 
environment. 
 
And I would have to say that this budget saw an increase of 35 
per cent in the agricultural file. That’s why we haven’t heard 
too much from the members opposite about agriculture. They 
seem to have all of a sudden forgotten that that is something 
that matters to them. 
 
As well, in health we saw an 11 per cent increase. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are the largest increases in 
education, highways, technology, agriculture, and health that 
this province has ever seen. 
 
Now the members opposite can quibble about whether those are 
the right priorities, and they’ve been doing a bit of quibbling 
today. But I want to just give you a few more details so that we 
can think carefully about whether these are the right priorities. 
 
I noticed in question period today that this good news is 
infectious despite all their attempts to be negative and grumpy. 
The opposition were seen to be smiling on several occasions. So 
I think they actually enjoyed this budget a little more than 
they’ll admit due to their ideology. 
 
But I want to just go over a recent exchange that took place 
between the Finance minister and the MLA from Redberry in 
the March 28 issue of The Riverbend Review in Hafford. And 
the headline says, “Sask Party financial analysis skewed.” 
That’s actually kind of a polite statement really, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But it mentions the MLA for Redberry insisting that 
Saskatchewan’s debt is increasing. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess you could take that as a 
possibility if it weren’t for that the Provincial Auditor, every 
major bond rating agency in North America, every major bank 
and financial institution in Canada, disagree with him. 
 
Now that takes a lot of courage to be right in the face of people 
like provincial auditors, bond rating agencies, major banks and 
financial institutions. And I admire the member opposite for his 
courage in standing up and saying that all of these other people 
are wrong. But that doesn’t make him right, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 

The 2000 budget delivered a four-year plan to promote growth 
and opportunity in our province through a competitive tax 
structure. Now this isn’t some fly-by-night plan of instant 
riches. It’s a realistic four-year plan. 
 
And what happens when we put forward a plan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? Well they say that, well you already announced that 
last year. Well that’s what happens when you put forward a 
plan. You announce several years at once. And I’m not sure 
quite how you put forward a plan and don’t put forward a plan 
at the same time. So I know that the opposition is still trying to 
get their head around how you have a plan and not a plan at the 
same time, but I’m sure they’ll figure something out. 
 
The reduction in annual income tax will be estimated to be 42 
million by 2003. Now we do know that Saskatchewan residents 
pay less tax in 2001 than in 2000, and they’ll pay less again in 
2002, and less again in 2003. That’s what a plan is, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It comes down year, after year, after year, after year. 
And that may not be exciting, but that is a plan, and it is 
happening. 
 
And what I find particularly surprising is the Personal Income 
Tax Review Committee, when they issued their report in 1999, 
it was endorsed by the opposition Finance critic. And the fact of 
the matter is, he says here, these are exactly the same cuts as we 
have recommended. And now that we are doing these cuts that 
were recommended, we now have the MLA from Redberry 
saying that he’s opposed to these cuts. So which is it, Mr. 
Speaker, we have on the one hand that they endorse the report 
and the cuts that were made, and now all of a sudden they’re 
against them. I guess what one believes in 1999 has a short 
shelf life. 
 
It’s important to note also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the final 
budget of the Devine government in 1991 harmonized our sales 
tax with the federal goods and service tax. Now one of the first 
things our government did was to remove this harmonization. 
We now have the narrowest tax base of any province with a tax 
base, which is only one that doesn’t in Canada, they have health 
care premiums and stuff, so we’ll just save that discussion for 
another day. But we have the Leader of the Opposition saying 
he won’t rule out restoring harmonization. He says he’ll make it 
revenue neutral. 
 
Well the trick is to harmonize it and do it in a revenue neutral 
way he says. Well you tell me how you’re any further ahead 
with that kind of a plan. The plan we have now protects poor 
people. That’s the reason for doing it the way we do it is you 
can be targeted, you can be selective, you can protect poor 
people, you can be sure that essential items aren’t taxed. But no, 
they want to harmonize so that poor people pay the same tax as 
rich people. 
 
And you tell me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how that constitutes an 
improvement. I don’t see it. Maybe we can spend some time 
with the opposition later and they could explain to me how this 
is . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’d like to remind the hon. 
member not to draw the Chair for the debate, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 293 

 

Speaking through the Speaker is different than speaking to the 
Speaker. 
 
I again come back to asking the opposition: are you any further 
ahead under that kind of a harmonization plan? 
 
The fact of the matter is, under our plan, income tax rates have 
come down four times in seven years and they’re going to come 
down again in 2002 and 2003. The sales tax rate has come 
down in two of the last four budgets. The fact is that at six per 
cent Saskatchewan’s rate is now the lowest of the nine 
provinces with a sales tax. 
 
So the MLA from Redberry can quibble about this but, while 
he’s busy quibbling, we’ll continue to work with Saskatchewan 
people to implement a continuous plan of tax reduction that 
benefits the citizens of this province. 
 
Now I just want to talk for a moment with their deep concern 
over the growth in public sector jobs. You know, probably one 
of the things that concerns me about the opposition is the 
continuous negativity about the public service. They speak in 
derogatory terms of bureaucrats. 
 
And as a minister of the Crown since 1995, I would have to say 
to the opposition that I’ve met and worked with many public 
servants. And time and again I’ve met hard-working people 
who care deeply about this province and its services. But also 
hard-working people who do a considerable amount of overtime 
in making sure that they do everything they can to fulfill their 
job responsibilities. And of course, the people that I meet tend 
to be at the management level so they aren’t entitled to 
overtime, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I want to highlight where these workers are and how I 
believe it will benefit the productivity, economic growth, and 
job creation in this province. And I’m just going to highlight a 
few. 
 
I want to ask the members opposite whether they’re against 
having more people engaged in forest firefighting. I guess their 
policy is let it burn. We don’t need to worry about forest fires. 
 
One of the other areas is increased security in correction 
services. Well I don’t think it would be fair to ask our workers 
to put themselves at risk without adequate staffing in those 
facilities. 
 
When it comes to the care of children, I would ask the 
opposition whether they think supporting a family-based model 
of child care is worth having some additional staff to give the 
supports to those families. 
 
See, it’s my belief, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that by supporting 
families, children have a better chance of success, have less 
chance of being on welfare, less chance of committing crimes, 
and a better chance of entering the workforce. Now if that runs 
against the members opposite, then I guess we’ll have that 
discussion as we go through this budget debate. But I think 
that’s a very good and thoughtful expenditure of money. 
 
Now monitoring the safety compliance on drinking water, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We’ve all heard the problems they had in 

Ontario, and we certainly want to make sure that doesn’t 
happen here, but we did as well see the impact that privatization 
had on the security of water in Ontario. And I think that’s a 
very good expenditure in this budget. 
 
And then we come into items like expanding community and 
Aboriginal involvement in school programs to enhance the 
learning opportunities for children. Well again I could see why 
the opposition would be opposed to that. It’s part of their 
ideology, I guess, to be opposed to people having an 
opportunity to have a better life. But we believe it’s part of the 
Saskatchewan way that people should, each and every one, 
should have an opportunity and should get a chance to do the 
things they want to do. 
 
We have other areas of staffing that have to do with adaptation 
initiatives for farm families, with agricultural research, with 
helping immigrant people adapt to actually getting to work 
when they get to Canada and bonding very quickly with the 
workforce. 
 
We’ve got some resources going to reclaiming inactive oil 
wells. If my memory serves me right, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
legislation was put in by the previous government and we just 
keep making some progress on this one. 
 
Equitable Internet access to all schools. I think that schools in 
the North, schools in rural Saskatchewan would consider this to 
be important. I stand to be corrected if that isn’t the case, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but the opposition certainly has the ability to 
counter that argument. 
 
The mining industry, in my understanding, is very happy about 
the new staffing in the area of subsurface geological research 
and mapping because they can’t make their investments unless 
they have the information and data that they require to make 
those investments. In fact, they are so pleased that the 
department is getting the staff . . . (inaudible) . . . to provide 
them with the information they need to do exploration in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve got some staff going to the new life-sciences gallery at 
the Royal Saskatchewan Museum. Well I suppose the members 
opposite are opposed to tourism. But I have to say that we think 
that tourism is a very important part of development in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:45) 
 
And so I could go on and on, as you probably noted, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but the point I make, that these jobs in the 
public service are either related to preparing people for work, to 
helping them get to work, or to creating direct growth in the 
economy. And I’m certainly happy to debate the members 
opposite about this. 
 
As well, the opposition talks about a slush fund. Well, this . . . 
you could pretend that it’s a black and white issue but I think 
even the members opposite would accept that the Saskatchewan 
economy is still impacted by the cyclical nature of a resource 
economy. And the fact of the matter is, is that agriculture as 
well comes into that envelope with a bit of an unpredictable, 
cyclical situation but also impacted by international markets. 



294 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

And I think I mentioned before in the Throne Speech why this 
has such an effect on Saskatchewan. 
 
In other provinces, 3.5 to 4 per cent of their workforce is in 
agriculture. In Saskatchewan, it’s 10 per cent. Now I don’t care 
how clever you think you are, you cannot overcome, like that, 
the impact of having 10 per cent of your workforce involved in 
part of the economy that’s suffering under international trade 
situation. 
 
So obviously it affects the economy, and you can work on 
diversification and whatnot but you can’t change that overnight, 
particularly when part of your money is tied up in support and 
subsidy when perhaps it should be tied up in diversification. 
And certainly, the members opposite can stake out some ground 
there and let us know what they think about that. But the fact of 
the matter is it’s not possible to have your money in two places 
at once. And we have heard very little from them about what 
they would practically and actually do about any of this. 
 
The member from Canora-Pelly talks about priming the pump. 
Well, if you look throughout the history of Canada and the US 
(United States), the pump was frequently primed by large 
public investments. I think any historian would tell you that that 
was the case. When the marketplace couldn’t deliver or 
wouldn’t deliver, it was often the private . . . or the public sector 
that stepped in to get this done. And I believe the opposition 
knows this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But for the opposition, a tax cut is a cure-all. If the member 
from Canora-Pelly was a doctor, he would prescribe a tax cut 
for the common cold. However, most people still use the health 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s consider for a moment the impact that a 
hundred million has if delivered directly into people’s pockets. 
If we use the $10 million rebate, which as we know amounted 
to $25 each for people, it made $10 million go not very far. So 
if we were to spend a hundred million in the same way and 
direct it back to individuals, it would be $250 in each pocket. 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the member opposite if this is the best use of 
$100 million instead of highways, instead of education, instead 
of agriculture, and instead of health care. I don’t think that’s 
very wise thinking. Instead, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I go for a 
four-year plan that’s balanced, that’s responsible, that’s 
sustainable, not this . . . you know, I’ve had a little experience 
with priming the pump. 
 
My grandpa ran a market garden and we used to have to get the 
water for the market garden from the Moose Jaw Creek. And if 
you just sloshed the water over the pump, it doesn’t work very 
well. It just leaks out all over the edges and gets the ground wet, 
but nothing really happens. But if you’re very careful how you 
prime that pump, just like that, the pump’s clicking away, and 
water’s pouring over the garden. 
 
And so I just say, Mr. Speaker, that that’s the way this 
government chooses to prime the pump, carefully, and trying to 
get all the water in the right spot instead of just sloshing it over 
the pump and hoping that something hits. 
 
I could explain a little more about pump-priming but . . . I’m 
going to make just a bit of an effort here. I know that my efforts 

may fall on deaf ears but I’m going to make a bit of an effort to 
explain the plan for economic growth. 
 
Now, as you know, for small business, I would certainly agree 
the engine of growth in this province, that reducing the 
small-business corporate income tax rate from 8 per cent to 6 
per cent effective July, 2001, well, that’s a darn good start on 
top of decreases we’ve done in the past for small business. But 
raising the taxable rate from 200,000 to 300,000 has got to be 
good news for many small businesses in this province. 
 
Not to mention . . . I don’t know about yourself, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but for a while I was afraid to go to the dentist because 
certainly professionals in this province wanted the attempt to 
. . . I will try to keep you out of the debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Professionals in this province wanted the right to incorporate. 
And as of this budget we have extended the right to incorporate 
to all regulated professionals in Saskatchewan which will again 
enable them to operate in a business-like way, and receive the 
benefits flowing from that. 
 
In the non-renewable resource area, a 10 per cent tax credit for 
individuals on their purchase of flow-through shares of eligible 
mineral exploration, retroactive to October 18, 2000. 
 
Incentives for enhanced oil recovery projects using CO2, 
effective midnight, budget night. 
 
A new capital incentive to promote more efficient production 
technologies in sodium sulphate, effective April 1, 2001. 
 
In the provincial tax reform, double the education tax credit 
amount to 400 per month for full-time study and 120 per month 
of part-time study. 
 
Increased to disability in caregiver tax credits. 
 
Increase for seniors from 500 to 750 for their tax credit. 
 
The child tax credit from 1,500 to 2,000. If people have more 
than one, Speaker, I urge the opposition to tell me why that’s a 
bad thing to have your child tax credit go from 1,500 to 2,000. 
 
And effective January 1, 2002, reduction in the provincial 
income tax rates to 11.25 on the first 30,000 of taxable income; 
13.25 on the next 30,000; and 15.5 on taxable income over 
60,000. 
 
Now I go back, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the fact that these were 
the very changes that the members opposite supported when 
this report came out. This is still the same report; this is still the 
same plan; the only difference is that we’re moving consistently 
ahead on the plan. 
 
And as well, no doubt the opposition would be supportive of the 
provincial tax credit for donors to qualifying political parties. 
 
And elimination of the provincial sales tax on the real estate 
commissions for new homes. 
 
And I know that these things are all very popular in the business 
community. 
 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 295 

 

Now I could certainly go on here on all the things in this budget 
that support economic development. And I would have to say 
that wherever the spending isn’t directly in economic 
development areas, it is directly in areas that support people 
becoming self-sufficient, skilled, and moving into being 
productive members of the economy. 
 
I just want to mention quickly the capital funding because there 
are many areas where capital funding has dramatically 
increased, for a total of 359 and a half billion . . . million over 
top of what was already there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 
wish it was a billion but it’s a million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have announcements like new medical equipment for health 
districts — everything from new diagnostic imaging equipment, 
including ultrasound, X-ray units, CT (computerized axial 
tomography) scanners. Seven hundred and fifty new beds in 
health care facilities, 2.44 million in medical surgical 
equipment, including anesthesia machines and surgical lasers. 
Almost a million dollars here for patient lifts to benefit the 
clients and address safety issues. The cancer centre will get 1.85 
million for equipment needs in Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
Moving to state-of-the-art equipment as quickly as we’re able. 
And I will hope that the federal government continues to be 
involved in these kind of programs because they’re certainly 
very helpful. 
 
But I just want to talk a little bit about the municipal funding 
issue. You know, in this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in total, 
19.5 million went to municipalities in new dollars. Now that 
went in areas like Centenary Fund and street lights and grants in 
lieu and a range of other areas. 
 
And I did see my mayor, Mr. Fiacco, in the lobby on budget 
day and I said to him surely Pat, as a mayor, economic 
development has to matter to you almost as much as this issue 
that you wanted to see dealt with in this budget. And surely, 
highway spending, broadband Internet services, community 
schools, the small business tax, the personal income tax, surely 
these things all go towards creating the kind of business climate 
that makes it more likely for Regina to be a successful 
community. 
 
And I do recall, that when the trustees and the municipal 
representatives came together in January and met with the 
Minister of Finance, that education tax on the property base was 
one of their priorities. And although all of the additional 
funding, 615 million in the K to 12, may not actually reduce the 
tax on the property base, it’ll certainly give them a lot of room 
to not have to increase it to meet needs in the schools. And we 
know that there’s a lot of needs, that teachers have a lot of 
responsibilities today and there’s a lot of needs in the schools. 
So hopefully they will see this as responding directly to the 
issues that they raised with the Minister of Finance when they 
came here earlier. 
 
Now the other thing I might just mention, is this investment in 
community schools and post-secondary education. Certainly, 
one of the biggest issues for municipalities is policing and a lot 
of the money they have to spend on community programs to 
deal with difficulties in the community. And surely, the kind of 
investments we’re making in community schools and in 

high-risk families and whatnot will go to reducing the bottom 
line in municipalities in some of the areas where they now have 
to spend money. 
 
I just quote from the Chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations saying that: 
 

The provincial initiatives in urban areas are a good first 
step. 

 
And he talks about the $609,000 being dedicated to the 
Aboriginal apprenticeship program, expansion of forestry 
training and access to nursing training for Aboriginal people in 
the North. He says that between 50 and 60,000 First Nation 
individuals live in the cities, and that’s not including the 
numbers of Metis people. But this is the important part, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. He says, when the conditions for First Nations 
people improve, everybody wins. And I think that’s an 
important thing to remember. That helps economic 
development, it helps productivity. 
 
And if you remember from the Speech from the Throne, the 
opposition will surely remember that the Minister of Finance 
pointed out that we have reduced the social service numbers 
steadily over the last several years and as well have seen a 
steady reduction in child poverty. So these things are obviously 
working and it’s important that we stick to the plan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Now, I want to just talk a little bit about the response of the 
media to the budget. Certainly we got some kudos from some 
kind of unexpected areas. And I hope Bruce Johnstone is 
watching because he’ll probably be surprised that I’m quoting 
him, but I think Bruce has really put this thing in context. He 
says: 
 

There’s a big difference between this spending spree and 
the orgy of overspending in the 1980s that made drunken 
sailors look like paragons of fiscal rectitude. 

 
And, of course, we know of which he speaks. The fact of the 
matter is — and I do want the opposition to listen carefully. I’ve 
said this before, but the fact of the matter is 30,000 young 
people left this province during the time that they were in 
government — 30,000. 
 
Now at this point we’re creating 5,900 new jobs for young 
people a year. We haven’t quite overcome all of the damage. 
But the fact of the matter is we have gone a long way to repair 
the damage that was done by priming the pump in a wild and 
reckless way over the ’80s. While speaking of priming the 
pump: 
 

Instead of Jacuzzis and decks, the government is lavishing 
more money on . . . (things like) community schools, early 
childhood programs to reduce fetal alcohol syndrome, 
highways, farmers, health, school operating grants. 
 
. . . about $264 million in one-time spending . . . thanks in 
large measure to the province’s “rainy day” fund — the 
$500-million Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 

 
Now, he goes on to say that: 



296 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

As a hard-headed . . . business columnist, (he perhaps) 
should be condemning the opening of the spending 
floodgates and clamouring for more tax cuts. 

 
(16:00) 
 
But he goes on to say: 
 

I’m sorry I just can’t find it in my heart . . . to condemn the 
. . . government for spending more money to prevent 
unborn babies from getting FAS, or giving seniors a tax 
break . . . or enhancing tax credits for students, people with 
disabilities and caregivers. 

 
Well I guess we know who has the heart around here, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I’ll just go on to say that: 
 

. . . the soul-grinding process of snuffing out the deficit, 
and paying down the debt took its toll on Romanow and his 
cabinet colleagues . . . Ultimately . . . (the goal) of 
government, which is not to (just) balance the books or pay 
down the debt . . . (it’s to improve) the quality of life for 
the province’s citizens. 
 
. . . (And the Premier), a United Church minister and 
former health and social services minister, recognized the 
need to replenish the roots of Saskatchewan’s hard-pressed 
citizenry. 
 

But he again reminds us that we do have to remember the 
means to the ends, and of course we are ever respectful of the 
taxpayers and the need to make sure that there’s both value for 
tax dollars and a thoughtful long-term plan of tax reduction. 
 
The other thing, I don’t often quote Murray Mandryk either, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, but he does point out that: 
 

The . . . Opposition spent much of the last year complaining 
about the sorry state of Saskatchewan’s roads . . . the lack 
of support for small business . . . 
 

Well he emphasizes here that we’ve responded with a plan to 
reduce small-business income tax, to fix the roads. And I guess 
to have the courage to solve some of these problems is the stuff 
that governments are made of and we were happy to do that. 
 
And I just note, Mr. Speaker, that the budget was applauded by 
business. They’d like to see some even longer term tax plans. 
And we certainly agree that planning is a good thing, and it’s 
something we intend to keep doing. 
 
The last thing I’d like to talk about, Mr. Speaker, is the plan for 
the development of the broadband Internet. Now there’s no 
question that this is going to create opportunities that 
communities have never had, both for service delivery, for 
economic development, and for communicating with networks 
within their community. It enables you to create, if you want, a 
virtual economic region, a virtual service region for the sake of 
information sharing, resource sharing. 
 
And we haven’t got enough time today to go too far into this, 
but I’m a little bit surprised at the member from Canora-Pelly 
saying that this is no panacea for what ails the economy. Well 

the fact of the matter is there are huge opportunities in Internet 
applications, both for businesses and the public sector, and that 
there’s a large number of young people today who leave 
specifically for those kinds of jobs, and by having this sector 
developed here, they will stay here specifically for these jobs. 
 
So I just say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I find having considered 
the amendment and understanding what municipalities want 
surely, but I just want to assure people there is a long-term plan. 
I don’t intend to support the amendment. I will indicate that I 
will be voting against the amendment and I will be supporting 
the budget. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s real 
opportunity for me to be able to add my comments with regards 
to the budget that was presented just on Friday. 
 
One of the things that I spotted right away, Mr. Speaker, was 
that there was an opportunity that was really missed. It was a 
lost opportunity because there was a chance for the Minister of 
Finance to follow up on the budget . . . on the Throne Speech 
with giving some details as to how we could move this province 
ahead with vision and with some kind of objective in mind. 
 
What I noticed, Mr. Speaker, was that this opportunity really 
was looked for by the people of this province as well. They 
wanted something to get a hold of, something that they could 
believe in because they didn’t feel that they wanted to leave this 
province particularly, but there is a outward exodus. As you 
know, the population is stagnant and jobs, unfortunately, are 
leaving the province. 
 
This was an opportunity for people to say, yes, I will stay; yes, I 
will come back, if they have left already. Here’s an opportunity 
for people that are planning their future to say, yes, I think I’ll 
stay in Saskatchewan; yes, I think I will expand my business in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m thinking in terms of some of the retired farmers or farmers 
who will be retiring. When they, for instance, sell their land and 
develop . . . or liquidate their land so that they have a retirement 
fund, where do you think that retirement fund is going to go? Is 
it going to stay in this province or is it going to move out with 
the farmer as he leaves the province? 
 
One of the interesting things I’ve found, Mr. Speaker, when I 
was talking to the constituents in the Lloydminster 
constituency, was the fact that whether this government wants 
to believe it or not, people are making those decisions. Whether 
this government perceives the opportunities are here in this 
province and not elsewhere, the fact is that people are moving, 
they are making decisions to move. 
 
In a discussion I had with an accountant on the weekend in 
Lloydminster, he explained to me that 20 per cent of the 
accounts of his Saskatchewan clients were now moved out of 
the province and they are now into Alberta — 20 per cent of 
their Saskatchewan clients have moved. 
 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 297 

 

Talking to the business people — and not only in Lloydminster, 
I’m talking to business people in the Edam/Turtleford area, in 
the Maidstone/Lashburn area, the rural parts of the 
constituency, the businesses in those towns in fact have 
developed exit strategies already. They are preparing probably 
for the worst. And I was hoping that this particular budget 
would give them some incentive, some confidence, or some 
hope that they would be able to fulfill their destiny right here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have to do is to identify what the 
problem is. Before you can solve a problem, you have to 
recognize that there is a problem. You have to identify that 
problem before you can solve it. 
 
Now there is a problem in this province. Other people have 
talked about it. We’ve talked about it. The population is 
stagnant. Students out of universities, graduates out of 
universities are leaving. Businesses are leaving. We’ve talked 
about it and it’s a fact. What we have to do is recognize what is 
the problem forcing them out of the province and what can we 
do to correct that. 
 
One of the things that you don’t do is to continue spending 
large amounts of money on issues that you’re not sure that will 
solve the problem. Whenever there was a situation arose in 
Health or in Education or maybe in Highways, the budget 
indicates that we’re going to spend so many dollars on this, 
we’re going to increase the dollars. The fact is that maybe 
there’s a better way to do those things rather than just say we’re 
going to put money at it and hope that the solution will 
automatically follow. That isn’t the case. I think we have to do 
things much better, much more efficiently. 
 
So when we look at this budget, and look at the signals that it 
actually put forward, I think we get to the basis of where the 
problems really begin. 
 
When people look at this budget and say what’s in it for the 
province and how do I fit into this particular budget, what they 
see is a bigger government. The budget very explicitly says that 
they are going to expand the government, they are going to 
increase spending. In fact, the spending is going to increase at a 
rate of 7 per cent. 
 
Now that is a signal that really makes people wonder. Because 
as it was mentioned earlier, people have been told that the 
economy is getting tighter. We are in a particular susceptible 
time for a downturn. The American economy often leads the 
way. And right now what we’re seeing is not a tightening of the 
belt, but we’re seeing an increase in spending and a tend toward 
bigger government. 
 
The signals that we see from this budget also is that the . . . 
some of the remedies aren’t in place that people were hoping 
for. We didn’t see any reduction in the gasoline tax. We didn’t 
see any reduction in the PST. We didn’t see anything that is 
going to relate to helping us with our property tax, because the 
downloading of some of the problems is still going on to both 
education and to the municipalities. 
 
The focus has to be — from what I saw in the budget — the 
focus was on spending, an increase in spending and not cutting. 
If we’re going to have a more sustainable budget, we’re going 

to have to take into grips . . . into account and come to grip with 
the fact that there are administration costs, for instance. And I 
want to pick out one thing that this government certainly had 
some control over. 
 
Each of the departments, in their own department, have 
indicated that the administration of that department is going to 
be on the increase. Every department except one. Now that’s 
not exactly a signal that gives confidence to the people of this 
province that the government is concerned with really 
tightening their belts as well. 
 
There’s no personal . . . no additional personal tax cuts that we 
could see. And certainly, no additional cuts for the large 
corporation. We noticed — and I do applaud the fact — that 
there is a small-business corporate tax. I think that’s going in 
the right direction. We indicated that that was the right thing to 
do all along. 
 
I guess the problem that we have there, Mr. Speaker, is that if 
we’re trying to attract people back to this province in the form 
of small business, we’re going to have to be a leader not a 
follower. This particular tax cut from 8 to 6 is merely following 
what is happening on either side of our border, in Alberta and in 
Manitoba. 
 
Alberta is now at 6 per cent cutting it to 3; Manitoba, I think, is 
moving to a 4 per cent. We’re only playing catch-up. We’re not 
giving the right signals to have people say, yes, we do want to 
come back to that particular province. 
 
What I’m concerned with is that we have to learn from what is 
happening in our province. The problem, the problem is that 
people are leaving and businesses are not responding, and we 
have a very flat, both a tax level, and we also have a very flat 
population level. 
 
We need to have people coming back to this province and 
paying the taxes that are going to sustain the infrastructure that 
I’m talking about. And how do you, how do you attract people 
and put those confidence in people to come back when, in fact, 
there isn’t the incentives in place for them. We are driving 
people, we are driving people away. What we have to do is 
attract the people back. 
 
We want to . . . we have to make specific recommendations and 
specific plans and not just rhetoric about how well the province 
is doing. We have to learn, for instance, that tax reductions in 
fact do work, and not just the personal income tax and the 
small-business corporate tax for the small baby step that was 
taken. We have to realize that those kinds of reductions do work 
and will stimulate the economy and bring people back here. 
 
We talked earlier about the number of people in the high 
wage-earning age group that in fact are not in this province. 
Those are the people that we want to come back here. If we can 
give them the right signals, if we can give them the confidence 
that there is going to be a benefit for them, I’m sure they will 
want to come. A lot of the people from Saskatchewan are in 
other provinces looking back at us. And as the taxes are 
reduced, the economy will spur. 
 
(16:15) 



298 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

We also have to be . . . make sure that there is a friendly 
investment climate in this province. Friendly investment 
climates do attract businesses. We need friendly fiscal policies 
and we need friendly regulatory policies. Both of those items 
are missing at this particular time. 
 
In order to get jobs and taxpayers in this province, we need to 
create the atmosphere for jobs. But to get the jobs, you need 
development. To attract the development, you need to attract 
the businesses. To attract businesses, you need to attract the 
investment. And to attract the investment to cycle all of those 
things, you need the confidence and the transparency and 
certainly the signals that will indicate that we in Saskatchewan 
are ready for that. 
 
The biggest concern I have with the budget, Mr. Speaker, is the 
sustainability of the budget. When I looked at the numbers, I 
was rather shocked to find that if you look at the long term with 
the increase in spending, the decrease in revenue, how could 
this possibly lead itself to a sustainable economy in this 
province. 
 
When I looked at the numbers, I could see the revenues from 
own source were down over 9 per cent; the operating expenses, 
as I mentioned, were up over 7 per cent. That’s a 16 per cent 
difference between what the situation was even just a year ago. 
And if you include the debt-servicing part, the operating 
expenses are still up five and a half per cent or so. That’s a 14 
to 15 per cent difference. 
 
When I look at the debt of this province and then I look at the 
deficit, the deficit between revenue and expenditures — which 
is the definition in the budget — is about $1.3 billion. That’s 
the deficit from this particular budget. I’m wondering how 
that’s sustainable. 
 
Now that is made up from other sources and I grant it, it’s true. 
For instance some of the things that will make up that 
difference will be the transfer payments from the federal 
government. Fortunately there are provinces in Canada that are 
doing well, otherwise we would be in real trouble. And those 
federal transfers, by the way, are increasing by the number — 
17 per cent. 
 
Other things that have to be taken into account to balance this 
budget of course is the drawing from the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. That’s the fund that was put in place for a particular rainy 
day. I guess this is a rainy day. In order to continue increasing 
the spending and hiring more people in the civil service, I guess 
that qualifies for a rainy day. So we have to draw down from 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
We also have to make sure that the Crown corporations pay 
their . . . a dividend to the government, otherwise the . . . it will 
not be, it will not be a balanced budget. In fact, the Crown 
corporations, by dividend, will now be paying $200 million to 
the government in this particular budget. So those three things 
— Crown corporation, federal transfer, and Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund — is the only thing that’s keeping this budget from being 
a deficit budget. 
 
It’s interesting to note that the $200 million that the Crown 
corporations will have to pay in terms of a dividend will 

actually . . . the servicing on that debt will actually be about 
$300 million. Now isn’t that an odd situation. We have to draw 
$200 million from them to balance the budget; the cost of 
servicing the Crown corporation debt is $300 million. That’s 
not sustainable, Mr. Speaker, in any sense. 
 
In order for the Crown corporation — that has increased its debt 
considerably — to achieve this, they are going to have to 
increase their revenue sources which is, in fact, the utilities that 
you and I are paying in this province. So don’t kid yourself, we 
are going to be paying an increase, maybe not in a direct 
taxation but certainly in utility rates and in property rates. 
 
Even though the government has indicated and have continually 
talked and bragged about the reduction of the government debt 
which is going down about 3.5 per cent this year, you have to 
realize that the Crown debt is going up at over 7 per cent. So 
when you look at the overall gross debt by the numbers in the 
budget . . . the overall gross debt, the actual gross debt has 
increased. It’s increased from last year. 
 
I looked at the four, the four Crown corporations, the four 
largest Crown corporations that affect the people in this 
province probably the most. One of them is certainly 
SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy, and even SOCO 
(Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation). When I looked at 
those four Crown corporations, their debt will have increased 
over 15 per cent. That has got to be, that has got to be an 
indicator that it’s going to cost the customers of those utilities in 
the meantime. 
 
Those are real concerns that I have, Mr. Speaker. Because of 
those numbers, the sustainability of this budget just is really in 
question. We can’t go on doing that kind of thing when you 
think of it in terms of a business sense. In the business world, if 
your revenues are down and your expenses are up, what do you 
do? If your revenues are down, you somehow reduce the 
spending or you freeze the spending; you don’t increase it. And 
if you somehow get a windfall in your revenues, which this 
province has done, what do you do with it? Do you hire more 
people or do you put it towards something that will be a 
windfall for the people in the long haul? For instance, maybe 
you pay down your mortgage if you’re in the business world. 
 
If you can’t reduce your spending, then you must increase your 
revenues. It just makes business sense. And the way to increase 
that revenue is to . . . you have to attract the businesses, you 
have to attract the development, and you have to attract the 
people that are going to be paying taxes. 
 
That is what has to be done, Mr. Speaker. That is why the 
budget is a real concern to me, because those basic business 
considerations are not taken into account. We need to increase 
. . . we do not need to increase the expenditures in this province, 
we don’t need to create a bigger government, we certainly don’t 
need to increase the civil servant, Mr. Speaker, and for that 
reason, I’m going to be supporting the amendment and I cannot 
support the budget. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 299 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure for 
me to get involved in this tremendous budget of the year 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the members across are again 
fidgeting as they did in my last speech, because they know, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is a good news budget. They know that this is 
a budget, Mr. Speaker, that connects to the people of the 
province. It’s a budget that connects to all of Saskatchewan and 
the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are also out there, always saying something 
when I’m speaking to quieten me down because, Mr. Speaker, 
they don’t like listening to the people. This budget listens to the 
people, but the members from opposite side, they simply can’t 
do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to do a little bit of an overview on the 
budget. I want to cover, you know, the overall theme. I’d like to 
cover the good news items. I’d like to talk about the balance 
that’s in this budget in regards to not only balancing the books 
but also in regards to trying to have a policy of inclusion in 
regards to the business level as well as working people, the 
balance on the economic and the social side, and the balance 
also in regards to debt, taxes, as well as expenditures. 
 
Now in regards to the budget, Mr. Speaker, I would say this: 
that as we were listening to the people, they said that we still 
wanted to have a firm foundation over the long run but we still 
needed a balanced view. So, Mr. Speaker, I was very, very 
happy to be part of the team of the Government of 
Saskatchewan to deliver not only the first balanced budget in 
Canadian history, in the recent, modern-day history, but also the 
eighth balanced budget. We are the first government in Canada 
to have a balanced budget for eight years running. 
 
I would like to mention that lest we forget, Mr. Speaker, 
because I was here in the House when Grant Devine and the 
Tories were around. I was here, Mr. Speaker, when they put this 
government in debt at over a billion dollars a year. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And we’re still paying for it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — The members from our side say we are 
still paying for it, Mr. Speaker, and that’s very true. 
 
Some of those people over there like to hide and forget the 
connections that they had with the Tories. They even tried to 
change their name to the Saskatchewan Party, but it’s the same 
old Tory Party. It’s the same old party, but then, Mr. Speaker, I 
see the same message coming from there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all they want to do, they say, is cut taxes. But as 
soon as the money goes down, they say, spend more and spend 
more and spend more. Nothing new. It’s the same old Tory 
strategy of the ’80s, and that’s exactly what I’m hearing from 
the Sask Party. They may change their name, Mr. Speaker, but 
they’re the same old Tories. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the facts on that . . . The 
member from Moosomin says I should say it again, because he 
was a strong Tory. Along with Grant Devine, he was proud of 
being a Tory. He was proud of putting this Saskatchewan 
government and the people in debt by billions and billions. 

Mr. Speaker, I will explain that. There is a difference between a 
million dollars, which is a lot of money, and a billion dollars. 
And I used to explain this when I was in opposition at that time 
to the people of the North and throughout this province. I used 
to explain what is the difference. People wanted to know the 
difference between a million dollars and a billion dollars. 
 
These people are putting us in the hole a billion dollars a year. 
What is a billion dollars versus 1 million? This is what it is. If 
you are going in the hole and you owed a million dollars and 
you throw a dollar down every second, it would take you 12 
days to pay up 1 million. Now if you owed a billion dollars, 
guess how long it would take — 32 years, Mr. Speaker. The 
difference between a million dollars and a billion is a difference 
between 12 days and 32 years. 
 
And these old Tories used to be able to spend so terribly and so 
outrageously, that that’s the amount that they put this province 
in the hole by. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And it’s $640 million interest a year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Now the member reminds me that it is 
$664 million a year on interest payments. I’ll have you know, 
Mr. Speaker, that with our balanced budgets, when we were 
balancing the books all these years, the actual interest payments 
on the debt by the Grant Devine Tories, now called the 
Saskatchewan Party, they put this province in debt by $882 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I listened to the Finance minister, he also 
said that, at that year, when we spent $882 million on the Grant 
Devine interest payment on the debt, that indeed we were 
spending less money on education than on interest payments. 
And that was a very shameful part of our Saskatchewan history. 
Of course they’re not ashamed of it. But to me, I thought that it 
was worse than highway robbery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Now when I looked at that, a lot of people are now saying, as 
they watch the balanced budget and the new expenditures, you 
know, that we’re having and also the tax cuts that we’re having, 
a lot of people are still worried about the old Tories, and we 
saw that in the past two by-elections. You know when I was 
doing some door knocking in Riversdale and I was doing some 
door knocking in Elphinstone, a lot of the people were still not 
trusting of these people. 
 
And I think that that’s the reason why, Mr. Speaker, they think 
that if they ever, ever were to come in power again, we’d have 
the same devastating example of financial mismanagement in 
this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the budget, a lot of the people are 
very, very happy that we’re listening to the people. We’re 
listening to the people in regards to balancing the books, 
lowering taxes, as well as making very excellent expenditures 
in the educational and health and social realm, and as also in 
regards to the roads that they drive and walk on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the tax side I would say this, because I was listening to the 
members as they were speaking, and they were talking about 



300 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

taxes the way the old Tories used to talk about taxes. Well I will 
say this much, Mr. Speaker: we were able to knock down the 
PST from 9 to 6 per cent, and people remember that. 
 
We knew that they knew and remember that it was sustainable. 
We didn’t go in the hole every year that the Tories did. But they 
remember the Tory tax cuts. I remember the Tory tax on the gas 
tax. They cut the gas tax but it was not sustainable. It went in 
the hole by a billion dollars that year. And I will tell you; it 
went in the hole by a billion dollars a year after. 
 
As a matter of fact, in the terms of the truth on that history — 
the member from Rosthern is chirping from his seat — in 
regards to that history, Mr. Speaker, when you look at that, the 
Tories brought back the gas tax because it was such a shameful 
example of mismanagement that this province had ever seen. 
 
Sure the members can keep chirping on their seats, Mr. 
Speaker, but that’s the truth of what has happened in this 
province. 
 
Now on the tax cut, I was pleased to be part of this government 
to look at the largest tax cut in the history of the province in 
regards to income tax. Many of the people in our province go to 
work daily and they were telling us that they needed to have a 
certain degree of buying power in regards to daily living. And 
we therefore agreed and went with our plan over a three-year 
period on $440 million, Mr. Speaker. Again, I was proud of 
that. 
 
The other thing that we do is that we looked at the business side 
of the equation, and we looked at the manufacturing and sales 
tax cuts all through the years of strategic ventures that we made 
in that regard, that indeed a lot of the people were asking us, are 
you going to lower the small business tax. And I was pleased to 
report, and a lot of the business leaders in the province were 
very, very pleased about this, when they said that we indeed cut 
the tax in regards to the small business tax by 25 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. That tax cut is from 8 to 6 per cent. 
 
And this is what the Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business director, Marilyn Braun, had to say, and this is what’s 
in accordance with that tax cut: 
 

What that will do is encourage small firms to grow and 
expand, and that is something that we recommend to the 
government. And it’s apparent that they were listening. 
 

The Canadian Federation of Independent Business says that 
government was listening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — So, Mr. Speaker, when he looked at the 
tax cuts, I listened to one of my member’s comments and they 
said that you listen to the other person from the tax side . . . I 
think his name is Truscott. And they say that he is just talking 
exactly the same line as the Sask Party . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Did they have him on payroll before? 
 
An Hon. Member: — He worked for the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Oh, he worked for the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He worked in his office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — He worked in his office? Truscott worked 
in his office? 
 
An Hon. Member: — And when they had to lock up for the 
budget the other night, he was in there with them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Well, he was with them during the budget 
time. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They released the details of the budget 
to him, notwithstanding the embargo. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — They released the details on the budget? 
My goodness, even when it was embargoed. Well that is not 
very, very ethical from my viewpoint. 
 
So when you’re looking at the overall budget I’ve covered 
already, you know the balancing idea not only in regards to the 
budget itself, but the social and economic development, as well 
as the working people, as well as the business sector. And know 
I will move on in regards to the educational side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a former teacher wherein I taught grades 2, 3, 4 
in my teaching as well as grade 6 for a couple of years, it was 
heartening to see that in regards to the realm of education that 
this was a strong budget. A lot of the people have told me as 
I’ve gone through the North this past weekend, and listened to 
some of the people from a teaching background, they were 
telling me that we are listening. And we are responding to what 
they have talked about. 
 
And same with the trustees. I met with a board member who 
was very, very pleased with the trustees because if you look at 
the formula on the operational side, we have moved from . . . in 
regards to the share of the costs, from 40 per cent to 42.5 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And also if you look at the northern areas where the trustee was 
very, very interested in, we have moved from 1.30 to 1.33, and 
I’ll tell you that that board member from northern 
Saskatchewan was extremely pleased and proud of this budget. 
 
But he was also proud, Mr. Speaker, because we went back to 
the people in the community. They said we were listening in 
regards to the community schools. They said that they were 
very proud to have involved parents and teachers and 
consultants, as well as the children in regards to the educational 
realm at the school level. And they said that we were listening 
when we responded in regards to the expansion on the 
community schools idea to 42. And, Mr. Speaker, it now 
includes the high school level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well . . . (inaudible) . . . the direct side of the 
budget, for my members from northern Saskatchewan who are 
listening, that indeed we are now, in that budget, including a 
$360,000 for the community schools; on the 10 schools right 
now, as well as 160,000 new money on the high school side. 
 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 301 

 

Again, you know, as I talked to the teachers and to the board 
members in the North, they were extremely pleased. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other item is in relation to health. In regards to 
the health side, of course, every year as the Minister of Finance 
stands here, we continue to have a record budget on health. This 
year it’s 2.2 billion. I remember one time it was 1.2 billion. I 
remember one time when the budget on health was 33 per cent 
. . . 32 per cent of the budget. Today it is now 40 per cent and 
2.2 billion. Yet, I hear the members who are chirping from their 
seats saying that, hey that’s not the correct number. 
 
And yet, I know one thing. When they were in government and 
in power as the Tories, they were never, ever, able to read the 
budget. They had the same old Tory math as my other members 
of them and don’t really understand exactly what’s happening 
in regards to proper expenditures. 
 
So the 230 million, Mr. Speaker, will be well used by the 
people of the province. 
 
I have to say something more about that, because there was 
disparaging comments by the member from Melfort, you know, 
the other day when there was a debate on, in regards to working 
people in many areas. 
 
But I’ll have more to say about that later on because for me, I 
am proud of those health workers. I am proud whether they 
work at cleaning the health centres, or whether they’re doing 
the doctors’ work, or whether they’re doing the nursing, or the 
LPN (licensed practical nurse). For me, I respect all the 
workers; but they play a divide and rule strategy which I will 
talk about later on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, as we moved in on the 
health side, I might say this much. I was at a conference the 
other day. It was held by the P.A. (Prince Albert) Grand 
Council in regards to the issue of fetal alcohol syndrome. And 
they had expected about 200 people at that conference, Mr. 
Speaker, and lo and behold, there was about 500 people that 
were there. 
 
So I was given the opportunity to say a few words at that 
conference, and people were extremely happy and pleased that 
the province will be moving forward in partnership with them 
over the long run. And what they were very particularly pleased 
with is that in our concept of partnership, not like the old Tories 
who like to play divide and rule between Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal people, we did a partnership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I went to the four coordinating committees 
from Regina, the North Battleford, to Prince Albert and La 
Ronge, when I got in and gave a specific example of northern 
development, the Lac La Ronge Indian Band was part of a 
strategy with Mamawetan Churchill Health District in northern 
Saskatchewan and all other people who are involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to me, that’s a sign of positive action by the 
government, not only in regards to fetal alcohol syndrome and 
early childhood education, Mr. Speaker, but the partnership 
concept that goes along with that strategy. 

Mr. Speaker, there are works that we’re doing in regards to 
diabetes. And as we move along on this question . . . And I visit 
the northern communities, and when I visit the northern 
communities, a lot of them talk about diabetes and its impact. 
Whether, you know, it’s the losing of the limbs or the eyesight 
being lost, Mr. Speaker, it’s quite a tragic situation for a lot of 
people. And again, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to say that last year 
we moved in on the diabetes strategy, again on a partnership 
model, and will continue again on this year’s budget. 
 
On the other thing that I would like to talk about, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s the question of northern Saskatchewan, when I was in 
northern . . . in the North I was in La Ronge doing a budget tour 
and I was as well to another event in Prince Albert where 
there’s a lot of Northerners gathering. 
 
And they were pleased again in regards to the North. Because 
I’ll tell you something, they remembered from last year’s 
budget — and this is a continuation of last year’s budget — 
there was $120 million on the centennial fund. And people were 
very pleased that on a per capita basis we were supposed to 
receive approximately 4 million. But a lot of the people in the 
North were very happy to see that we were getting $5 million a 
year for four years, Mr. Speaker. And that indeed we would be 
getting not only $20 million but $21 million in regards to that 
centennial fund. 
 
And to me, Mr. Speaker, it bodes well for this government and 
their partnership with northern Saskatchewan because it impacts 
many areas on educational development, health development, as 
well as infrastructural concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those people who are listening in from the 
South, there were areas for example where we didn’t have . . . 
When the Tories were around they completely neglected the 
North. Zero monies in regards to sewer and water when they 
were there, Mr. Speaker. We had to play catch-up as we came 
into government and we did some money into our first term, our 
second term, and our third term. 
 
But I would say this: that we have finally achieved the standard, 
Mr. Speaker, in that regard. Because we are now going to be 
finishing off . . . I think it’ll be the first in Canada in northern 
areas where the nine communities without sewer and water will 
be now getting sewer and water, Mr. Speaker. To me that is 
something to be proud of. 
 
We will be getting 24 communities upgraded on their sewer and 
water. Those are the types of actions, Mr. Speaker, that’s a sign 
not only of a government that looks after the pocketbook of 
people but also connects through the people, listens to the 
people, and does compassionate action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reason why — somebody asked me — it took so long is 
that . . . When I looked at the budget from the, let’s say the 
housing side. When the Tories were around nothing was done. 
So it took a long time. And I remember in our first term we put 
in about $8 million. Then we added on another $7 million on 
housing. Well last year we did another $9 million, Mr. Speaker, 
for a total of 24 million. You add the 24 million we did on 
sewer and water and the 24 million in regards to the housing 
situation and that’s action and listening by this government. 
 



302 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

(16:45) 
 
And when I remember when I was in opposition with Grant 
Devine, and some of those members were, you know, with 
Grant Devine in regards to the party strategy and everything 
like that, that indeed there was really, really nothing done for 
the people of the North. 
 
Well technically they were saying, the member . . . (inaudible) 
. . . but they got to remember, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask Party 
. . . I mean the Tories were so corrupt and they mismanaged the 
province so much that they got to change their name into the 
Saskatchewan Party. They forget that. They try and leave that. 
 
But you can look at that different from people from Kindersley, 
the member from Kindersley knows that. They know the Tory 
fund scandal and all of that. So I knew that as well. I was part of 
opposition when that came about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now when I look at the issue relating to Highways. We’ve been 
listening to the people in Education and acting on that issue. 
We’ve been listening to the people and acting on Health. We 
are now listening to people and acting in regards to northern 
Saskatchewan, throughout this province. Also we have listened 
to the people in regards to Highways. 
 
Close to a billion dollars over the next three years will be spent 
in Highways. And I will tell you, that is the largest in the 
history of this province. We will be looking at not only the 
development in the urban areas, the rural areas, but also in the 
North, Mr. Speaker. And I looked at the comment on the 
highways section from a particular Mayor Robert Ducan of Val 
Marie, and he said this about the roads money announced in the 
budget, he says this: 
 

I am pretty ecstatic. 
 
Now this was a guy who was part of the crew that was fixing 
roads last year. He says: 
 

I am pretty ecstatic. I think they are really going to give it a 
good try. I really think that this government has shown . . . 

 
Now listen to this . . . The members are chirping. The members 
are chirping from their seats again, Mr. Speaker, but a billion 
dollars in three years is not a bad try. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — And this is what he says, and I will 
continue if . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — I know that the Leader of the Opposition 
doesn’t like to hear this, but this is what the Mayor Robert 
Ducan of Val Marie says: 
 

I really think that this government has shown a real interest 
in trying to address the problem of rural Saskatchewan. I 
feel pretty positive about the whole thing. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business, when you listen 
to the commentary by people from the rural areas, you see a 
tremendous aspect in regards to the support on this budget. 
 
And I may say, as I was talking about the Education budget, I 
listened to the commentary by people from the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and from the STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation). And Gary Shaddock of 
the SSTA says: 
 

We see this year’s budget as an investment in our children, 
the future of our province. 
 

Wayne Clements of the STF says this: 
 

We are quite excited, given the fact that the community 
school mandate has been expanded, in fact doubled. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Further than that, I heard the member 
from Canora-Pelly wondering what else Gary Shaddock of the 
SSTA was saying. He also says this: 
 

We have a number of schools that are isolated, distance 
problems and so on, and so with the bringing in of the 
CommunityNet, it’s going to help rural and isolated 
schools in the North. 
 

That’s what Shaddock says, the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Now when you look at the aspect of the development relating to 
the rural area, I might say this, Mr. Speaker. As a person from 
the North . . . and of course, my farm experience is very limited. 
 
I remember being in a 4-H club and we were having community 
. . . we used to have community gardens to help the people deal 
with the high cost of food from the Hudson Bay Company at 
that time. And we were trying to help out a lot of our people 
and we did a lot of community gardens. So we did a lot of the 
community gardens and I helped out when I was growing up, 
not only on the community gardens in relation to growing 
potatoes or getting cabbage or carrots and so on. So I was 
involved in a lot of that type of development, so I knew the 
value. 
 
And we also had a farm, you know, at Cumberland, which a lot 
of . . . the government that worked in co-operation with the 
people of the day, through the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation), and that later on we are now 
having the community running. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I did know something about not only the 
grouse I was hunting, but also the cock-a-doodle-doo that I used 
to hear in my Dick and Jane readers, you know, as I was 
growing up. 
 
So the members from across may think that my rural 
background is dealing with, you know, such issues as gardening 
and wild rice, as well as . . . The wild rice, by the way, is 80 per 
cent of Canadian production now. But also, on the blueberries 
and also, you know, the possibilities of the expansion of that in 



April 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

 

the North. But these are ideas that they have no vision about, 
whereas people in the North have that vision in regards to the 
agricultural sector. 
 
But let’s look at the South, and this is what they don’t want to 
hear, the good news. Mr. Speaker, the member from Kindersley 
simply doesn’t like the good news, although I heard he made 
some positive comments about this aspect. Because he said that 
we have a 95 per cent increase in the budget in regards . . . 95 
million, I mean, increase in regards to the agricultural budget, 
which is a 33 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. That’s why you 
don’t hear anything of the opposition on agriculture. 
 
I remember, I thought it was simply politics that they were 
playing over at Elphinstone and Riversdale, because during 
those by-elections in the city when they were trying to get city 
votes, we heard absolutely nothing from them on rural 
Saskatchewan — zero. Although their member that ran in from, 
on particularly Elphinstone, was in the farm area and right in 
the farm area, he came to run, but they talked zero about 
agriculture, although agriculture is important for the rural area 
and for the urban area at the same time. 
 
So there they were, Mr. Speaker. They were looking at the 
situation in regards to rural development and just talking doom 
and gloom. But the message is positive; the message is positive 
— the 95 million, the 33 per cent increase. And I know that the 
member from Kindersley is smiling because at least he agreed 
on that point early this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say this much on the idea of the 
concept of a divided role that I picked up during the Grant 
Devine era. Grant Devine was always trying to create a split 
between the rural area and the urban area. And he tried to create 
a split between the North and the South, and northern 
Saskatchewan and the South. And he was always doing the 
same strategy of splitting the business sector against the 
workers. 
 
And I must say, and I must say that this week I was utterly 
surprised — well really not surprised, I guess. I listened to the 
member across on the budget. The only thing they attacked 
about this is that they attacked working people of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. They attacked the working people, whether it is 
people that we hire . . . that are going to get hired by the health 
boards in regards to the health system — people who do the 
cleaning of the hospitals, people who are doing the doctoring, 
people who are doing the nursing. These people are making 
disparaging remarks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because when I heard the member from Melfort, he was 
talking, trying to create a split between the nurses and the 
janitors. And he made disparaging and negative remarks against 
the janitors, Mr. Speaker, and negative remarks against the 
administrators. And these are honest, hard-working people, Mr. 
Speaker, and they make terrible negative remarks; the same that 
I used to hear when Grant Devine was around. 
 
So not only do they have the same tax-and-spend strategy like 
the Grant Devine Tories, but they also have the same 
divide-and-rule strategy in regards to working people. They 
don’t have pride in the working people. They don’t have pride 
in regards to the . . . seeing a combination between pride on the 

business sector, and all they think about is Alberta, and thinking 
about Alberta and all of that. 
 
They don’t make disparaging comments about Alberta workers, 
but they will Saskatchewan workers and that is exactly what 
they were doing. 
 
So I will say that when I looked at that . . . (inaudible) . . . rather 
than making constructive remarks, they made destructive 
remarks of our province and also of our hard-working people. 
So when I looked at that, Mr. Speaker, I find that very, very, 
very disappointing. 
 
I think that on that side of the equation, Mr. Speaker . . . I know 
that when we’re doing the northern development on the energy 
mine sector, when I looked at the province and we listened to 
the energy and mining business people, they told us that we 
needed to improve. They said that we needed to improve the 
sector relating to services dealing with geoscience. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people made disparaging remarks to the 
workers who I’ll be working at helping the mining sector, but 
I’ll tell you the mining community are saying yes, that is a good 
idea, we will be getting now digitized services — the best in 
modern-day technology when we get our maps to do our 
exploration. 
 
Not only that. In regards to the taxes, we’re going to have a 10 
per cent flow-through tax credit to the mining companies. That 
will be combined with 15 per cent on the federal level for a total 
of 25 per cent on the tax credit to the exploration companies. To 
me, Mr. Speaker, that is real action. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I was looking at that, I was not only 
therefore very pleased with the extra workers that we got to deal 
with the mining and the development. We also . . . like in 
Northern Affairs many people and many of the businesses said 
we want to be part. When the Tories were around, the northern 
businesses couldn’t get any contracts. 
 
They’re waving their flags over there, Mr. Speaker, their white 
flags. They’re giving up. You know, they can’t take any more 
of the great connection between the Grant Devine Tories and 
the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
But the other thing that they don’t like, Mr. Speaker, is that 
when I make a connection between them and Canadian 
Alliance, then they get pretty . . . (inaudible) . . . because 
Canadian Alliance in Canada is going like that. And they’re 
worried, Mr. Speaker, because that’s what they were connected 
with. 
 
They supported Stockwell Day and knocked out Preston 
Manning. And a lot of the people sort of liked Preston Manning 
because he didn’t like the elitist approach that some of the 
people offered in different parts of the country. He’s a 
grassroots orientation. He didn’t like the glitz and the stuff . . . 
and all that stuff. But he bought into it a little bit himself. But 
that’s what the people in the rural areas didn’t want — that type 
of elitism. 
 
Because it’s that type of elitism that I see in the connection on 
the attack on the janitor. That’s the same type of elitist idea that 



304 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2001 

 

is there. That is what got in the Canadian Alliance earlier on, 
but they’re moving away from those values. They’re moving 
away from those traditions that were historically there. And I’ll 
tell you, a lot of the rural people recognize that those were not 
the values that were part of the early development. 
 
Even Preston started moving away, and also Preston Manning, 
and also now Stockwell Day, moving too far away from the 
values of rural areas and the values of this province. 
 
And I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, that when you look at the 
situation, and when they did the attack on working people, it 
was pretty shameful when I saw that. Because in my . . . when I 
was growing up in northern Saskatchewan, I knew what elitism 
was and I knew what discrimination was, and I knew exactly 
what it meant. 
 
And when I hear it, Mr. Speaker, and I see it, I tell it like it is. 
Because that’s what it is. Because I can sense they are 
squirming in their seats when I mention that, Mr. Speaker. And 
that is what they’re doing. They are indeed squirming. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I look at that, Mr. Speaker, I got their 
interest again. You know, I made this different connection 
overall, and I will continue to make that connection . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, the House stands 
recessed till 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 
 
 


