















































Hansard: May 25, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1305 
 May 25, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
once again today to present petitions on behalf of numerous 
people from the Humboldt constituency and from citizens of 
this province well beyond that constituency who see the good 
sense in having the Bruno telephone exchange becoming a part 
of the Humboldt telephone exchange. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to allow 
Bruno to be part of the Humboldt telephone exchange. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Humboldt, Viscount, Bruno, Saskatoon, Wilkie, 
Cudworth, Lloydminster. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
to present today, from people who are concerned about the Fyke 
report. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena health care 
centre be maintained at its current level of service, at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctorial services available, as well as laboratory, public 
health, home care, long-term care services available to 
users in our district and beyond. 
 

The people that have signed this are from Wadena, Kuroki, 
Fishing Lake, and Fosston. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the House today to present a petition concerning tobacco 
products, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Where your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban on smoking in enclosed places and 
workplaces and on school property within the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by good people from fine 
communities such as Prince Albert, Christopher Lake, and 
Duck Lake. 
 
And I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
this morning, the prayer of relief which reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to call on the 
provincial and federal governments to provide immediate 
financial assistance to the city of North Battleford in order 
to facilitate necessary improvements to the North 
Battleford water treatment plant. 
 

Your petitioners this morning come from Battleford, North 
Battleford, St. Walburg, and Unity. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the condition of 
Highway 339, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 
 

The petition is signed by individuals from the communities of 
Briercrest and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition concerning the harmful effects of 
cigarette smoke. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban on smoking in enclosed public places 
and workplaces and on school property within the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, judging by the penmanship, I would say that these 
are primarily students, from Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m pleased to present this. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who’ve expressed an interest in the 
maintaining and upgrading of the Saskatchewan road network. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ask the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue with its foresight and vision of 
increasing the funding to $900 million over the next three 
years to maintain and upgrade our thoroughfares of 
commerce. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Springside, Canora, and Preeceville. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition from citizens concerned about high 



1306 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2001 

 

energy costs. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by the good folks from Rockglen, 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to bring 
forward a position . . . a petition, pardon me, from concerned 
citizens in Saskatchewan concerned about the harmful effects of 
tobacco smoke. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban on smoking in enclosed public places 
and workplaces and on school property within the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
As is in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people in southwest Saskatchewan who have signed a petition 
concerning the state of our hospital in the city of Swift Current. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the 
provincial government to carefully consider Swift Current’s 
request for a new hospital. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by residents of the 
city of Swift Current, Cadillac, Vanguard, Main Centre, Cabri, 
Glenbain, Pambrun, Waldeck, Wymark, and the Spring Lake 
Hutterite Colony. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban on smoking in enclosed public places 
and workplaces and on school property within the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed on behalf of citizens in P.A. 
(Prince Albert), Christopher Lake, and Spiritwood. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of the citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 
concerned about the loss of their ambulance system as they 
know it today. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 

implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Radville and Ceylon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition respecting the concern of citizens 
about the harmful effects of tobacco smoke, its cancer-causing 
nature, and its negative impact particularly on children and 
pregnant women. And the petition reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban on smoking in enclosed public places 
and workplaces and on school property within the province 
of Saskatchewan. 

 
And the petitioners are primarily from the Prince Albert area, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the EMS service. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of the 
ambulance service as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from the people in the 
Redvers, Antler, and Bellegarde areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition from those who are concerned with the problems 
caused by tobacco smoke. It reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban on smoking in enclosed public places 
and workplaces and on school property within the province 
of Saskatchewan. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions this morning dealing with the health care services in 
southeast Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 



May 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1307 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available, as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to the users from our district, 
southeast Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and 
beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the good people of the 
Redvers and Antler area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about poor cellular 
telephone coverage in their area. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of Rabbit 
Lake, Hafford, Blaine Lake, Leask, Radisson, Borden, 
Perdue, Maymont, Mistawasis, and Muskeg Lake. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Marcelin, Blaine Lake, Muskeg 
Lake, Shellbrook, and Debden. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise to in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition 
regarding health concerns in the province: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce current levels of available 
acute care, emergency, and doctor services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Spiritwood, Mildred, and Meeting Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition with citizens 
concerned about the high energy costs and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from Unity 
and Eastend. 
 
I so present. 

Ms. Junor: — I too rise on behalf of citizens who are interested 
in the harmful effects of tobacco smoke. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban on smoking in enclosed public places 
and workplaces, and on school property within the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The citizens that signed this are from Prince Albert, Shellbrook, 
and Spruce Home. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with a petition to stop further cuts at the Pioneer 
Lodge. And I might add that these concerns are increasing and 
deepening. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Mazenod. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions that are tabled as addendums to previously 
tabled petitions and there are nine of them. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day 48 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of SERM: what is the estimated dollar 
amount of damage done by so-called rowdy campers in 
each provincial park in Saskatchewan over the Victoria 
Day long weekend? 
 

And I give notice that I shall on day no. 48 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of SERM: how much firewood was 
available for use by visitors to each Saskatchewan 
provincial park over the Victoria Day long weekend? 

 



1308 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2001 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of 
this legislature, MP (Member of Parliament) for 
Regina-Lumsden, Larry Spencer. I must also take this time to 
confess that once in a while the partisan spirit overrules the 
spirit of grace and I haven’t taken the time to congratulate Mr. 
Spencer on his win, which I will now do and welcome you to 
this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with Mr. Spencer is also his parliamentary 
assistant, John Nieuwenhuis. And we’d welcome John also to 
this legislature. 
 
I would ask all to join in welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of House, I’m delighted to 
introduce to you in the west gallery, 37 grade 8 students from 
Porcupine Plain’s school . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, in 
the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with them today is Terry Andrusiak, Barb Baxter; 
Christine Eitenier, and Tony Dzurka, who are chaperones. 
 
On the floor of the Assembly I have a special friend, Colleen 
Harris. And I had the opportunity to meet with the teachers and 
the students for a few moments outside, and they reminded . . . 
the teachers were reminded what night life really means for 
students. So I’m looking forward to seeing you later on. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege for 
me today to introduce to the members of this legislature, 
students from Valley Christian Academy, seated in the east 
gallery. There are 45 of them, among the finest students, and 
the finest schools in Saskatchewan, and we’re proud to have 
them here today. 
 
They are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Block, and Mr. 
Wall. They are going to be watching question period. I hope 
they enjoy it as much as I do. And we’ll be meeting afterwards 
for a time to answer some other questions that maybe weren’t 
answered in question period. 
 
So would you join me in welcoming them to our legislature 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, 31 grade 7 students from Carrot River High 
School. They are in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. And they are 
accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Soucy; chaperones Val 
Stanger, Steven Smith, Adele Hardie, and April Wooters. 
 

I would like to ask three of the students to stand, please — 
Tracy Warnock, Alicia Kitely, and Brittany Ralph. And I think 
all members will remember them from their visit to the 
legislature a couple of weeks ago as part of a work experience 
program. 
 
So I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming these 
students from Carrot River High School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I 
would also like to join the member from Kelvington-Wadena in 
joining in welcoming the group from Porcupine Plain. 
 
There are two individuals in the group that I would like to 
recognize. The first is Christine Eitenier, who is sitting on the 
floor of the Chamber, Mr. Speaker. Christine is a former 
employee of mine. She has dedicated her entire career to 
working with people with disabilities, does an absolutely 
excellent job, and is a very, very respected professional in our 
community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would also like to recognize my daughter, Krystal. Krystal, 
this past Monday just turned 14, so I would ask all members of 
the Assembly to join with me in wishing Krystal a happy 14th 
birthday. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, to you and through you 
to members of the Assembly it’s a pleasure for me to introduce 
a gentleman that’s seated in your gallery. He’s my constituency 
assistant who has joined us here in Regina for the last two days. 
His name is Everett Hindley. And like so many men and 
women of quality, his is a background in radio news before he 
joined my office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And he does a great job for me in Swift Current, and on behalf 
of the people in Swift Current. In fact, Mr. Speaker, if he chose 
to run against me in the next election, I’d have a very difficult 
choice to make. 
 
So I just ask all members to join with me in welcoming Everett 
here to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Highway Improvements in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, more 
good news for Saskatchewan. Seven more highway 
improvement projects are taking place in the land of the living 
skies. 
 
And in no particular order, Mr. Speaker, the seven projects are: 
further twinning of Highway 16, between Maidstone and 
Lashburn; resurfacing of Highway 32, west of Cabri; surfacing 
will begin on a 16.1 kilometre section on Highway 13, east of 
Assiniboia. 
 



May 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1309 

 

Road improvements will also take place near Eston on Highway 
44. Highway 17 is getting a facelift on a 12.6 kilometre section 
near Onion Lake First Nations. Improvements on Highway 39, 
near Milestone will take place on a 14.4 section . . . kilometre 
section. And finally, Mr. Speaker, resurfacing of Highway 13, 
west of Weyburn will take place on an 11.3 kilometre section. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the grand total of dollars spent on these projects is 
20.3 million. Mr. Speaker, so many projects, so much good 
news, and so little time. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Missing Children’s Day 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 
the House today to raise awareness of National Missing 
Children’s Day. Mr. Speaker, today, May 25, is National 
Missing Children’s Day in North America. This year marks the 
15th anniversary of this event in Canada. 
 
May 25 is a special day that has been set aside to remember 
those children who are missing, to offer renewed hope to the 
families who are still searching, and to renew our pledge to 
never forget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the shocking facts are that more than 56,000 
children go missing every year in Canada. As a mother, I cannot 
begin to comprehend the pain that a family would go through 
when their child disappears. 
 
As a member of the child sex trade committee, I know that a 
missing child is a child at risk and that stronger, more decisive 
action is needed if we are to stop children from becoming 
involved in this shocking and degrading activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme for National Missing Children’s Day is 
Light the Way Home. This public awareness campaign 
encourages all Canadians to turn their porch lights on tonight in 
hopes that the lights will shine brightly through the night all 
over Canada. By doing so, it is hoped that these lights will 
become a symbol of hope that we all share for the safe return of 
missing children everywhere and that it will reassure searching 
families that their children have not been forgotten. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

News from Yorkton 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday morning at 8:30 local time, David Rodney, originally 
from Yorkton, became the first Canadian to reach the summit of 
Mount Everest for the second time. This is quite an 
accomplishment for a flatlander and I know all members will 
feel a bit of vicarious accomplishment as we join in offering our 
congratulations. 
 
Mr. Rodney’s feat would make a good subject for a short film, 
and a short film festival that would be shown at the Yorkton 
Short Film and Video Festival. As you can see, Mr. Speaker, I 
have two greetings this morning, or two members statements in 

one. 
 
Yesterday was the opening of the 54th annual short film 
festival, Canada’s first North American longest running short 
film and video festival — the festival that makes my city a 
significant beacon in the world of arts and culture. The purpose 
of the festival is to display, celebrate, and reward the best 
Canadian short film and video productions of the previous year. 
 
The festival attracts a national and international crowd of about 
1,800 people. Now this goes without saying is a boost to the 
Yorkton economy. 
 
The highlight of the festival is on Saturday when the Golden 
Sheaf awards are presented at a banquet and a celebration. The 
awards and recognition and accomplishments of both 
professional and amateur filmmakers. This year I’m happy to 
say that the Premier will be joining us in presenting the awards. 
 
My congratulations, as always, to the film organizers and 
sponsors and I invite all members to bring their popcorn and 
enjoy several of the good shows. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Railway Line Opens 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on May 10 the Omni Trax-owned Hudson Bay rail engine still 
bearing it’s Carlton Trail Railway colours made its first run 
down the newly acquired short-line spur from Crooked River to 
Arborfield to spot 34 rail cars, two producer cars at Zenon Park, 
and the remainder at the Arborfield dehy plant. 
 
It has been years of planning and negotiation since the 
communities of Zenon Park and Arborfield learned that their 
local CNR (Canadian National Railways) rail spur had been 
earmarked for abandonment. Their efforts were met with 
success when in September of 1999 a ruling from the Canadian 
Transportation Agency settled the purchase price of just under 
$110,000 for approximately 19 miles of track. 
 
It took until March of this year, however, to hammer out the 
necessary operating arrangement with CN (Canadian National). 
HBR (Hudson Bay Railway), a division of Omni Trax will 
operate and carry out all maintenance on the short line on behalf 
of its new owners. The Y at Crooked River where the short line 
meets the CN line will be used as the turn around for HBR 
engines and cars. 
 
On the day of the inaugural run the engine, a locomotive that 
Omni Trax delivered to CN a week prior for hauling to the 
operating site, was fueled and filled with water at Humboldt. A 
CN rail crew set the HBR locomotive and 34 cars on the 
Arborfield spur and the HBR crew took them over for the 
remainder of the run. 
 
Members of the community of Zenon Park greeted the train as it 
broke through a ribbon held across the track on this very 
memorable occasion. 
 
Thank you. 
 



1310 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Business Makes a Major Sale 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you. Hold on to all three corners of your 
hat, Mr. Speaker, there’s even more good news for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
International Road Dynamics Inc., IRD, has made yet another 
heavy sale, this time worth 1.25 million — another private 
company thriving under a so-called socialist government. Who 
would believe it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
IRD is a multidiscipline technology company with the expertise 
to integrate complementary intelligent transportation systems, 
ITS technologies, into systems designed to solve unique and 
challenging transportation problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the IRD team includes engineers, programmers, 
marketing professionals, technicians, installers, assemblers, and 
administrative staff; each individual playing an important role, 
working together for the good of the whole, like this 
government in its commitment to the people of the province. 
 
Upon this solid foundation, IRD designs and builds its leading 
edge products, systems, and solutions for worldwide 
transportation management applications. 
 
The land of living skies is thriving, Mr. Speaker, no matter what 
the members opposite wish to believe. Thriving companies 
based in Saskatchewan are popping up all over this great 
province, Mr. Speaker. The only thing that seems to be 
deflating is the collective ego of the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tribute to Former Member of the Legislative Assembly 
Jim Maher 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in tribute to a 
former member of this Assembly who passed away May 11. 
Jim Maher was elected as the MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) for The Battlefords in 1950 and served only till 
1952. 
 
He is better remembered in the Battlefords for his work as a 
businessman and on city council. He spent a total of eight years 
as alderman, and a grand total of 18 years as mayor of North 
Battleford. He thus holds the record of the longest-serving 
mayor of our community. 
 
He is remembered by all in the Battlefords as a man of high 
integrity, cheerfulness, and above all, pride in his community. 
 
I would ask all members, and I know all members will want to 
join with me in expressing our condolences to Florence, his 
wife of 65 years, and all the members of the Maher family on 
the passing of this illustrious former member. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Graduation of Saskatchewan Students 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday and 
today the University of Regina is holding its spring convocation 
ceremonies at which 1,454 students will receive their diplomas 
or certificates. 
 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) students are also receiving diplomas and 
certificates this weekend, and I would have to note that next 
weekend more than 2,900 students at my alma mater, the 
University of Saskatchewan, will become graduates. 
 
This convocation will mark a change in our universities as both 
the U of R (University of Regina) chancellor and the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) chancellors, Verda Petry and 
Peggy McKercher, respectively, will end their terms as 
chancellors of these universities. 
 
Convocation or graduation are significant markers in the lives 
of individual citizens. Many of these graduates will go on to 
enter the workforce immediately, some will continue their 
studies perhaps at another university, and some will travel. 
 
The choices of these graduates are limited only by their 
imagination, Mr. Speaker. This is a good time in their lives and 
I know all members will join with me in offering our 
congratulations on these very significant milestones. We wish 
them well. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Worst Highway Contest 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 
immortal words of the member from Regina Dewdney, a good 
idea is a good idea no matter where it comes from. 
 
Now it would appear that an idea that originated on this side of 
the House, one that caused the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
sufficient embarrassment, the worst highway in Saskatchewan 
contest, has now been recognized at the national level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a group that has 80,000 members across Canada, 
the Canadian Taxpayers Federation, has launched Canada’s 
worst highway contest. 
 
In an era when provincial and federal governments are taxing 
much more than is being returned to the roads, citizens, and 
especially those who drive on our highways, are demanding that 
serious attention be given to our decaying infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given the NDP’s poor record in fixing roads, it’s 
almost a given that a road in Saskatchewan will be declared the 
worst highway in Canada. Even though the NDP claims to be 
spending record amounts to do repair work, we have yet to see 
the spring tendering list from the Department of Highways, 
which determines what work will be done throughout the 
summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our hope that the NDP actually do something 



May 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1311 

 

that they have promised — fix some roads this summer and 
save the province the potential embarrassment of having one of 
our highways named the worst highway in Canada. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Allegations of Impropriety at Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister of Liquor and Gaming. In December 
1999, a series of articles appeared in The Toronto Star about the 
Ontario Liquor Control Board and the Bacardi rum company. 
 
It seems that a number of Liquor Control Board employees had 
gone on luxury vacations to the Bahamas, Mr. Speaker, paid for 
by Bacardi. This was a violation of the Ontario Liquor Control 
Board code of conduct. But Bacardi Canada president, Manuel 
Diaz, defended those free trips. He said it was a common 
practice for Bacardi to offer these trips to government liquor 
officials all across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the minister aware of any Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming official receiving a luxury vacation to the 
Bahamas, paid for by Bacardi Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would have 
the member opposite and people know that Liquor and Gaming 
Authority is guided by conflict of interest guidelines. Now 
those guidelines, from time to time, are reviewed by the 
organization. 
 
I’m not aware of the specifics of a trip that the member opposite 
is mentioning. I do know that there was an individual who had 
some allegations with the Authority. They were thoroughly 
looked into and an independent investigation was conducted by 
an independent investigator. Many of those allegations were 
unfounded. The remainder have yet to be determined. So a 
thorough review of those are underway. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister said 
the remaining. It sounds like there’s a long list of people out 
there that they have to check through. Those kinds of answers, 
Mr. Speaker, will get her voted off the team one of these days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if any Saskatchewan Liquor official has received a 
free trip to the Bahamas from Bacardi, that would be a serious 
violation of the liquor and gaming Act. Section 133 of the Act 
states that Liquor and Gaming employees are strictly prohibited, 
Mr. Speaker, from accepting any gift from a liquor supplier 
such as Bacardi. 
 
Is the minister aware of any employees who may have violated 
section 133 of the Act by accepting a free vacation to the 

Bahamas from Bacardi Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am aware 
that Liquor and Gaming Authority is guided by conflict of 
interest guidelines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in an unrelated manner, some allegations were 
made. Many of those allegations were found to be without basis 
or unfounded. There are a few remaining that we have now 
hired an independent investigator to look into. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once that review is completed, appropriate actions 
will be taken. We’ll be delighted to share those actions with 
anyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of the details of the information 
this member is presenting. But we know we have the 
independent legal adviser looking into, carefully, those 
allegations, and once that review is complete, I’d be delighted 
to share that with members of this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister seems 
to be very aware of the code but she doesn’t seem to be very 
aware of what’s happening in her department. So, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ll move away from Bacardi. 
 
How about hockey tickets, Mr. Speaker? Apparently some of 
the big liquor companies like Corby Wiser like to pass out free 
tickets to Leaf games in Toronto — personally, I don’t know 
why you’d want to go to a Leaf game — this would also be a 
violation of section 133 of the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has any Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming official 
ever accepted a free ticket to a Toronto Maple Leaf game from 
Corby Wiser? Specifically, Mr. Speaker, specifically, did any 
Liquor and Gaming official accept free tickets to the closing of 
Maple Leaf Gardens — the closing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I have mentioned to this 
Assembly and members opposite, there are times when I am 
informed about things happening within the Authority and 
times when items have not been substantiated that I cannot 
speak to those matters before this Assembly. What I am saying 
is I’m not aware of the specific details that he’s mentioning. I 
do know that Liquor and Gaming Authority has conflict of 
interest guidelines that were being discussed by all members of 
the Authority in a review of that to make sure that they were 
consistent with the Act. 
 
During that discussion — a totally unrelated matter, Mr. 
Speaker — but allegations were made, many of them 
unfounded. There are some that would have us look at them 
with an independent adviser’s eye. When the review is 
complete, appropriate actions would be taken, Mr. Speaker, and 
when the review is complete we would share that information 
with the members opposite. 
 



1312 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The minister talked a bit about some 
investigations so let’s look at that for a minute, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Can the minister confirm that a judge has been hired to conduct 
that independent investigation into alleged violations of section 
133 of the alcohol and gaming Act? Can the minister confirm 
that these allegations involved free Leafs tickets, free trips to 
the Bahamas, paid for by liquor companies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, what I can tell the 
member opposite is I was informed of a process that was 
underway to look at allegations. We had an independent outside 
adviser look at those allegations, many of them unfounded. 
 
What I also know is that I told anyone, if they have evidence of 
criminal wrongdoing it’s their right and their responsibility to 
go to the police. 
 
What we also said was that the remainder of the allegations that 
have been made require an independent individual, Justice 
Wakeling, to look at those. We are not going to deal with 
unfounded allegations. We want to deal with the facts. Once the 
review is completed, Mr. Speaker . . . when that review is 
completed, action will be taken where action is necessary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hopefully the 
action won’t be consistent because that has been to fire all those 
people that bring forth information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now we know that a judge has been hired to go 
ahead and do the investigation. The questions are: exactly what 
is he investigating; who will he report to; and will his report be 
made public? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve stated early on in my 
responses that in an unrelated way allegations were made about 
a number of things with the Liquor and Gaming Authority. An 
outside review was conducted. Many of many of those were 
found to have no basis, Mr. Speaker. They’ve been unfounded. 
The remainder are under review. 
 
I take my responsibilities seriously, Mr. Speaker. We have hired 
someone independently to look at this and report to the Liquor 
and Gaming Authority. I would then be aware of that 
information, and if action is needed action will be taken, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
missed the question. Will that report be made public? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The hon. member does not listen. 

She answered that question three different times and said an 
investigation . . . She said an investigation is underway . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The member answered that 
question on two separate occasions. She said an investigation is 
underway and when the results are complete the results will be 
made public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. On Monday morning that 
member can read Hansard. He will find out the minister of 
Liquor and Gaming did not say they will be made public. 
We’ve got a gallery full of people witness to that. He knows 
better than that and he should read Hansard and listen to the 
answers from his own ministers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does this investigation focus on a specific 
employee or employees, or is it a full-scale review being done 
to determine how widespread that practice is of Saskatchewan 
Liquor officials accepting gifts from liquor companies in 
violation of the Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority is guided by conflict-of-interest 
guidelines consistent with the Act. 
 
In a separate process, some allegations were made, Mr. 
Speaker, many of them unfounded. There are some that we take 
seriously. We have faith in Justice Wakeling to do a thorough 
review of those few remaining allegations. 
 
What I said was, Mr. Speaker, that when he recommends 
actions to be taken on substantiated information, Mr. Speaker, 
action will be taken and those actions will be shared with the 
members opposite — therefore, Mr. Speaker, with the public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Little bit of history 
here. Mr. Speaker, what initiated this investigation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a very serious 
process that everyone should take with the greatest of respect, 
and that’s called harassment and personal harassment 
allegations. A member of the Liquor and Gaming Authority 
made those allegations. 
 
We took our responsibility seriously and had an outside 
investigator review those, and letters were sent to all members 
involved. We do not talk about those to protect all of the 
individuals involved in that kind of a pursuit. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I could say that there were some allegations 
made by one employee that we must take very seriously. A 
letter was sent to that employee asking that if there was any 
knowledge of criminal wrongdoing, there’s an appropriate 
course of action to the police. 
 



May 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1313 

 

But we take seriously those allegations. I have faith in Justice 
Wakeling. He is looking at these allegations. When something 
is verified and substantiated, action will be taken, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s our 
understanding that it was another employee of Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming who first reported these allegations of 
violations of section 133 of the alcohol and gaming Act. 
 
My question is simply, what happened to that employee? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, you have to wonder who 
the members opposite are trying to put on trial before the 
Assembly. 
 
He knows full well that this employee has been severed from 
the Authority. She has recourse, Mr. Speaker, before the courts. 
 
We do not speak about individual personnel matters before this 
Assembly. There is respect for process and respect for 
individuals from this member, Mr. Speaker, and I would wish 
the same from the member opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The one thing on 
trial here is that minister and the cabinet she represents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our understanding that the employee who first 
raised those concerns has now been fired. So once again, we 
have an SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) 
employee who sees possible illegal activity. She raises these 
concerns with her superior and then she gets fired. Sound 
familiar? Like yesterday and the day before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s going on over there? Why is Liquor and 
Gaming firing people for bringing forth evidence of possible 
illegal activity? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I would mention 
that I was advised by my officials that this employee has the 
right to present her case before a court and have legal action 
taken. With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to 
prejudice court actions. I have a high regard and respect for that 
process. I would ask that of the member opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Isn’t it amazing, Mr. Speaker, that day after 
day that minister and that cabinet keeps getting up in the House 
saying that their employees are in court with the government for 
the way that they handle their employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister said if an employee had evidence of 
wrongdoing, they shouldn’t go to the police, they should go to 

the minister. That’s what she said the other day. That’s exactly 
what this person did, went to the minister. Minister fired her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was the minister and the deputy minister to the 
Premier who investigated this matter. They ordered that a judge 
be hired to look into the allegations. But then before the 
investigation was even completed, they fired that employee who 
made the complaint in the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister fire the SLGA employee 
who launched this complaint? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I’d advise the hon. 
member through you that this is an internal personnel matter. 
There’s a longstanding tradition in this Assembly not to bring 
those matters to the Assembly and comment on such matters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also advise that that employee has the 
right . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The minister will continue. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I would also advise the 
Assembly that that employee has a right to follow legal action 
and has advised that she intends to do so. All of the matters will 
be before the courts, all would be revealed in that process, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I respect that process. I take that responsibility seriously, not to 
prejudice any of those results. Mr. Speaker, I’m asking the 
member opposite to respect that process as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re learning very 
quickly that the word internal from this government is 
doublespeak for cover-up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again I ask the minister, what was this 
employee supposed to do? She was aware of possible illegal 
activity by Liquor and Gaming officials. In this case it wasn’t 
criminal activity, Mr. Speaker. It was a violation of her alcohol 
and gaming Act. The SLGA is responsible for enforcing that 
Act. So this complaint was brought forward to the proper 
authority, the minister responsible for liquor and gaming. The 
next thing you know, they fire her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does this minister keep firing people who 
bring forth evidence of illegal activities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a tradition here that 
we do not speak about individual personnel . . . individuals and 
their files before the Assembly. 
 
This employee is now working with the Health department, Mr. 
Speaker. She has been informing us by writing that she intends 
to take legal action in this matter. All of this would be discussed 
before the courts and laid before the courts. It’s not my intent to 
prejudice a process that I have a great deal of respect in, Mr. 



1314 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2001 

 

Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s become 
apparent that this government no longer has any idea, Mr. 
Speaker, of the difference between right and wrong. A few 
years ago, a few years ago, Mr. Speaker, the Premier . . . a few 
years ago the Premier was leading protests . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — A few years ago, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 
was leading protests against gambling. Now his own gambling 
Authority is completely out of control. Dutch Lerat misspends 
hundreds of thousands of dollars but the employee that takes 
this matter to the police gets fired. SLGA activities, SLGA 
activities — the officials are allegedly violating their own Act 
by accepting free trips to the Bahamas, but the employee who 
brings this to the authorities gets fired, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 
doesn’t know the difference between right and wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, this 
woman was fired on his watch, by his deputy minister and his 
Gaming minister. Why is the Premier rewarding those who do 
wrong and firing those who do the right thing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that on this side 
of the House the member opposite continues to ask the question 
about due diligence and process. And I say to the member 
opposite that this minister has said now for two consecutive 
days the kinds of process that this government has used to make 
sure that it administers due diligence to the people who work in 
the system. 
 
Unlike what happened in the ’80s, Mr. Speaker, because in the 
’80s, Mr. Speaker, what happened here is that on a regular basis 
we had the brown-box brigade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — As I say to the member opposite, not 
unlike what happened in the ’80s. In the ’80s in this province 
we had a brown-box brigade that went into the offices of 
people, and I know this personally, Mr. Speaker, about what 
happened in this province. And that’s not how we deal with 
people on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, and that’s not 
how we deal with our employees. 
 
There’s due diligence; there’s process, Mr. Speaker. And at the 
end of the day we set up established individuals to make sure 
that due diligence is done — unlike what you’re accustomed to, 
unlike what happened on that side of the House in the past, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Deputy 
Premier, Mr. Speaker, gets up and talks about due diligence. 
We’ve seen their due diligence, Mr. Speaker, when it came to 
water in North Battleford. And the minister squawks from his 

seat right now. He’s the one that’s caused those people to be 
sick because he didn’t do his due diligence. 
 
Now we have Liquor and Gaming, now we have Liquor and 
Gaming, and we have those . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Now we have Liquor and Gaming . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Only the member for Rosthern. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Now we have Liquor and Gaming doing the 
same sort of thing. Then we had the Deputy Premier getting up 
and he wants to review the 1980s. I suggest they better look at 
how they’re operating their own departments, and maybe he 
should get up and say that outside. 
 
We’ve got the member from Prince Albert talking about going 
outside. I think they all need to go outside and defend their 
record in front of the public, the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask the Deputy Premier again, Mr. Speaker, how long are they 
going to keep covering up by firing their public employees 
when they present information to the police and to their own 
ministers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that what doesn’t happen on this side of the House is 
what used to happen on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, in 
the ’80s. 
 
On this side of the House our ministers, Mr. Speaker, are not 
involved in the hiring and firing of employees, are not involved 
in the hiring and firing of employees. 
 
And the history, Mr. Speaker, on that side of the House has 
been in the past and through the ages, Mr. Speaker, is that every 
name had to have the Conservative/Tory acid test before they 
could be hired anywhere in this province. And that’s the same 
kind of process that the member from Rosthern talks about 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What they would like to see is they would like to see full 
involvement; they’d like to see a full blood test of those 
employees that are going to be hired and fired in the system. 
And that’s, Mr. Speaker, not how we do it on this side of the 
House. And that’s the way the old Tory system on that side of 
the House continues to work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investments by Crown Investments Corporation 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Early on in the 
session I asked if Crown Investments planned on investing a 
hundred million a year over the next five years — that’s half a 
billion dollars. 
 
Since then we’ve had the following news: 1.2 million on Crown 
travel; 8 million on an insurance company in Toronto; 13 



May 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1315 

 

million on two Internet companies; 2 million on a home 
security company in Vancouver; 3 million on Business Watch 
International; 11 million in losses for ISC (Information Services 
Corporation) for a system that isn’t operating yet; 4 million 
losses in Clickabid; and SaskPower signing a cogen agreement 
where the negotiators were so concerned they issued a 
disclaimer on the soundness of the deal. 
 
We appear to be well on target to investing and losing our 
hundred million this year. 
 
My question for the Minister of Crown Investments: how does 
he think all this investment nonsense — with or without what 
he calls due diligence — will give any hope to those 42,000 
young people the Canada West Foundation says are packing 
their bags and preparing to leave our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the member lists off 
statistics. Here’s some statistics as well, Mr. Speaker. Nine 
thousand Saskatchewan people employed every year in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; 1.2 billion worth of goods and 
services purchased right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
Over $400 million a year the Crowns spend buying goods and 
services as well, Mr. Speaker. SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, made in 
Leicester Cable $100 million, Mr. Speaker. SaskTel made in 
Saturn/Austar $38 million, Mr. Speaker. SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, 
made with ISM Westbridge, Mr. Speaker, made $24 million, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Crowns are investing outside of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, so they can bring revenues to our 
province to be able to deliver goods and services across our 
province in the very constituency that that member represents, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
stand and respond to questions 196 though 200 inclusive — 196 
through 200. 
 
The Speaker: — Items 196, 197, 198, 199, and 200 have been 
tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — Convert no. 201. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to stand and respond to questions 202 and 203. 
 
The Speaker: — 202 and 203 have been tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — Convert question 204 to motions for return 
(debatable). 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Fyke Report to Standing Committee 
on Health Care 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased today to rise with respect to a motion 
referring the Fyke committee report to the Standing Committee 
on Health Care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been, as you will know a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’d just ask the members to come to 
order so that we could proceed with the orders for the day. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I know 
members on the other side of the House aren’t much interested 
in due diligence, and I know they’re not much interested in 
hearing the people of Saskatchewan with respect to the Fyke 
report. 
 
But I want to say today, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the noise from 
members opposite, I intend to move a motion that will refer the 
Fyke Committee report to the Standing Committee on Health, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there was some . . . there was some 
considerable time spent by a commission, who spent a 
considerable amount of time looking at health care in our 
province, making recommendations with respect to changes that 
may in fact improve health care in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the recommendations are 
controversial. Not all of them, I am assuming, will be agreed to 
by all people of the province. Because it is such a large issue, 
Mr. Speaker, the future of health care in this province, this 
government has intended, and does intend, and will hear the 
people of Saskatchewan with respect to the recommendations 
made by the Fyke Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last days in short . . . few days in this 
legislature, we have established a standing committee, an 
all-party committee of the legislature as the vehicle to hear the 
people of Saskatchewan with respect to the Fyke Commission 
report. 
 
Now I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s a reasonable scenario that we 
would hear, on such an important issue — the future of health 
care, the future of Medicare — in this province, that we would 
listen to the people of Saskatchewan. Whether it be through 
their groups, whether it be through organizations, or whether it 
be individuals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the position that this government took was that we would 
establish an all-party committee, allowing members of this 
legislature the opportunity to hear the people of Saskatchewan 
as it relates to health care and the future of health care. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that members on this side of the 
House are committed to hearing the people of Saskatchewan. 
What I want to say though . . . and I’m hoping that it becomes 
clearer, because I think right now it is somewhat unclear as to 
whether members of the opposition are interested in the same 



1316 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2001 

 

kind of a process. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have committed to an independent 
reporting mechanism. We have committed to an all-party 
committee that would hear the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I think it’s very 
important . . . and I don’t always agree with members of the 
opposition but in this case, there are some instances that I do. 
 
I want to, Mr. Speaker, refer to a speech that was given by the 
Leader of the Official Opposition on November 2 of the year 
2000. And I have to say that I very much agree with him. And I 
want to quote from that speech and what he said that day. And 
he said: 
 

The success or failure of governments at both levels to 
design and implement an effective 21st century, publicly 
funded health care system will to a large extent be dictated 
by the degree to which citizens are given the opportunity 
for real influence. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think those are very wise words. And I 
think they were well-chosen words, and I agree with him. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I believe, and members on 
this side of the House believe, that this is the vehicle — an 
all-party committee with an independent reporting mechanism 
that will report what the people of Saskatchewan are saying 
with respect to the Fyke Commission — that this is the vehicle 
to do that. It’s the appropriate vehicle. 
 
It’s parliamentary tradition over centuries that all-party 
committees are established and that they are mandated, and in 
this case mandated to hear the people of Saskatchewan as it 
relates to health care. 
 
I want to go on, Mr. Speaker, in quoting the Leader of the 
Opposition in his comments. He says: 
 

Citizens are demanding to be engaged more directly in the 
challenge of building their communities and their country. 

 
And he’s right. Because health care groups in this province and 
individuals are demanding to be heard on the Fyke 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker. And this is the vehicle. 
 
And so today I’m asking members of the opposition not to 
boycott this committee as they say they are going to, that 
they’re intending to. I’m asking members of the opposition to 
join with us, to join with the Liberal Party, to join in a 
non-partisan way in listening to the people of Saskatchewan 
with respect to their concerns on health care. 
 
Now I know that’s difficult. And sometimes it’s very difficult to 
put partisan politics to the side for all of us because by nature 
we’re political people. That’s why we’re here. But this is such a 
large important issue — the future of health care in our 
province — that I’m asking members of the opposition to put 
partisanship aside. I’m asking them to join with New Democrat 
members, with Liberal members in supporting this commission, 
in supporting this committee, and in hearing the people of 
Saskatchewan. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there has been some discussion on this issue 
in this legislature and I think it’s been somewhat healthy, but 
this needs to be now taken to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m asking the members to join in supporting this motion today. 
I’m asking them to attend to the committee hearings. I’m asking 
them to listen to the people of Saskatchewan, and I’m asking 
them to work with us in bettering health care in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that member, the Leader of the Opposition, 
said that governments who do not effectively engage the public 
in the development of important public policy will pay the 
price. And I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that editorials in 
newspapers across this province are suggesting that if the 
official opposition, as well, does not listen to the people on this 
issue they too will pay the price. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to move a motion that will be seconded 
by the member from Saskatoon Northwest: 
 

That the Standing Committee on Health Care be instructed 
to receive and report on the representations from interested 
parties and individuals with respect to the Final Report of 
the Commission on Medicare, dated April 11, 2001; 
 
And that the Standing Committee have the authority to sit 
during the intersessional period and during the legislative 
session except when the Assembly is sitting, to engage such 
advisors and assistants as are required for the purposes of 
the hearings; 
 
And that the Standing Committee be authorized to televise 
the proceedings on the Saskatchewan Legislative Network; 
 
And the Standing Committee be authorized during any 
period of adjournment to make a report on its inquiries by 
filing the same with the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly; 
and that the report shall be distributed in accordance with 
The Tabling of Documents Act; 
 
And that the Standing Committee file a written report no 
later than August 30, 2001. 
 

I so move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It certainly 
is my pleasure today to rise to second the motion by the 
Government House Leader with regard to the referral motion to 
the Standing Committee, the all-party committee, on Health 
with regard to the Fyke Commission. 
 
Certainly when we look in the past week or so in terms of how 
this process has evolved, the first motion that was brought 
forward was to create an all-party Standing Committee on 
Health Care. And the reasons for creating this all-party 
Standing Committee on Health Care were enunciated on 
numerous occasions. The fact that we are the birthplace of 
medicare, that major initiatives with regard to health care has 
come from the province of Saskatchewan, and here we were 
one of the few jurisdictions in Canada that did not have an 
all-party standing committee to specifically look at health care 
issues. 
 



May 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1317 

 

So there was little debate, and really the opposition members 
were supportive of the concept as an item of principle for them 
and which has also been declared within their party’s 
constitution. 
 
We also then looked at, well, creating the membership. So there 
was a second motion, creating the membership of this all-party 
committee which basically follows the proportions in regard to 
the representation within this Assembly. When we look at 
legislative assemblies and how these assemblies are formed and 
how the membership is determined at the beginning of each 
legislature after a general election, it’s important to see that the 
proportion of how these members are determined is based on 
the party representation. And again, this committee represents 
those principles. 
 
So today, we talk about the referral motion. The first item of 
business for this new all-party Standing Committee on Health 
Care is to look at the Fyke Commission; is to have people of the 
public, to have stakeholders, to have front line caregivers come 
forward and talk about the Fyke report, what they like and what 
they don’t like. And the purpose of the committee hearing what 
these opinions are of the Fyke report, is to make that report 
available to the government so that we can look at 
recommendations with regard to implementation. 
 
This is different than the approach that the Saskatchewan Party 
and the members opposite would take. When they talked about, 
in their platform part of the last election, they talked about a 
Provincial Auditor doing a value-for-money audit. And one of 
their key recommendations, and I quote, was: 
 

Implementing the Provincial Auditor’s recommendations 
within six months of receiving the results of the 
value-for-money health care audit. 

 
Nowhere does it say that they would consult with the people, 
where they would listen to the people. No, they said they would 
put up the Provincial Auditor. He would talk to some 
economists and so forth, and then he would make 
recommendations. And that that, if they were government, they 
would implement them. 
 
Where was the feedback? Where was the concern for 
consultation? It wasn’t there, Mr. Speaker. So I can see their 
resistance in talking about having an all-party committee and 
being part of that process because they had no intention, if they 
would have formed government, to have a consultation with the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about what this government 
would do, we are talking about putting forward a report and 
having people come and respond to that report and that is the 
purpose of this all-party committee. 
 
Now when we talk about health care in general and the issues 
before health care and the Fyke report itself, Mr. Fyke has made 
some very controversial recommendations. And it is only fair 
that people, health care workers, health care providers, front 
line caregivers, the public, health districts themselves, SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations), and all of 
the organizations that represent regulated professions, should 
have an opportunity to respond to Mr. Fyke. 

Now some of the things that Mr. Fyke has brought forward, 
indeed, are controversial. But just to lay some of the 
background and some of the information that has been brought 
forward, he talked about the principles of health care. He said 
that the principles of health care as enunciated by the Canada 
Health Act in 1962, and these principles . . . really we’re talking 
about hospital and physician services, so they are specific to 
provider, and they were also very specific to location, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And those principles were comprehensiveness, accessibility, 
universality, public administration, and portability. And I think 
all of us are aware of those principles. But the language of the 
Canada Health Act was such that it talked about insurance, and 
it was based on the . . . a provision of services that were either 
from a physician or hospital base. 
 
We have since evolved from that . . . from the early 1980s in 
terms of the number of services available through communities, 
via home care, with emergency response, and greater 
responsibility now within the public system for providing a host 
of services that weren’t recognized, you know, 20 or 30 years 
ago. 
 
So Mr. Fyke now says we have a system here in the province of 
Saskatchewan in terms of service delivery that maybe doesn’t 
reflect the reality of today. And he talks about a 
recommendation in terms of how this system should look for 
the province of Saskatchewan, starting with primary care 
reform. 
 
And he admits, Mr. Speaker, that the base for this new system 
will have to be primary care reform. And he says that there 
must be buy-in from the providers of primary care, the 
physicians in the province of Saskatchewan, the nurses in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and how this integrated primary 
service model will work. 
 
How it will integrate onto the secondary care level with regard 
to regional hospitals, the services that could be provided there, 
and on to the tertiary care facilities which he’s itemized as 
being in Regina and Saskatoon, and an expansion in P.A. as a 
tertiary care referral centre. 
 
(11:15) 
 
And then his final point was, well after we have all these 
interprovincial characteristics itemized in this system, we also 
need to recognize . . . And I must admit that the members 
opposite in their submission to the Fyke report talked about 
very much the tertiary care levels that would be interprovincial. 
Those specific areas where you’re talking about such advanced, 
technologically advanced procedures that it would be of a 
benefit to provide those within a region as opposed to a 
provincial jurisdiction trying to provide those services, and 
greater co-operation between provinces in providing that. 
 
And I think that we can agree that there is probably lots of 
consensus with regard to that recommendation. 
 
But the controversial aspects with regard to primary care reform 
— how that will be funded; how nurse practitioners will 
interact; how the interaction of this team concept will then feed 



1318 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2001 

 

into the regional centres. And I must admit he talks about 
expanded regional hospitals in 10 to 14 regions. He talks about 
community health centres or community hospitals — the 
terminology to him wasn’t all that important. But the fact of the 
matter was that there would be 24-hour accessibility. 
 
The key ingredient in all of this is getting that primary care 
reform and having the health care providers and the front-line 
caregivers recognize and recommend that this is the best 
procedure. 
 
Now I’m sure these will come forward from the stakeholders as 
they come forward to the committee to provide their reports. 
 
But just to show you some of the information that was provided 
by Fyke to try and itemize some of the concerns that he had. 
For example, Mr. Speaker, when he talked about the number of 
districts, and he mentioned, you know, some of the 
recommendations that came from the Murray Commission in 
the early 1990s and their recommendation of having 12 to 15 
regions. 
 
Well numerous commissions throughout the history of 
Saskatchewan have been recommending a regional model. In 
fact the first time that there was talk of a regional model with 
between 10 and 14 regions actually came from an all-party 
committee in 1944. And I think it was chaired by a deputy 
minister by the name of Mindel Sheps at the time, and he 
recommended 14 regions within the province of Saskatchewan 
— that’s 1944. 
 
Since then we’ve had numerous commissions that have made 
similar recommendations, but there hasn’t been the buy-in or 
the implementation. And Mr. Fyke believes, and I think this 
government believes and perhaps the people of Saskatchewan 
will find out from their responses to Mr. Fyke, whether the 
environment is receptive to finally having that regional model 
in place here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now it has been done in other jurisdictions. For example in 
neighbouring Alberta there are 17 regional health authorities 
each serving a population of between 20,000 and 900,000 
residents. 
 
In Manitoba there are 12 regional health authorities, most 
servicing between 30 to 50,000 people. 
 
In Saskatchewan it is projected by Mr. Fyke that by the year 
2015 there will be seven districts under the current model that 
will have fewer than 12,000 residents, and another 16 districts 
will serve fewer than 20,000. 
 
So the implication of this, Mr. Speaker, is that we have a system 
of regional districts right now that perhaps does not allow for 
appropriate service delivery, and that is the question with regard 
to governance management that needs to be addressed. 
 
But he also goes on to point out that we also have some 
concerns within the province of Saskatchewan that we have a 
hospital admission rate that is 41 per cent higher than the 
national average. And we have higher rates of surgery than the 
national average in 12 out of 16 surgical procedures including 
things like hip replacements, and comparatively low rates of 

day surgery. 
 
So not only does he talk about governance management, but he 
talks about the delivery of those services as well and what we 
need to do to incorporate the changes that would allow for a 
quality system. And to Mr. Fyke, his number one underlying 
theme throughout his report is that we have to focus on quality 
in the delivery of all of our services. 
 
We also looked at some of his other recommendations with 
regard to the health science educational capabilities. He 
recognizes that the demands in terms of the health services 
sector will be increasing, that the changes in how individuals 
and practitioners within that system will change, and that we 
need to have the changes in our educational facilities to provide 
that. 
 
So when we talk about having an integrated health care facility 
in Saskatoon where physicians and nurses and licensed practical 
nurses and whatever those providers will be in this new evolved 
system, we have to have the education facilities to provide that 
workforce to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And recognizing that the changes will have to occur within the 
human services sector right now, that there might be some 
changes in terms of the types of services being provided from 
front-line caregivers today that may be different tomorrow, then 
there has to be opportunity for those health services providers to 
also make the adjustments and have the training available to 
them to provide that change as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are many recommendations within Fyke. 
He has put it together as a package, and he is talking about what 
we can do to deliver better quality health care services in urban 
Saskatchewan, in rural Saskatchewan, and in northern 
Saskatchewan, and what this government can do to make sure 
that that quality system does develop over the next many years. 
 
Now when we talk about the process itself and how the people 
will come forward, well obviously once the referral motion is 
set and passed by this Legislative Assembly, then it will allow 
for that committee to meet to elect its Chair and then to put out 
requests to people in Saskatchewan — stakeholders and any 
community group who is interested in making a response — 
and then having those groups come forward and present to the 
committee. 
 
So we anticipate that over the course of the next six to eight 
weeks, probably into the summer months, that we will be able 
to sit and hear these presentations. That report . . . we’re talking 
about presentations by groups. We’re not talking about this 
committee making recommendations. It’s talking about 
reporting on what those representations have been, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this is not a committee that’s talking about redesigning Fyke. 
What it’s there for is to hear what the people have to say with 
regard to Fyke, and then it will be up to the government to 
determine where consensus is amongst the stakeholders — 
which areas we can move on quickly, which areas that may 
require more consultation or in-depth study. 
 
But the fact of the matter is it’ll provide the template for 
making those needed changes — changes that have been talked 



May 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1319 

 

about for over 50 years in this province and have yet not 
occurred. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that, I would just like to reiterate that the 
role of this committee is to hear from the public and from 
stakeholders and from front-line caregivers, and for that report 
to then be tabled within this Legislative Assembly. 
 
The recommendation and the motion for that recommendation 
talks about having these proceedings televised so that what is 
said by individuals, what questions are asked by the committee, 
will be available on the public record, Mr. Speaker. So that 
there can be no interpretation in terms of what was said or what 
wasn’t said, because what was said will be there for everyone to 
see. And the government’s action on what was said will be 
based on that interpretation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that I would just like to say that I am pleased to second 
the motion by the Government House Leader with regard to 
referring the Fyke Commission as the first item of business for 
this very important all-party Standing Committee on Health 
Care. And I’m pleased to second that motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
a pleasure for me as well to rise and speak on the motion that 
will reference material to the Standing Committee on Health for 
initial work by the committee. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I spoke at some length on May 16 last about 
my opinion of the process that the government was 
recommending, and raised a number of concerns and cautions. 
And I won’t pretend to go over the entire speech again, 
although people have commented that it pretty succinctly 
summed up the reservations and concerns that the official 
opposition certainly has about this whole process. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, subsequent to that debate I must say that 
there’s nothing that has occurred and nothing that has been said 
by members opposite that has alleviated my concerns or my 
fears. Certainly by the fact that the government saw fit to 
appoint every member of the committee was a concern, and it 
was expressed by our House Leader, the precedent that that 
created in terms of the lack of consultation and co-operation in 
terms of forming standing committees. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, I also have heard words that again 
remind me very much of my previous experience with standing 
committees that are set up by this government. 
 
And in some ways I hear almost concerns that are at odds. The 
Government House Leader said that no one is interested in 
hearing what people say, from this side of the House. Well I 
think, Mr. Speaker, the opposite is absolutely the truth, because 
we’ve been talking to people and listening to people very 
closely since the Fyke report has been submitted. 
 
And as I said in my speech a week ago, I am sure it is only not 
myself as the opposition Health critic that is receiving 
submissions and letters from the public, I am absolutely sure 

that the Minister of Health is as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I listened to the Liberal leader talk about 
seconding this motion of referral, it sounded to me not so much 
like, again, anything different than I’ve heard before. Because 
what I heard, what I heard, Mr. Speaker, is not so much an 
objective willingness to discuss Fyke; I heard a spirited defence 
of all the material that Fyke was presenting in his report. I heard 
him say that Fyke is right. Well that isn’t certainly the kind of 
attitude you take to a committee that is going to move forward 
the issue in terms of health care before. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government selectively likes to forget 
the fact that they have been a government for a good long time. 
They keep pointing back to the ’80s and selectively forget about 
the decisions that they themselves have made throughout the 
’90s. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the first thing that they have to talk about, I 
think, is their record on health care. And they have to be willing 
not to just talk about Fyke; they have to be willing to talk about 
their record on health care as well. Because it is not a new 
government that is coming up with a new direction. They are 
responsible for the last decade of direction in this province, not 
only in health care but in every other aspect of this provincial 
government’s economy and social activities that we all have to 
face. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, they have to live up and stand up to the 
fact that there are more issues involved than the Fyke 
Commission. The Fyke Commission was something that was 
born out of desperation because they have simply run out of 
ideas. 
 
In 1983 or so, we heard the minister of the day, Louise Simard, 
bring forward the wellness model idea. And the result of that 
model was a lot of wonderful platitudes that were stated at the 
time about the pillars of health care and about how we had to 
work together in this collaborative spirit to improve health care. 
 
And the minister of the day and the deputy minister, who is 
currently the Premier, went around this province and told 
communities: trust us, this process is going to result in better 
health care for everyone in this province; trust us when we say 
it doesn’t matter that your facilities are going to be closed or 
converted — at the end of the day health care is going to be 
better. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there was a lot of anxiety across this 
province about what was going to happen. But at the end of the 
day as well, this government made the decision with their 
majority to say, come hell or high water they were going to 
implement the wellness model. And 52, and later the Plains 
Health Centre in Regina, were closed. And some of them were 
converted, but many were simply closed. 
 
And in their wake was supposed to be better health care. And 
yet nowhere in this province, rural or urban, are people sitting 
there saying health care is better than it was a decade ago. 
 
Certainly it’s different, certainly it’s different. But what we 
need to do is say objectively, is it better? And I’m afraid that 
the reality is, is that’s simply not a fact. It is not better. 



1320 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2001 

 

And so now because the government, after a decade of trying to 
put band-aids on this and wandering around in the wilderness 
about what to do, they finally said, well let’s get someone in 
here that can maybe give an opinion that will get us off the 
hook for a while. And they did. 
 
They commissioned Mr. Fyke, and for a year and a half not a 
single proper decision was made. Nothing was done. 
Everything was on hold. Any time the Department of Health 
wanted to bring an issue forward the minister said, we can’t talk 
about that because Fyke is in the process. 
 
And in the meantime, the decisions that this government had 
made were coming more and more to the forefront as to the 
implications of what’s going on. And there are many of them, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
(11:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, just the other day we saw a story that said the 
orthopedic waiting times for hip and knee replacements were 
not longer than anywhere else in the country — they were 
almost twice as long as anywhere else in the country, and they 
were significantly more than twice as long as the average for 
Canada. 
 
These are the kinds of facts that are now facing the people of 
this province who were told: trust us; if you allow us to do this, 
it’s just going to get better. Well, Mr. Speaker, it hasn’t gotten 
better; it’s gotten worse. 
 
And now what we’re supposed to do is listen to the Liberal 
leader sit here and say, oh the Fyke report, his commission is 
absolutely right on. He’s not going to sit on that committee as 
an objective observer of Fyke; he’s going to be there as a 
proponent of Fyke. And that’s the kind of exercise we are going 
to get into again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re going to end up with again . . . and 
when I heard the Liberal leader speak, I could hear Channel 
Lake all over again, where the decisions are already made as to 
what the report’s going to look like. I want to know if there’s a 
flunky in his office already writing the thing, because that’s 
what happened to us the last time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader can buy into this NDP 
government’s agenda for the last decade. I remember him 
running against it. But now he’s been so engrossed in power 
and authority that he has simply bought into everything that this 
government stands for. And if he wants to stand for the last 
decade of mismanagement, then he can stand up and stand right 
next to them and watch the end of the Liberal Party for the next 
generation, thanks to what’s gone on. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I wonder if I might beg the indulgence of the 
member and the Assembly to make an introduction of some 
students. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you very much, members. In 

the Speaker’s gallery just entered, there is a group of 27 grade 6 
to 8 students from Osborne School in the Prince Albert district. 
 
They are accompanied today by teachers Bernice McNair, Jodie 
Fraser, and Lynda Miller, who actually I must say was one of 
my daughter’s first teachers . . . one of our daughters, Lisa’s 
first teachers. 
 
And also with them is Fred Grono, Alvin Parenteau, Wally 
Tetarenki, and Corinna Perkins, as chaperones. 
 
I want to welcome the students from Osborne School and I wish 
you a good visit, and I hope to see you shortly in the rotunda for 
photos. 
 
Would the members please welcome these students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Fyke Report to Standing Committee 
on Health Care 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is really difficult to sit here and listen to that Liberal 
leader sit here and talk about his great defence of the NDP 
process. 
 
This was the member that was going to chain himself to the 
Plains hospital to keep it from being closed. And now he stands 
here and advocates everything that Fyke is talking about, 
including the closure of another 50 hospitals in this province. 
I’d like you to chain yourself to one of them, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those kinds of inconsistent comments by that 
member are exactly what make us nervous about this whole 
process. Because, Mr. Speaker, you can see again and again 
how this is going to be manipulated, not in the public interest, 
but in the political interest of those members, all of them who 
are obviously NDP, including the Liberal leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other issues that need desperately to be 
dealt with in this province. Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader talks 
about the fact that there has to be a renewed commitment to the 
health sciences at the University of Saskatchewan. Absolutely. 
We’ve been saying that for some time now, day after day after 
day, while those members sit on their hands and by doing 
absolutely are allowing the College of Medicine to be placed in 
great jeopardy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I quote an article that was in the On Campus 
viewpoint by Dr. Roger Pierson, who is a renowned medical 
professional at the College of Medicine. And he says: 
 

At the end of it, let me connect the dots for you. We are 
attempting to run a College of Medicine on a shoestring 
budget, in rundown facilities, following decades of 
underfunding and cutbacks in an intensely competitive 
environment against provinces who want to be leaders in 
the academic, clinical, and biomedical research game. 

 
That’s what’s at stake, Mr. Speaker. And he talks about the fact 



May 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1321 

 

that there is a critical accreditation review going to happen this 
fall, and there are considerable worries about how that’s going 
to come out, given the lack of commitment by this government. 
 
And so what we’re going to do is take more time and listen to 
all this sort of stuff that these guys are going to shove down our 
throats after we go through the process. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if the government is indeed serious about a 
process, if they’re indeed serious about the process, they have 
to not only talk about Fyke and run a spirited defence of their 
report, they better be prepared to put their health record on the 
line. They better be prepared to talk about the critical issues of 
things like the College of Medicine and the closure of hospitals 
and the waiting times. 
 
They better be willing, not to sit in Regina under the glare of 
television cameras, but be willing to go out to communities that 
are going to face another round of closures if this government 
has its way. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think if they’re prepared to do that, then they 
will be prepared to entertain an amendment to their motion that 
I would like to propose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment as follows: 
 

That all the words after “respect” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 

 
to the current government’s health forum initiatives 
undertaken since 1993 that have resulted in the closure of 
53 hospitals, an increased number of health professionals 
leaving the province, concern about the future of the 
College of Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan, 
and the longest medical waiting times in Canada, as well as 
the final report of the Commission on Medicare dated April 
11, 2001; 
 
And that the standing committee have the authority to sit 
during the intersessional period and during the legislative 
session except when the Assembly is sitting; to engage 
such advisers and assistants as are required for the purposes 
of the hearing; 
 
And that the committee be obligated to conduct hearings in 
any community where conversion or closure of health 
facilities is recommended; 
 
And that the standing committee be authorized to televise 
those proceedings on the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Network; 
 
And that the standing committee be authorized during any 
period of adjournment to make a report on its inquiries by 
filing the same with the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly; 
and that the report shall be distributed in accordance with 
The Tabling of Documents Act; 
 
And that the standing committee file a written report no 
later than August 30, 2001. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to move that and point to the critical 

issues that are changed in this from the original motion. It takes 
all of the substance of the original motion and adds the fact that 
the government has to be accountable for their decisions since 
1993. And that if they’re going to recommend closures or 
conversions, that this committee be obligated to hold hearings 
in those communities affected so the people can have their say. 
 
If this government wants to indeed deal with the future of health 
care in this province, then I am quite certain that they’re going 
to pleased to accept the amendment that I’m making, seconded 
by the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak 
to the amendment to the proposal put forth by the NDP. And I 
would like to mention that we are the only party that has 
submitted its priorities for health reform to the Fyke 
Commission. 
 
We look across the way at the other three parties in this 
Assembly and realize that they have not had the courage to do 
so. And yet we have the Minister of Education stand today and 
endorse the Fyke report before the committee has even started 
holding their meetings. 
 
I believe that the NDP-Liberal coalition has already made up 
their mind and we are about to go out on another — what 
should I say — we’re going to just go out and talk to people but 
we’re not going to listen them, the same as we have done in so 
many other cases, and make it look like a public relations event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the members have indicated, that we are going 
to have another study to study the study. And we have had 
experiences with this in the past where there’s been committees 
formed but yet no results have come out of it. And certainly the 
people of Saskatchewan have not been well served by them. 
 
We had the Channel Lake committee that was put forth. We 
have the committee for agriculture. We had the committee on 
the child sex trade. And most recently we had Mr. Fyke come 
before the legislature, where we were given assurance that we 
would all have opportunity to question him on his report. And 
we were cut off and not allowed to continue the debate because 
the issue was becoming too hot and heavy for the members 
opposite to handle. 
 
And so now, Mr. Speaker, we are being asked to go out and yet 
form another committee that will not serve the people of 
Saskatchewan but will be another of the same that we have seen 
from this government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the last thing that the people of 
Saskatchewan want or need is another study. They are sick to 
death of waiting for this government to do something to 
improve the health care of the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy there 
has been much frustration, much hurt, since this government 
introduced its wellness model some eight years ago. We have 
seen the deterioration of health care in rural Saskatchewan and 



1322 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2001 

 

now we are seeing the deterioration of health care in urban 
Saskatchewan because they are asked to pick up the slack from 
what cannot be offered in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that now that when 
polling is done, that we find that the level of frustration and 
concern about health care is as high or higher in urban centres 
as it is in rural Saskatchewan. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that that is 
because people in rural Saskatchewan have come to accept the 
fact that this government has turned their back on them, doesn’t 
care about their situation, and has left them out there wandering 
in the wilderness. 
 
But now the people in urban Saskatchewan are also starting to 
feel the heat from not having adequate services, and they are 
realizing that this government does not serve them in the issue 
and the centre of health care either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Radville, Bengough, Pangman, Weyburn, the 
centres that provide health care in my constituency, they have 
been whittled down to nothing. They have asked to be able to 
provide access . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — They have been asking this government to be 
able to provide adequate health care to the people of their area 
and this government has denied them. We have a doctor in 
Radville . . . we have actually two doctors in Radville who 
provide excellent care to the people of Radville. This doctor is 
asking for five acute care beds so he can provide service for the 
people of his area. It has been denied him because there is not 
enough money in the budget. So these people are being forced 
to come to Regina for care, and therefore there’s pressure on the 
hospitals in Regina. And this is happening all over this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how are we expected to keep doctors in these 
small places if we do not provide beds so that they can provide 
service to their people? And yet what is the answer? Fyke is 
going to close even more hospitals and reduce the care that we 
now have in rural Saskatchewan to even less service. This is the 
answer. And I hear the Minister of Education and the people 
opposite endorsing Fyke before we’ve even heard the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is also huge concern about emergency 
services in rural Saskatchewan. And it’s very interesting to me 
that when Mr. Fyke did appear before this Legislative 
Assembly that I asked him about why was he endorsing the 
EMS (emergency medical services) report. And his response 
was, well, I haven’t really studied a lot about it but I am 
endorsing it. Very, very serious for the people of Saskatchewan 
to think that the man who is in charge of the overseeing of the 
commission in this province endorse the EMS report but yet he 
has not studied it in depth. And this is what we are supposed to 
take forward and endorse to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another reason why the people of rural 
Saskatchewan are so concerned about the ambulance service 
and the EMS report is because they will again lose more local 
control, much of what they already lost when 52 hospitals were 
closed and the Plains hospital was closed as well. Local control 

was taken away from them without any consultation and they 
see this happening again now in the area of ambulance services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in rural Saskatchewan can provide 
ambulance service to their people. They understand the need. 
Many of them are volunteers so it is done at a much less costly 
basis. And they also know the location where they need to go 
when they get a call. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Now we have a situation where it goes into a centralized 
service, they have a land description or whatever. People are 
frustrated, they don’t know where they’re supposed to go. 
Valuable time is lost and it could mean lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another concern with the ambulance is because of 
the deterioration of our highway system in rural Saskatchewan. 
People are being asked to use ambulances to get them to larger 
centres to receive care and they’re being asked to drive on 
highways that have deteriorated to the point where many are 
unsafe. It is not an uncommon practice now in rural 
Saskatchewan for bus drivers to take a grid road because it is 
safer than the highways that they used to use. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we have the situation where we have a 
government that has turned their back on rural Saskatchewan 
not only in the area of health care but also in the area of 
providing a means for them to access health care. 
 
And yet does this government care? I don’t see any evidence 
that there is any caring on the other side of the House for what 
is happening in Saskatchewan as far as health care is concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have a situation where there are no acute 
care beds in my constituency except in the city of Weyburn. 
And in the other areas, if people are admitted to an observation 
bed, they have to be moved after 24 to 48 hours. That means the 
use of an ambulance and it means trying to get them into 
another centre where they can receive care. In many cases these 
people are sent home without the adequate care that they need 
and should have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of what Mr. Fyke came out with in his 
report, there is great concern amongst people in smaller areas of 
Saskatchewan. They are concerned about the loss of their 
hospital that they have now. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Fyke has 
recommended that we have 20 acute care centres left in 
Saskatchewan should his study be . . . should his advice be 
taken. 
 
In Weyburn there is great concern because we are situated 
between Regina and Estevan. And we have a situation now 
where we have nurses that have left or that are looking to leave 
because their jobs are on the line should this hospital be closed. 
 
I see the member opposite shaking his head. Well I would like a 
guarantee from the members opposite that Weyburn hospital 
will not be closed. The people of Weyburn would be very, very 
pleased to hear that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have a serious situation in rural 
Saskatchewan because we have many seniors. And the seniors 



May 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1323 

 

are being asked to trust this government to provide the care that 
they need. And, Mr. Speaker, they have already seen where they 
have lost their doctors in many cases, they have lost a hospital, 
and they are forced to leave their homes in these smaller 
communities so that they can be close to access a doctor and to 
a hospital. And they have spent a lifetime, many of them, 
buying their homes, and that is the only thing that they have 
left. And they are being asked to leave these homes and to move 
to a larger centre, simply because health care is not provided to 
them in their own local area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of rural Saskatchewan and indeed all of 
Saskatchewan have lost trust in this government. They are 
frustrated and they see changes being imposed upon them 
without any consultation from this government. 
 
This government is saying we will hold the studies in Regina; 
you can come to us. It’s the same old story. Everyone has to 
come in at their expense and present a report to this government 
in Regina. The government should be looking at going out to 
these communities and speaking to the people in their own 
areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we seen eight years ago where this government 
brought in what was supposed to be the wellness model, where 
they closed 52 hospitals and they closed the Plains hospital. 
And as our member has already mentioned that the Minister of 
Education, at that time, said he was going to chain himself to 
the Plains hospital to stop it from closing. What happened? 
Now we see him sitting on the government side of the House 
and endorsing Fyke who is going to close 50 more hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a province-wide crisis where we have a 
shortage of training seats. This is not only to do with nurses, but 
it’s also to do with the College of Medicine. And now we are 
hearing people in the technical area of medicine also being very 
concerned because of the lack of seats, that they are going to 
have a severe shortage in their areas very soon. And what does 
this government do? They react after the fact. 
 
After we already are at a shortage of seats and we have a 
shortage in the hospitals, then they decide that they’re going to 
start looking at increasing them. Well the damage has already 
been done. And because of this, we have created a workplace 
that has caused great frustration, and we have seen the exodus 
of many nurses and doctors because of a workplace that is out 
of control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have emergency rooms that are backed up day 
after day after day because people in the emergency rooms 
cannot get a bed on the ward. And it is just a continual 
revolving door. What has this government done to alleviate 
this? Nothing. 
 
We have waiting lists. And the sad part about the waiting lists 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is that people believe if they’re 
on a waiting list that somehow they are going to get in soon. 
Some of our waiting lists are up to two years long. And there’s 
a waiting list for urgent; there’s a waiting list for emergency; 
there’s a waiting list for elective. And there’s A and B lists as 
well. 
 
People have the idea that if they’re on that list, that they are 

being looked after. Well they can be two years down the 
waiting list and sitting there at home waiting by the phone for 
someone to call them. We have seen people hurt, and we have 
seen their conditions deteriorate while they are waiting. 
 
This has caused great cost to the whole taxpayer system of 
Saskatchewan, to the taxpayers, because people are on 
medication because of their conditions, they are hospitalized 
because of their conditions, they have repeat visits to their 
doctors and to specialists, and yet somehow this is supposed to 
be cost effective. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just everyone in this Assembly can give examples 
of people that phone them on a daily basis because they are 
waiting either for tests or waiting for surgery. We have a 
situation where for a tonsillectomy, a simple tonsillectomy, you 
have to wait up to months to get in. 
 
I have a situation in my constituency now of a lady whose 
doctor has advised her to go out of province because he said 
there is no point in waiting in Saskatchewan because you will 
never probably get in to get this conditions looked after in a 
timely fashion. 
 
We have a situation where we have hip replacements that are 
taking up to two years in order for people to have hip 
replacements. Many of these people are seniors and are very, 
very severely affected by this wait time. Even to get in for a 
simple physical now is up to months of waiting time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have doctors leaving, we have nurses leaving, 
we have technical workers who are frustrated. We have less 
service and yet we are spending more dollars. The big question 
still is where is the money going. We are spending more on 
health care now than we ever have in the history of this 
province and yet people are frustrated and they are suffering 
and no one knows where the money is going. 
 
We believe, and I believe the people of Saskatchewan believe, 
that we have a huge, huge problem in management of the health 
care system and we have a government that is not willing to 
look at this and to find solutions. Many people in Saskatchewan 
are faced with a choice. When they are sick and they need care 
they can wait, many times up to two years, or they can go 
elsewhere and pay the bill themselves. 
 
We are the only party . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . workers’ 
compensation, that’s right. If you’re on workers’ compensation, 
as the member from Cannington has indicated, that then you go 
out of province and then it is paid for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to read a few headlines that 
would indicate to you what is happening in this province. These 
are just over a few days. It says: “Care home wait list at crisis,” 
“Doctor points to bed shortage, unable to meet patients’ 
demands,” “Nurses say still no improvement in working 
conditions,” “Province losing nurses like stuck pig bleeds,” 
“Chiropractors defying ruling,” “Tearful nurse asks how care is 
being enhanced,” and “P.A. nurse wants government to pay 
up.” These are just but a few of the ongoing lists of headlines 
that we see in our paper, of the frustration and the hurt that this 
government has caused the people of Saskatchewan. 
 



1324 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2001 

 

Well we are the only party, Mr. Speaker, that has put forth a 
plan and a vision to actually deliver accessible quality care to 
the people of Saskatchewan, no matter where they live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has had eight years to do nothing. 
The problem started with this government when they introduced 
wellness. And the people of Saskatchewan expect this 
government to do something to improve it. Everyone in 
Saskatchewan, either themself personally or a family member, 
has been negatively affected by the health care in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have put forward an amendment 
today. We believe that the time is now is action . . . is for 
action. And we have a plan to make the system work. And we 
believe that this government has no plan and now we hear today 
that they actually are going to endorse the Fyke Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education indicated very clearly 
that he was in favour of what Fyke was saying. It makes us 
wonder what the purpose of the committee is that they are 
forming over there. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are asking, do 
the members opposite have any idea of the desperation and the 
insecurity felt by all people in Saskatchewan? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have put forward an amendment that 
says: 
 

to the current government’s health reform initiatives 
undertaken since 1993 that have resulted in the closure of 
53 hospitals, an . . . (increasing) number of health 
professionals leaving the province, concern about the future 
of the College of Medicine at the University of 
Saskatchewan, and the longest waiting times in Canada . . . 
 
And that the committee be obligated to conduct hearings in 
any community where conversion or closure of health care 
facilities is recommended . . . 
 

So that all these issues can be spoken of and can be . . . the 
people can have a right to talk about them, not just about the 
Fyke Commission. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we are asking today that the members 
opposite endorse our amendment, and that we give the people 
of Saskatchewan a true chance to have a say in how they are 
going to have health care delivered in this province in the 
upcoming months and years. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take a different view 
of what the work of this committee can do. Actually I see that 
the committee will be meeting to talk about the broader context 
of health reform. Where do we go next? What do we do next? 
 
I think the amendment speaks to where we’ve been. And 
basically I think it, the amendment if passed, would provide the 
committee with stories and anecdotal evidence of people’s 

discontent with what has happened in the past. 
 
We have had 10 years of change. I’ve worked for over 30 years 
in the health system and change is inevitable and it is constant. 
And I think that when we pretend that we won’t see change, 
we’re certainly doing a disservice to ourselves and to the public 
that we serve. 
 
I think what we need to see the work of this committee do is to 
reach out to the public who are interested in being part of the 
next shift in how health services are delivered in this province. 
We’re on the cutting edge of what we’re going to do with the 
health system. Other provinces are watching us. People in this 
province are looking to us for leadership. They’re not interested 
in the politics that’s always in health care. I don’t know if you 
can take the politics out of health care, but people would like to 
see us try. 
 
They’d like to be able to talk about what we do next. They’d 
like to be part of what happens next. And I think that they want 
to be part of shaping public policy. When public policy is 
started at the community level, as most community developers 
know, then you have strong, strong support for change. 
 
And when we talk about change that’s necessary to happen, I 
think that, as my colleague from Saskatoon Northwest was 
saying, there are things that all of us know that Mr. Fyke 
reported in his report that will be inevitable. The whole country 
knows this. Things that Mr. Fyke reported are not new. They’re 
not news. 
 
Primary health care’s been talked about for many years. And 
even in the Sask Party submission to the Fyke Commission, 
primary health care was predominant in their recommendations. 
 
When we talk about how we’re going to change the system and 
primary health care being delivered, we talk about what 
happens in a community. So we want people to talk to us about 
how they see that working in their community. 
 
People who have had changes in their community have not . . . 
they’ve not accepted them gladly at first. But that’s how people 
are with change. Most of us don’t like it. I was laid off and 
bumped and closed through my nursing career. I didn’t like it. 
Many of my colleagues didn’t like it. It’s very stressful. Change 
is not exactly something that we accept gracefully or with ease. 
 
But change is inevitable in the health system and we should 
welcome it because change signals better service, better 
technology, better evidence-based decision making so that we 
know what we’re doing makes a difference. And I think people, 
they want to know that what we’re going to do will be to their 
benefit. 
 
And when we talk about individual communities being targeted, 
we don’t have any idea of what communities will see change. 
What we’re going to look at is how people feel about the broad 
context of change. When we talk about decisions about which 
community, that’s a future decision. That’s not the work of this 
committee. 
 
(12:00) 
 



May 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1325 

 

And I think to have the committee look at a venting, an exercise 
in venting isn’t going to be productive. I think we need to move 
forward to what we do next. And that’s where I think people are 
interested. 
 
There’s been no communities recommended for change. When 
we talk about hospital closures in the context of how I read 
Fyke, he talks about what will change in a community and how 
services will be delivered in the facility that people now know 
as a hospital. Those services will be delivered. 
 
What people need to have in those communities is palliative 
care, observation. They need to have access to step-down units 
to come back and recover from surgery, perhaps in a larger 
centre. Those services will be there — long-term care facilities. 
 
People will have the services that they need — home care, 
public health, mental health. Communities that have adopted a 
primary health care model already see the benefits of how 
people work together to address needs of communities as a 
whole. 
 
And when we talk about health, we limit ourselves significantly 
if we’d just talk about beds, providers, and services in a defined 
manner. When we talk about health, we should be talking about 
the broad determinants of health — what we need to make 
ourselves whole as a person, where we work, what we do, the 
safe water we drink, the clean air that we breathe, the job that 
we have, the education that we have. We need to talk about the 
broader determinants of health. 
 
So when we talk about healthy communities, we have to see 
what that community needs as a whole. Do they need exercise 
programs or do they need two beds, two acute care beds. The 
exercise programs will probably be hugely beneficial in 
long-term gain. When we talk about what communities need, 
we need to talk to communities, because those communities 
will want to be part of what they determine to be the best 
service in their area. 
 
We talk about communities talking together because one 
community is not necessarily defined by geography; a 
community is defined by common interest. And I think we need 
to explore how communities are formed and who are in those 
communities. 
 
I think people are interested in having that discussion and I 
think they’re looking to this committee to have that 
forward-looking discussion. When we talk about putting 
forward all the things that have happened over the last 10 years, 
some of them have not been good. I’ve been part of them. But I 
think that some of those changes have moved us where we are 
today and where we need to go tomorrow. 
 
And I think people do realize when they have good information 
. . . when people have good information, they make the right 
decisions. And I think it’s up to us, the onus is on us as 
developers of public policy to include people in those decisions 
and to give them the right information. 
 
When we talk about having top-down decisions, those are very 
hard to implement. People need to feel part of the process and 
they need to have some place to go to talk about what’s going to 

happen next. There may need to be some time spent on why did 
this happen and this wasn’t good for me, but that shouldn’t be 
the focus of what the work of this committee does. 
 
This committee needs to look at where we go next. And I think 
the whole country is watching us. And they know that 
Saskatchewan has the ability to do this. We have the resources, 
we have the human resources, and we have the track record. 
People have seen what we do here and they look towards us for 
leadership — not only our own people but people in other 
provinces. 
 
So what we do with this committee is quite significant and will 
have a significant impact on the country — not only just our 
province, but the country. 
 
We have many people come and talk at different events that 
I’ve attended over the last many years and talking about what 
we should do. We all pretty much know that we’re moving 
forward in a different area. It’s a cultural shift in how we see 
health care. We don’t just traditionally look at the . . . the way 
we used to look at it was looking at how many people we had 
delivering it, how many beds we had, what the definition of a 
hospital was, and where the building was. 
 
We need to look at what health means in the broader context 
and what services we need to make us healthy and to keep us 
healthy. And those services are not necessarily tied to a 
building. And we need to . . . like we keep saying; it’s a cultural 
shift. 
 
And people need some time to adjust to that. So they need to 
come and hear good information and give their input in how 
they feel about that information and be part of the process of the 
next direction of public policy for health care services in this 
province. 
 
I’m looking forward to the work of this committee. I think 
people in this province have really good ideas. I think many of 
them already know where we should go. And some of us of 
course, have got more information than others and I think we 
should be sharing that so people that need the information to 
make good decisions will have access to that information. 
 
I assume that people that talk about Fyke will have read it. 
Because I think we need to look at the whole package, not 
individual pieces that maybe jump out at us as not particularly 
useful to our individual situation. But I think everybody that 
comes forward should have had a good look at it, and look at it 
in a broader context of where the province should go. 
 
I think when we talk about emergency medical services we need 
to look at how that fits into all the services that we deliver. And 
the level of comfort and the level of concern that people have 
with access to emergency services. That is acute. I mean people 
do worry about what will happen to me if I’m in an accident or 
if I have a heart attack. We need to have a strong emergency 
medical services system in this province. That has to be part of 
the debate and part of the forward-thinking and part of the 
future planning that this committee will do. 
 
And I think the amendment will merely bog us down into 
looking at . . . looking behind us. And I think that many of the 



1326 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2001 

 

issues that we see about waiting lists and providers, recruiting 
providers, those things are being discussed and those issues are 
being addressed. 
 
We have pages and pages of initiatives that we’re doing to 
recruit and retain professionals in this province. I was part of 
much of that. So I mean this is something that . . . and if people 
don’t know it, I’d certainly be willing to share it. And I mean 
these things are doing . . . these things are really doing a good 
job. 
 
I saw in the paper the other day, we are seeing an increase in 
nurses. SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) is supporting 
Fyke. The SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association) is 
supporting Fyke. The SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association) is supporting Fyke. These organizations know that 
change is what we need to make this system work better. And 
most people see better as we’re going to have to make some 
changes. 
 
And what we have had — and I can attest to this since I’ve been 
in the system for so long — that we do have better services. 
When I was a nurse in the early ’70s, we did things a lot 
different than we do now. And a lot of the things we do now are 
so much better and so much more . . . they’re quicker, less 
invasive, people recover quicker; there’s more access to 
different drugs, more therapies, more technology, more 
diagnostics. These things are doing better. 
 
We do more in Saskatchewan. We spend more than we have 
ever had but we do more. We do more surgeries, we give out 
more drugs, we see more doctors — we do a lot with our 
money. 
 
And we keep doing more and more each year. It’s not that we 
don’t do surgery — we do more than anybody does. As my 
colleague from Northwest was saying, we do more out of . . . in 
16 categories; we do more in 12 of them than any other 
province. So we have a good record of spending our money 
well. 
 
And we need to talk about waiting lists but those discussions 
are happening in the department and with the other provinces 
about a western waiting list strategy. Those things are ongoing. 
 
Many of the things that I read in the Sask Party submission to 
Fyke are ongoing health department initiatives. They’re not new 
to us and I’m sure they weren’t new to Fyke. But they are 
ongoing and they are good ideas. But they’re already happening 
within our government and under our leadership. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think the public does want us to lead. They 
want to . . . they want us to lead forward. They don’t want us to 
be looking backward. 
 
So with those comments, I’d like to say I definitely do not 
support the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, a number of years ago I too 
worked in the health care system at the Royal University 
Hospital in Saskatoon. And I agree with the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview — the change in health care is inevitable 
and it’s constant. 
 
But there are some fundamental elements within health care that 
must stay constant because they’re absolutely necessary in 
order to say that we have a health care system. And I find that 
the deterioration that’s happened since I’ve been in the health 
care system from when I worked within to today is astounding. 
And it’s extremely disturbing to me. 
 
I worked in the system prior to the formation of health care 
districts and the introduction of the much-debated wellness 
model for the delivery of health care services. And I remember 
only too well the number of public meetings that were held in 
the Watrous constituency at the time that this NDP government 
attempted to sell the wellness model concept to the general 
public. 
 
And at that time the Watrous constituency had three hospitals, 
located at Watrous, Lanigan, and Nokomis, and along with the 
formation of what is now known as the Living Sky Health 
District, all three hospitals were severely cut back on the 
number of beds that they would have in service. And in fact, 
very shortly after the formation of the health district, the 
Nokomis Hospital was converted into a health care centre. 
 
The local volunteer boards were dissolved at the time and a new 
district health board was set up. Louise Simard, the health care 
minister at the time, stated that the new district health boards 
would play a key role in ensuring that the acute care services 
continue to be available in the affected communities. And that 
was only eight short years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the people of Lanigan and Watrous have lost any faith that 
they have had in that statement, because only one year ago I 
stood in this Assembly, day after day after day, and I read 
petitions signed by the good people from Watrous and Lanigan 
communities begging this government not to close the Lanigan 
Hospital and to convert the Watrous Hospital to a health care 
centre. 
 
And the very board that Louise Simard promised would ensure 
that acute care services continue to be available, had proposed 
those ideas in their most recent budget at the time. And now, 
only one year later, we have the board proposing the closing of 
the Lanigan Hospital for the summer months due to lack of 
nurses. 
 
And the amazing thing is, Mr. Speaker, that the very health 
board that the people of Lanigan are supposed to put their faith 
in, couldn’t find the nurses to fill the summer shifts, and yet in 
five short days the people themselves found nine nurses, one 
LPN (licensed practical nurse), and a health administrator who 
were willing to work the summer months. 
 
This is the very board and this is the very government that 
people are supposed to trust, and I don’t think they do any 
more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, at the time that this government was 
introducing the wellness model, a lot of public meetings were 
held in the constituency and a lot of promises were made. In an 
article that was written in The StarPhoenix dated September 30, 



May 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1327 

 

1993, Louise Simard stated, and I quote: 
 

I know it’s hard on people because they don’t see the end 
product yet. And when it’s in place, it will be clear that 
they have a higher level of health care in the community 
than ever before. 
 

And I find it kind of ironic when I was listening to the speaker 
from Saskatoon Eastview, because she almost said those exact 
same words in the opening of her talk on this subject — that 
people find change hard but it’ll be better. 
 
In another article dated April 16, 1993, Ms. Simard stated, and I 
quote: 
 

Funding reduction doesn’t mean smaller communities will 
be without quality health care. 

 
And she goes on to say: 
 

Upgraded ambulance service and improved communication 
systems will aid the health centres in their work. 

 
This is sounding all too familiar, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Fyke in his 
report talks incessantly about quality health care and how that 
will be obtained, not through access to health care facilities, but 
through improved ambulance services and communication 
systems. 
 
In his introduction alone we see the word quality written 30 
times without ever once defining what is meant by quality. It’s 
almost as if, if we say it often enough and we hear it often 
enough we’ll actually believe it, even if it is never substantiated 
throughout the whole report. 
 
In actuality the Fyke report, with only a few minor additives, is 
a wellness model 202. The first round of wellness reform put 
forward by this government did not improve health care in rural 
Saskatchewan. It did not save the province a dime in money in 
the health care budget, and in fact it created incredible stress on 
the urban hospitals who now have to add rural people, many of 
whom have relatively minor conditions, to their waiting lists 
because the rural people have either lost their facility or had 
their facility downgraded to the point where it cannot perform 
the minor procedure necessary. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan are supposed to believe that 
more of the same will produce a different outcome simply 
because we’ve added the word quality. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley and 
ask him why he’s on his feet. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave for the 
introduction of guests, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and to all members of the legislature, I’d like to introduce two 
guests in your gallery, seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Ed and Marlene Stevenson from Eston. 
 
They are very, very close family friends of myself. In fact Ed 
and Marlene farm right across the road from our farmyard, 
long-time family friends. His son and I played hockey together, 
and baseball, for years and years. He was considerably better at 
it than I was, but nevertheless we still have a very close family 
friendship between our family and the Stevenson family. 
 
And I’d like all members of the legislature to join with me in 
welcoming them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(12:15) 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Fyke Report to Standing Committee 
on Health Care 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. An article that was 
on the Internet under Headhunter.net I believe evaluates the 
Fyke report quite accurately. It says, and I quote: 
 

The greatest disappointment in the report is the lack of 
detail found in the solutions/conclusions section. We see 
items such as the closing of facilities, renaming facilities, 
restructuring of management regions and districts and so 
forth, but what do we see for the front line? What do we see 
for the hands-on caregiver and the service recipient? 

 
What we see is more than a bit frightening. We see pages 
and pages devoted to an obsessive description of an 
imaginary need to guarantee that no health care provider 
ever be placed in position to offer care that a lesser 
qualified caregiver could offer. 
 
We see pages and pages devoted to an obsessive 
description of an imaginary need to guarantee that no 
health care facility ever provide care that could be offered 
in a more appropriate facility or by a cheaper method. 

 
We see pages and pages devoted to an obsessive 
description of an imaginary need to guarantee that no 
health care diagnostic procedure be performed that might 
be unnecessary or premature. Mr. Fyke intends to 
second-guess many of the decisions made by those health 
care providers who make the best of an impoverished 
system on a daily basis. 

 
The author says a lot more than that, Mr. Speaker, that I won’t 
quote, but he ends his article by saying: 
 

In his quest for quality and efficiency, Mr. Fyke has 
reminded us that efficiency spells the larger part of 
deficiency. We are also reminded that quality can be a 
subjective thing and that even though $2 million has spent 
and bought a lengthy volume of information for this NDP 
government, the Fyke report is sadly lacking in quality. 

 
There were two major themes to the last NDP health care 
reform, those being a more coordinated delivery of health care 



1328 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2001 

 

services through the formation of health boards and the more 
aggressive promotion of wellness. Health boards have indeed 
allowed the availability of services that can be shared by 
different communities that would not otherwise be affordable or 
even practical if the community had to support the service on its 
own. 
 
This asset however has not come to these communities without 
a price. The administration costs of the health districts is a 
major component of their overall budgets. More and more 
health care dollars are being spent on personnel that are not 
involved with the actual front-line care of people. 
 
The local communities have lost control over their own hospital 
or facility, both financially and in the decision-making process. 
Even though they have members on the board, no one 
community will have the majority of the vote in a local 
decision. 
 
I think that this has had a huge negative impact on the amount 
of donation dollars that were once given to this health care 
system. People are no longer willing to donate money to a 
district where there are no guarantees that the money will be 
spent where the contributor intended it to be. 
 
I also believe that the health districts, while perhaps saving 
some dollars through sharing of services, also creates a wasting 
of dollars. If you have one facility with a local board, the board 
members will have a very focused view on where money is 
being spent wisely and where it is not. It gives the board the 
ability to find out what that particular community’s specific 
needs are and what services that the people of that community 
would like to see offered, and then they can budget accordingly. 
 
And yes, it will mean that not all facilities the same size will 
have identical services. But it will also mean that it will have 
the services that meets the needs of the population that 
surrounds it. 
 
Having local input would also mean that if there was a large 
expenditure that the board could see necessary, they could 
budget for it over the course of a number of years instead of 
flying by the seat of their pants from one year to the next as 
they wait to see if their budgets will be approved before the 
next one has to be submitted, which is what they’re doing now, 
having the district boards which include a number of facilities, 
making the budgeting decisions for specific facilities more 
difficult. 
 
It also encourages the use it or lose it philosophy, because the 
monies that you save by making the operation of one facility 
more efficient does not necessarily stay allocated to that facility 
to spend at a later date. Rather it goes back to the general fund 
and will be allocated wherever the board deems necessary, and 
that could be in another community. 
 
Even though that is a serious flaw, there’s even a more serious 
flaw within the health districts however, and that’s their lack of 
accountability to virtually anyone, which gives them the 
ultimate power to make decisions that may not be in the best 
interests of the people that they are supposed to serve. 
 
I must admit that last week when we were doing Health 

estimates and when I had questioned the Health minister in the 
House of different issues that were happening in the Living Sky 
Health District, I was absolutely shocked by the Health 
minister’s total lack of awareness of what was happening within 
that health district. It is definitely a phenomenal way for this 
government to pass the buck and to shirk off any responsibility 
for health care issues. 
 
These districts are basically run by CEOs (chief executive 
officer) who don’t seem to have a specific job description or, if 
they do, no one can answer me as to what that job description 
is. They don’t seem to have to meet any specific criteria to get 
the job, and they don’t seem to have to answer to anybody. 
 
That alone can cause serious problems within the districts, 
especially if the CEO’s best interest is not necessarily to the 
people that she was hired by. That doesn’t happen in all cases, 
but it can happen in some. 
 
And this problem is compounded if the district is underfunded 
either because of provincial cutbacks or because of 
mismanagement of their available dollars. When underfunding 
occurs, the board members most definitely become very turf 
protective. Very quickly, one community is pitted against 
another, and then board meetings are used to discuss minor 
matters of how to get the communities to get along, rather than 
the actual delivery of health care services within that district. 
 
I cannot understand how this government considers this an 
efficient method of delivering health care. And the only answer 
that we can get from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, if we 
question them on this issue, is that they are not responsible; we 
need to talk to our local boards. 
 
The other element that I mentioned earlier, or the component of 
the NDP’s last reform in health care, was wellness. And Mr. 
Fyke’s report rewrites this concept quite well. And on page 13, 
Mr. Fyke states: 
 

By enhancing services to promote health at the “upstream” 
end of the health (care) system through prevention, 
protection, promotion, disease management and 
comprehensive care, the need for most cost-intensive 
treatments “downstream” can be reduced. 

 
And I agree that wellness is a very important element to health 
care delivery. But we’re foolish if we want to believe that it will 
significantly reduce our waiting lists or that it will have a great 
deal of savings for our health care dollars. 
 
Society as a whole today is more health conscious than we’ve 
been in the past. If you look at a magazine rack, you will see all 
sorts of health magazines, more than you’ve ever used to see 
before, and they’re there at no cost to our health care system. 
They’re there not because the government decided that they 
should be there. And they’re there because people are buying 
them. 
 
There are more health food stores open than ever before. And 
again, they’re there at no cost to the health care dollars. And 
they’re there because people are buying the products in the 
health food stores. We’re seeing a rapidly increasing market for 
nutriceutical products as people strive to live healthier. 



May 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1329 

 

But our health care system is still requiring more and more and 
more money. So if healthier living is the main solution, then 
why are we not realizing a decreased number of health dollars 
spent and a decrease in waiting lists? 
 
And there’s a few very simple reasons as to why . . . there are a 
lot of reasons. But quite simply if we all live longer, there are 
more of our body parts that are literally going to wear out. 
We’re going to need to do more hip replacements and more 
knee replacements. And irregardless of how healthy we live our 
lives — and I encourage everyone to do so — we will still age 
at some point. And that is when we’ll be the highest burden to 
our health care system. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when will this government take responsibility 
for the disaster of their first health reform scheme? And when 
will this government admit that they have botched the health 
care system in this province, instead of hiring someone to 
rewrite their initial reform under a different name? 
 
Mr. Fyke’s misdirected health delivery team concept is all well 
and fine. And on page 17 of his report he states that: 
 

Health care providers insist that “health care is about 
services, not buildings”, but the fact remains that for many 
people their local hospital is a symbol of security and 
community viability. The realities of modern health care, 
however, have simply made the small hospital obsolete. 

 
Well I would like to tell the members opposite that if one of my 
loved ones or one of their loved ones has been in a vehicle 
accident or has suffered a heart attack, a phone call to a health 
care team is not going to stabilize them enough to make the 
hour and a half trip that it takes to go from my home to a 
tertiary centre in Saskatoon. 
 
There comes a time when we need to engage common sense. 
And there comes a time that we need to realize that there are 
certain fundamental services that are necessary for our health 
care system even though the system is constantly changing. 
 
With Fyke’s team approach, when I enter the health care system 
I will be given a handful of brochures on exercising and how to 
prevent diabetes. I will meet with my social worker, my 
dietitian, my mental health worker, my lab tech if I need to, and 
hopefully I may even get to see a nurse. But the problem with 
this concept is, what if I just want to see my doctor? 
 
I think it’s obvious that this government has been ignoring this 
problem far too long and the whole health care system is falling 
around them . . . all the way around them as we speak. 
 
Since I have been elected I have not heard them voice even one 
solution to any of the difficulties that the health care system is 
facing in this province. They just react from crisis to crisis 
without offering any solutions. Where are their ideas about 
health care? What do they suggest we do about the long waiting 
lists, the recruitment of medical personnel, the unrest in the 
College of Medicine, the mass exodus of our specialists, and the 
never-ending increasing of health care costs? 
 
Do you know what they suggest, Mr. Speaker? They suggest 
nothing. They suggest that we do another study. And they want 

to form a committee to study the Fyke report. 
 
And I would like to help them out just a little bit here today. At 
a quick glance — and I have read the report from end to end 
quite extensively — there are two very good, very good 
recommendations in this report. 
 
One is that we should examine and address prescribing of drugs 
in this province to ensure that there are fewer duplication of 
prescriptions and that the drugs that are of lower cost but with 
equal effectiveness are prescribed ahead of the more costly 
drugs. 
 
The second is that we should implement some method in which 
test results and X-ray results could be transferred with the 
patient from one facility to another so that they are not 
needlessly duplicated. 
 
Both of these recommendations will save the province a great 
deal of money. And any member on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, could have given the government the advice for free, 
which would have also saved them the $2 million that they 
spent on the Fyke Commission. 
 
Normally the efforts by any government, Mr. Speaker, to listen 
and consult with the people of Saskatchewan and all the 
interested groups and parties on an issue should be commended. 
But the fact that it took this NDP government eight years to 
decide to do this — to listen to the people of Saskatchewan — 
is nothing short of a disgrace. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I shall be supporting the amendment 
put forward by the member from Melfort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me great pleasure to rise today and address the issue of the 
standing . . . the all-party Health Committee. 
 
It seems ludicrous to the members on this side that the 
government would actually believe that once again we would 
fall for their line of thinking — first of all, the manner in which 
the members of this standing committee were selected; 
secondly, the Saskatchewan Party’s past experiences with the 
NDP version of all-party committees. 
 
And I will just reiterate what my colleagues have said. In 1998 
we had the Channel Lake. In 1999 we had an all-party 
committee on agriculture, and in the year 2000, an all-party 
committee to deal with the child sex trade in Saskatchewan. 
And last month, of course, was the fiasco where they had 
invited Mr. Fyke to the legislature and all the members were 
told that they would have an opportunity to question Mr. Fyke. 
And after a couple of hours they realized that this probably 
wasn’t the brightest move they made, so they called a halt to it. 
 
So this issue of once again forming a standing committee to 
study — yet again — health care issues is getting to be very 
repetitive. My constituents have been calling and writing, 
wondering when or if the government is ever going to get it 
together and stop wasting money by studying the problems 
within the health care field. They feel that the money that the 



1330 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2001 

 

government wastes and spends on various issues . . . on various 
studies, could and should be put directly into the hands that 
work in the health field. 
 
And what are more studies going to accomplish? Mr. Speaker, 
we know where the problems are, but we have a government 
that, once again, wants to be able to put the blame anywhere but 
where it actually lies. 
 
This government has no intention of fixing anything within the 
health system, but rather wants to continue to spend taxpayers’ 
dollars by studying problems. It amazes me to think that the 
members opposite have had 10 years to figure out where their 
problems are, but yet they would like all of us to believe that if 
we agreed to work within an all-party committee, everything 
will be magically fixed. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I don’t buy into the government’s way of 
thinking. And on our past experiences as well, this is what we 
can expect with this all-party committee — that the members on 
this side would not be allowed to discuss issues outside of 
tightly controlled mandate imposed by the NDP, and the final 
decision on what is done with the Fyke Commission report will 
be made by cabinet and not a legislative committee, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
To the government members, they may have a short-term 
memory loss, Mr. Speaker, but my constituents do not. As 
everyone is aware, Mr. Speaker, the now Premier was the one 
who was instrumental in the demise and closing of the Plains 
Hospital as well as 52 rural hospitals. 
 
My constituents have told me that they have absolutely no faith 
in the Fyke Commission report and that they have even less in 
an all-party committee. The lack of access has forced people to 
look elsewhere for health care. The waiting lists for MRIs 
(magnetic resonance imaging), CAT (computerized axial 
tomography) scans, specialists appointments, etc., etc., are long 
and ongoing. And rather than waiting, Saskatchewan people are 
going to the United States, Alberta, and even Manitoba to 
receive these services. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? These same people are 
paying for these services out of their own pockets as the only 
alternative for them is a guaranteed death sentence. As many of 
my constituents have repeatedly told us, they would rather go 
out of province and pay to have a service provided that they 
could help them determine whether or not they have a 
life-threatening illness, because if they wait to get these 
appointments in Saskatchewan, they’ll surely be dead or very 
close to it. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, excuse me, but I just don’t buy into this 
government’s way of thinking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I have consulted with my constituents and a 
great majority of concerns are related to the health care systems. 
It is very disheartening to be told that even the doctors are 
telling their patients to lobby their local MLAs as they cannot 
continue to fight with the current government over these issues. 
 
What does that tell you, Mr. Speaker, when even the doctors 
within this system feel frustrated and do not want to have to 

deal with this government? What exactly is going to change? 
What is an all-party committee going to accomplish? How 
many more studies does this government need to have done 
before they will accept the responsibility and fix up their own 
mistakes and own up to their own responsibilities? 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, why this government is so intent on 
setting up this all-party committee. When the messy business 
has to be done they can once again point their fingers at the 
members opposite and try again to lay the blame on anyone but 
themselves, when really they should be looking in a mirror — 
something, Mr. Speaker, this government is very famous for. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment 
put forth by my colleague, the member from Melfort-Tisdale. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to speak to the amendment and to the main motion 
that’s before us this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that the members of the 
legislature and members of the public understand clearly what 
is happening here with respect to this motion that’s before us in 
the legislature. 
 
We have said on many occasions in the House and outside of 
the House, through our Health critic and others, that we have no 
difficulty whatsoever with the government wanting to set up a 
committee on health care. It’s probably overdue with respect to 
the whole problem surrounding health care in this province. No 
one would disagree with that, I don’t think. So we don’t have 
any difficulty with it whatsoever. 
 
Unfortunately our experiences in terms of committees of the 
legislature in recent years in this House gives us pause for 
concern in terms of this whole structure and how we’re going to 
move forward in terms of any kind of meaningful discussion 
about health care in this province. 
 
Since I was elected in 1991, there’s been ongoing and 
considerable debate about health care. And I think back to the 
days when the wellness program was introduced here in 
Saskatchewan and the abject failure that it’s been in terms of 
improving the lives of people and improving the health care 
system in this province. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, about the experiences, and 
I’d appreciate the members opposite thinking about this for a 
moment, the experiences of one community in terms of what it 
has done to a community and what it has done to the future of 
that community — your wellness program and the impact upon 
that community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you well know, I’m from a small community in 
west central Saskatchewan called Eston. That community at one 
time had a full-service hospital, and it was a very, very well 
utilized hospital in a community that was about 1,500 people at 
that particular time in 1991, ’92, in that time frame. And the 
government, through the wellness program, decided that they 
were going to take it upon themselves to close that facility. 



May 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1331 

 

And I want to tell you, if you haven’t been to Eston, 
Saskatchewan, you should take the opportunity to visit that 
community because it sits prominently placed, right exactly 
dead centre in the middle of that community, on a hill. And that 
facility is a landmark for people all around that community. 
When you’re giving directions in Eston, Saskatchewan, you say 
two blocks south of the hospital and turn right, that sort of 
thing. It is the landmark and it is also the most prominent, by 
far, building in the whole community. It was the focal point of 
the community. Was, should be, but isn’t any longer, Mr. 
Speaker. It was put at risk by a government that either didn’t 
seem to understand the needs of that community or simply 
didn’t care about the needs of that community. 
 
And what happened was, Mr. Speaker — and you will recall, 
you were a member of the legislature at that time — the 
government opposite decided that they were going to close that 
facility. And so they came forward — and in addition to 
numerous other ones, 50-some at the time — they decided they 
were going to close that facility. And it threw out of work a 
number of people that were employed at the facility. It very 
much ripped the community apart in terms of what it meant to 
the fabric of that community. 
 
The government of the day held a public meeting. I suspect, I’m 
not certain but I suspect, it’s probably the largest public meeting 
that was ever held in that community for anything, was held 
shortly after their decision to close that facility. And the 
minister of Health at the time, Louise Simard, and the former 
member from Rosetown-Biggar, Bernie Wiens, were in 
attendance at the meeting. I believe possibly a few other 
representatives of the government were there at the time. And 
they spoke to that community in the arena, the meeting had to 
be held . . . There was about 1,500 people. That was the only 
facility that would accommodate that number of people. And 
there was people from the whole area turned out for that 
meeting that night. 
 
And person after person after person got up and said to them, I 
don’t think you understand the impact that you are going to 
have on this community and on this area of the province if you 
close this facility. And on every occasion either Mr. Wiens or 
Ms. Simard responded to their plea by saying, I don’t think you 
understand the importance of the wellness program and what 
it’s going to do in terms of helping people have better health 
care services. And I don’t think you’ll ever, ever again see the 
kind of distrust that was put in place by a meeting of that type 
for a government. 
 
That community at one time used to have a considerable 
number of people who supported the New Democrats. I would 
dare say I don’t believe, I don’t believe — in the last election 
campaign, there was still the odd bit of support but there 
certainly wasn’t visible support any longer — I don’t believe 
there was a single NDP lawn sign in that community. 
 
I think the people who supported the NDP are largely — and 
there were very few of them — but the people who remained 
committed to the NDP were old CCF’ers (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) who voted NDP, and CCF prior to 
that, their entire lives and just simply held their nose and voted 
for them once again. But I dare say when they eventually pass 
away, and most of them are elderly, your support in that 

community is zero. 
 
And it is the result of that meeting that night when the Minister 
of Health said to that community, we understand the needs of 
your community better than you understand it yourselves. That 
was exactly the message that was delivered that evening to the 
people of that community. And that was the same type of 
message that you delivered to community after community after 
community all across this province. All across this province you 
delivered that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask the member from Kindersley 
to direct his remarks through the Chair, please. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think this government will 
ever understand the impact that they’ve had. And it should be a 
reminder to each and every one of you as to the reasons why 
you have no support left in rural Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I just once again ask the member to make his 
remarks through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, you will be reminded and the 
people of Saskatchewan most certainly will never forget that 
kind of impact that this government has had in such a critical 
area — in such a critical area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — That is why you haven’t any, that this 
government has no support in rural Saskatchewan and why it 
will take decades to rebuild any kind of support you may have 
had — if you ever can, if you ever can, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, I sit in wonder when I listen to 
the Liberal leader who, when he was outside of the coalition 
government, just raked over the coals this government in terms 
of health care. He was such a vocal opponent of everything they 
were doing, everything they were doing in terms of health care 
reform. 
 
And now he has completely abandoned any principle in that 
area whatsoever and now sits on the government side and 
trumpets their message day after day after day and says 
everything they are doing is wonderful. 
 
And at one point, and at one point, I remember and I’m sure 
you do, Mr. Speaker, and all members of this legislature and I 
daresay everyone in this province, when he made the 
commitment to the people of Saskatchewan that he was going 
to chain himself to the doors of the hospital, the Plains hospital 
to keep it open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — He was going to do that in an effort to show this 
government that he would not stand for that kind of, that kind of 
disregard for the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. That’s 
what he was going to do. And I daresay that today the people of 
Saskatchewan would like to see him chained to something all 
right. 



1332 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — But he’s chained himself, like being chained to a 
ball, to this government. And that’s why I’ll also say, Mr. 
Speaker, that I suspect in the next election campaign, if he 
decides to put his name forward, which is doubtful, if he does 
decide to put his name forward, he will be rejected by the voters 
of Saskatoon Northwest in overwhelming fashion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — But I also suspect, I also suspect that that isn’t 
going to likely happen, because I daresay that just as he’s been 
rejected by his own party these days, he will not stand for 
re-election very likely and the people won’t have opportunity to 
pass judgment on his actions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — His party, his party’s going to have the 
opportunity to pass judgment on his actions here in a very short 
period of time, but the people unfortunately won’t have that 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that it illustrates more than ever what’s wrong with 
a government that has lost touch with the people of 
Saskatchewan. They’ve completely lost any respect for due 
process in terms of what the people and the needs of this 
province are in Saskatchewan. And this is just a classic 
illustration of a government that has lost direction, lost any kind 
of initiative, any kind of hope for the people of this province 
that we all live within, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that the fact that we have before us now a motion, 
Mr. Speaker, that once again clearly illustrates to the people of 
this province that this government is without direction. They’ve 
put in place, they put in place a process. They put . . . About $2 
million was spent for the Fyke report. Two million dollars, Mr. 
Speaker, spent on . . . 
 
(12:45) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that is 
why, that is why the people of Saskatchewan are mistrustful of 
you. That is why the people of this province have abandoned 
this government, Mr. Speaker, in support. And that’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, that people simply don’t believe this whole . . . this 
process that they want to put in front of them. People don’t 
support it. We don’t see . . . You would think . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people on the 
opposite side of the House, I don’t think they like hearing about 
their failures in health care, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think they like 
hearing about their failures in a number of areas these days, but 
it’s our responsibility. And we take it very, very seriously that 

we are going to continue to put forward the views of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
You would think if you had any support for this idea of having 
another study for the study, that we would be hearing about it in 
our constituencies, Mr. Speaker. I have heard nothing about it. 
 
In fact I was approached by a gentleman in my constituency — 
the former principal of the public school, Mr. Speaker — a few 
weeks ago and he said to me, he said to me, I can’t imagine 
why you would want to participate in this process at all, to lend 
any kind of credibility to a government that’s lost direction and 
lost its focus and lost its caring for the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And this was a gentleman that I would have been 
doubtful that he was a supporter of the Saskatchewan Party. I 
suspect he likely was a supporter of the New Democrats over 
the years, but I think you’ve lost him as well. I think you’ve lost 
him just as you’ve lost most everyone else in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our experiences with this government in terms of 
committees, all-party committees, as you know, is not that 
good. We’ve had occasions in terms of Channel Lake, we’ve 
had occasions in terms of the Agriculture Committee. We’ve 
had occasions in terms of a number of committees of this House 
where they have used it and abused it to the point where it’s all 
about politics, and it always has been and always will be with 
your government. 
 
That’s what it’s all about with this government, Mr. Speaker. 
How is the political imperative addressed? What are the needs 
of this government in terms of political imperative? How does it 
fit with your political agenda? How does it . . . How are you 
motivated in terms of any kind of decisions, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And it’s always about politics, it’s always about maintaining 
power at all costs. It’s always about that, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s why the people of this province simply do not buy into 
this argument that we’re going to have another study. 
 
I think the member from North Battleford characterized it pretty 
accurately when he said, a study for the study, a report on the 
report, a commission on the commission. That type of action, 
Mr. Speaker, is not supported in this legislature, I dare say. 
 
And that’s why it seems surprising that this government had to 
go to the unusual steps of putting in place a full-blown Standing 
Committee on Health Care, because they knew that it wouldn’t 
operate otherwise. 
 
And they had to take the unprecedented step, they had to take 
the unprecedented step, as well, of appointing members from 
the opposition to serve on it knowing full well, knowing full 
well . . . and the House Leader knew full well, and I suspect he 
consulted with the members of the Assembly that could advise 
him in that area that that was the only way he could proceed. It 
was the only way he could put that committee in place was by 
forcing members of the opposition onto it. And forcing 
members on the committee . . . 
 



May 25, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1333 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 
experiences in the area of the whole Channel Lake inquiry, 
some of you may recall that. I recall it pretty well, Mr. Speaker; 
I recall it pretty well. I know you’re getting quite nervous about 
that, Mr. Speaker. I recall it quite well, the events around . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’d just remind the member that he’s not to 
involve the Speaker in any debate. And I would also, and I 
would also remind him to continue to make his remarks to the 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the events 
surrounding the whole Channel Lake affair are vivid in the 
memories of this province, in the memories of the members on 
this side of the House. I’m sure the members opposite would 
like everyone in Saskatchewan to forget about it. But it hasn’t 
gone away. 
 
Here’s what happened as I recall the events of the day, Mr. 
Speaker. The people, the people opposite got themselves into a 
business deal, they got themselves into a business deal. They 
decided that they were going to buy and sell natural gas, and as 
usual, as usual in this province, they decided that they knew 
how to do this pretty well. 
 
But the evidence after that showed that they went into the 
venture and lost millions and millions of dollars on it. There 
was all kinds of problems associated . . . They forgot to read the 
contract. They had all kinds of problems with it. 
 
And so then the news became . . . the focus of it became very, 
very much in the forefront of the business of this province. And 
people understood that there were problems associated with 
this. 
 
And the government wouldn’t commission any kind of a study 
into it. They wouldn’t put in place any kind of a judicial review 
of it or anything like that. They said they’d refer it to a 
committee. 
 
So they got their little dog and pony show rolling once again 
and had this committee set up. And so then we were able to, 
through our members, ask questions about this whole thing. 
And it went on for days and days and days, and in fact weeks 
and weeks and weeks. Scandal after scandal; absolutely scandal 
after scandal, Mr. Speaker, if you’ll recall and all of us do. 
 
And then at the end of the day when the people of 
Saskatchewan . . . At the end of the day when the people of 
Saskatchewan fully expected, fully expected that there would be 
a report that was very, very damning for the Government of 
Saskatchewan, what did we have come forward, Mr. Speaker? 
What did we have come forward, Mr. Speaker? 
 
All of a sudden, all of a sudden the . . . I forget what position he 
occupied at the time — Brian Topp — what was he in your 
government? Chief of staff, chief of staff to the premier 
himself. Chief of staff to Executive Council, to the premier, 
reporting to the premier himself, wrote a report, wrote a report 
saying that everything was basically fine. It’s no big deal here; 
no big deal whatsoever. 

It even caught the member — I remember, Mr. Speaker — it 
even caught the member from Albert South off guard a little bit, 
because he said we either had to live with it or walk out the 
door. That was his options as a member of that committee and a 
member of this government. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, that’s why the members of this side of the 
House are very distrustful — one of many examples — very 
distrustful of this government and their whole idea about setting 
up committees to study and to look into either events or 
scandals or anything else that has come before us. 
 
And I also remember how you people operated in terms of 
agriculture . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Just once again to remind the member 
to speak through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And they would remember opposite and we 
remember, Mr. Speaker, about how the Committee of 
Agriculture when we were looking at the problems associated 
with agriculture . . . They haven’t gone away. In fact they 
maybe are even worse if ever, Mr. Speaker, than the events that 
were happening at that particular time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The events that were leading up to it, we had called in 
opposition. We had called for an all-party committee to look 
into the problems associated with agriculture. We said there 
should be a special sitting of the House to bring to focus those 
kinds of problems and that we should be going to Ottawa . . . 
we should be going to Ottawa to press our case. 
 
And the government in all occasions said no, we’re not going to 
have an all-party committee. No, we’re not going to have a 
special sitting of the legislature. And no, we are not going to go 
to Ottawa to talk about the problems associated with 
agriculture. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Members will come to order. 
The members will come to order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the instant expert 
on agriculture from Regina Qu’Appelle speaks from his chair, 
Mr. Speaker. We’d ask him to enter the debate at some point 
and talk a little bit about the events of the past with respect to 
our experiences on all-party committees. 
 
I’m not sure he’s served on one yet. He’s only been here a short 
period of time. Have you served on one yet? I’m not sure 
whether he has yet or not, but nevertheless — nevertheless, 
nevertheless — he speaks from his chair rather than getting to 
his feet and talking about the problems associated with 
agriculture or with our problems about the committee structure 
that we have been forced to participate in over the years. 
 
And in fact that member, he wants desperately to be in cabinet, 
Mr. Speaker. And everyone else . . . everyone in this legislature 
knows it. And he hasn’t been advanced to that position and I 
suspect with very good reason. I suspect with very, very good 
reason, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1334 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2001 

 

But the fact of the matter is, is what is before us in the 
legislature today, what is before us, Mr. Speaker, in the 
legislature today is this whole idea about studying the study. 
Study the study once again. 
 
And do people expect . . . do they really expect that at the end 
of the day when that committee reports — I think it’s at the end 
of August — that there will be any change in direction from this 
government with respect to health care? 
 
What are your ideas in health care? What are your plans in 
health care? What are you going to do? Are you going to fulfill 
the Fyke report’s implementation strategy? Are you going to 
close another 50 hospitals? Are you going to do what the 
member from Saskatoon Northwest has been suggesting and 
follow in line with the Fyke Commission and close another 50 
hospitals? 
 
Well if you do, you will once again tear apart . . . If the 
government does, Mr. Speaker, if the government follows 
through . . . And I know you’re listening very intently. You’re 
quite concerned about what’s happening in the legislature here 
this afternoon. 
 
But nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, if this government follows 
through, if this government follows through on those 
recommendations, you will rip the heart and soul out of 50 
more communities in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — You will do what you did in the past to Eston . . . 
(inaudible) . . . what you did in the past. What this government 
did . . . what this government did in the past . . . what this 
government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Kindersley, he knows why 
I stood. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Frankly getting a little tired of . . . (inaudible) . . . 
This government will have done what they did to communities 
all over this province at that time. There were very, very many. 
Invermay comes to mind. Spalding comes to mind. Oxbow 
comes to mind. Eastend comes to mind. There are a number of 
communities in this province that had that same exact 
experience that Eston had. 
 
And this government, if they follow through on the 
recommendations of Fyke, will do to community after 
community what they did at that time, Mr. Speaker. And it will 
be a complete disaster once again for this government in terms 
of the needs of this province, in terms of the needs of the people 
of this province with respect to health care services. 
 
All of us in this Legislative Assembly should pause and reflect 
on that a little bit because it did harm — serious harm — to the 
fabric of rural Saskatchewan. It did serious harm to the fabric of 
urban Saskatchewan when they closed the Plains hospital. And 
the people of this province, I suspect, will not put up with it, 
Mr. Speaker, will not put up with it in the future. 
 
And I suspect when you have, if you do have any meetings 
outside of Regina which is doubtful, but if you do decide to 

have meetings outside of the capital, Mr. Speaker, I suspect, if 
the government does decide to have meetings outside of 
Regina, I suspect people would be lined up and wanting to tell 
you just that. 
 
They’ll want to tell you the experiences of the past and what it 
did to communities and they will want to tell you what it’ll do 
to their community if you go ahead with those kinds of 
recommendations. 
 
We all understand that health care needs change and we also 
understand and that’s why the member for Melfort has put 
forward the submission on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party to 
the Fyke Commission saying what we believe is necessary in 
terms of change, necessary in terms of change. 
 
We think that there are all kinds of things that can be done to 
improve the lives of people and improve the health care system 
in this province. But I don’t believe the government members 
opposite want to take those recommendations seriously at all. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
draw your attention to the clock. It’s after the time for 
adjournment. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it now being past 
the hour of 1 o’clock and after a week of passionate debate, I 
wish everyone a good weekend. This House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 13:00. 
 
 
 


