















































Hansard: April 30, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 815 
 April 30, 2001 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee report progress on the committee of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the Minister of Labour to get his 
officials ready and now to introduce them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair 
of Committees. It’s a pleasure to be here this evening and also a 
pleasure to introduce my officials. 
 
To my left is Sandra Morgan, the deputy minister of Labour. 
Directly behind me is Cheryl Hanson, the assistant deputy 
minister. To my right and behind is Dawn McKibben, the 
director of human resources and administration. John Boyd, the 
director of planning and policy is directly behind Ms. Morgan. 
Seated at the bar at the back is Jeff Parr, the executive director 
of occupational health and safety; Eric Greene, the acting 
executive director of labour services; Peter Federko, the chief 
executive officer of the Workers’ Compensation Board; and 
Gail Kruger, the vice-president of finance at the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like to 
thank the minister and welcome his officials here today for the 
estimates of Labour. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d like to begin by really talking about the 
general condition of our economy and how the labour laws and 
red tape and regulations affect it. Mr. Minister, this year — in 
the past year — employment in Saskatchewan is down over 
13,000 jobs; net out-migration 4,800 people. And taking that 
into account, Mr. Minister, I’m just wondering how can the 
government and your department justify an increase of 6 per 
cent in your overall labour budget, and more specifically nearly 
34 per cent increase in the Labour Relations Board budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, I thank 
you for that and I thank the hon. member for Redberry for that 
opening question. What I’d hope to do is to give a very . . . I 
hope relatively brief overview of the department before I get to 
answering that specific question, so if you will indulge me, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
I wanted first off to say how pleased I am to be here, my very 
first time in estimates and very pleased to be with the 

Department of Labour. We’ve had a busy time in the last two, a 
little better than two months that I’ve been the minister 
responsible. 
 
In Saskatchewan there’s about 40,000 employers and very close 
to half a million people in Saskatchewan’s workforce, and 
that’s the people that we directly administer legislation for. And 
I’m very pleased that the department is up to that task, that is 
representing over a half a million working people, or about a 
half a million working people and 40,000 or so employers. 
 
We view ourselves as not just a regulatory arm, but we like to 
see ourselves increasingly becoming a partner with industry as 
we develop sound social policy. And we like to work in a fair 
and a co-operative way with businesses and with working 
people, be they organized labour, or in some instances, not 
organized labour. But we believe that we contribute to the 
economic and social development of our province by providing 
good labour legislation, good . . . On the one hand there’s a 
regulatory part that’s good and has fair rules as we can that are 
predictable, and on the other hand it’s the partnership I was 
describing where we try and develop better social policy so that 
employers and employees throughout the province can benefit 
from that. 
 
The view that we’ve taken is one of prevention. We work 
diligently in the prevention of accidents. In fact, Saskatchewan, 
the member would well know, some years ago developed the 
first occupational health and safety Act in Canada. And we’re 
very, very proud of the principles that have been followed and 
indeed built on and that we strengthen as time goes on. 
 
We work to prevent accidents. We work to prevent work 
stoppages. And we work to prevent unfair treatment of workers. 
Education and prevention is very important for that. 
 
As an example of how important, Member, and Mr. Deputy 
Chair, if we were able to reduce by 5 per cent the injury rate 
and the death rate in Saskatchewan — just 5 per cent — we 
would save $20 million a year if we could do that, never mind 
. . . I’m not even touching on the human toll that takes place in 
accidents and deaths. 
 
There’s other things that we are working with. Across Canada 
there’s a concern about a shrinking labour pool. By way of 
example, in the construction industry they believe that there’s 
going to be a more than 600,000 person turnover over the next 
six to eight years. It’s virtually the equivalent of everyone who 
is a skilled tradesperson in the construction industry today being 
replaced, and that’s all going to happen in a very short time. 
 
It’s not much wonder that 72 per cent of the respondents in a 
survey of the Canadian Manufacturers and Exporters 
Association . . . 72 per cent listed skilled labour as being one of 
the top three criteria for where they would consider setting up 
an investment. And we in Saskatchewan of course are very 
interested in being a very good place for investment, creation of 
jobs, and the growth of our economic well-being, if I can 
describe it that way. 
 
We know that in addition to the skills, what businesses have to 
have is labour-management relations that are good because that 



816 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

can affect the recruitment and the retention of those very same 
skilled workers. We can do that. We can gain that good 
relationship through co-operation and collaboration, working 
with as opposed to the old industrial model of conflict and 
confrontation. So we’re trying to be working with as opposed to 
always at loggerheads and I know that our economy will benefit 
from that very thing. 
 
While we’re facing a demand for skilled workers, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, we’re also facing some challenges in changing 
demographics. In Saskatchewan today, just over one-quarter of 
the new entrants into the workforce are Aboriginal and that’s a 
tremendous opportunity for us to grow our economy and to 
have all people participating as fully as possible. And the 
department has a number of strategies aimed at youth and 
Aboriginal people, and I’m delighted with that, and hoping 
you’ll be asking some questions around that, Member, and it’ll 
give us a chance to talk a little bit more about it. 
 
We also are in — I talked of the youth component — we’re in 
our second year now of a program that we call, Are You Ready 
for Work? And what we’re trying to do is make sure that young 
people, particularly in their first job, have them know what is 
expected of them by their boss or their employer, and what their 
employer . . . what they can expect of their employer in turn. 
 
We want that first work experience to be a safe and a positive 
one. There’s all kinds of statistical evidence that says young 
people, defined as 24 years of age and younger, are at a 
significantly higher risk of injury and death on the job than are 
people with a little bit of grey in their hair — in other words as 
we get older. 
 
Just the other day we had a day of mourning tribute, on last 
Friday, and I know the member participated in that. What this, 
Are You Ready for Work? program, part of what it is designed 
to do is to try and drive that accident and indeed death rate 
down lower and lower. And I know that all members in this 
legislature, all employers, and all employees around the 
province would welcome that. 
 
As I’m nearing the end of these remarks, I want to talk a little 
bit about balancing work and family responsibilities. This is 
another area of endeavour that my department is most interested 
in and I’m certainly interested in. We’ve got more and more 
two-income earners, and we’ve also got people working many 
more hours now than they did 10 and 20 and 30 years ago. 
 
And there’s just a tremendous additional stress as people try to 
balance work and family responsibilities. And this leads, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, this leads to absenteeism. It leads to increased 
use of sick leave, that sort of thing, and the direct costs of that 
are estimated to be over $3,500 per year per employee. And 
we’re real anxious to work with employers and with working 
people to see if we can’t find ways of making work places more 
user-friendly. 
 
That in a nutshell, I think, sums up what the Department of 
Labour is about, some of the initiatives that the department has. 
We’ve also got some other areas of responsibility, being 
Workers’ Compensation, and I’m sure you’ll have some 
comments and questions on that. 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Deputy Chair. I do 
have some specific questions I want to ask the minister and his 
officials. I want to go back to the increased budget in the 
Labour Relations Board and the specific reasons behind a 
substantial increase of 33 per cent of the budget in the Labour 
Relations Board. And also I’ve noticed that the staff 
complement has gone from 172.4 up to . . . sorry, 161.9 to 
172.4, an increase of 10.5 positions. 
 
And taking these increases in the number of employees and the 
tremendous increase in the Labour Relations Board budget, one 
has to wonder where and why these increases have taken place. 
In last spring’s sitting, Bill 59 was a very contentious Bill, not 
only from the Saskatchewan Party but many employers and 
businesses across the province was very concerned about 
basically the forced unionization aspect of Bill 59. 
 
And my question to the minister is: is the increase in the Labour 
Relations Board budget directly related to the changes that Bill 
59 brought in, and the increased workload that the Labour 
Relations Board appears to be having concerning basically 
forced unionization of these employees? And basically my 
question is: is this the result of the increased cases before the 
board concerning Bill 59? 
 
(19:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The 
increased budget in the Labour Relations Board is a result of 
there being two additional positions in that. We have a new 
Vice-Chair of the Labour Relations Board and we also budgeted 
for an investigative officer. 
 
Now there’s a couple of reasons for this. One the member has 
identified, that we anticipated an increase might be needed 
because of the changes in The Construction Industry Labour 
Relations Act that were passed last year. 
 
But we also had ongoing concerns expressed to the department 
by both employers and employees about the speed of decisions 
that the Labour Relations Board was making. And indeed when 
we looked at it, or when the department looked at it, it was a 
case of the Labour Relations Board employees, you know 
officers and the balance, simply having . . . spending a lot of 
time listening and considering, and less time actually writing up 
the decision and making those decisions known. 
 
So this is hoped that what we’re going to do is speed the ability 
of the Labour Relations Board to hear cases, make their 
decision, their adjudication, and to report back to the parties 
involved. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Could you tell me exactly what the new Chair . . . the role of the 
new Chair will be? And the investigative officer? What is 
exactly their roles and duties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair, and I thank the member 
for Redberry for the question. What the addition of a 
Vice-Chair does is enables the Labour Relations Board to have 
a third more hearings, because the legislation requires that 
either the Chair or Vice-Chair of the Labour Relations Board 
must hear a case. There must be one of them in attendance to 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 817 

 

hear the case. 
 
Previously we had one Chairperson, one Vice-Chair. With the 
addition of a second Vice-Chair, obviously, you do the math 
and we’ve increased the ability to hear cases by a third. 
 
With respect to the investigative officer, they do the pre-hearing 
work, the background, the putting the details together, the 
investigative details to make the case more hearing-ready, if I 
can describe it that way, and it’s to facilitate the work of the 
Labour Relations Board. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
these 10.5 new positions, are these two positions part of that 
10.5, and if they are, what are the other positions made up of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, yes, the 
answer to your question in two parts is yes, these are a part of 
the additional 10 and a half positions that were included in this 
year’s budget allocation. The other part of your question, 
member, was: what are the positions, those 10 and a half 
positions? Am I right? Okay, I’ll share that with you happily. 
We have a full-time position in the labour relations area. We 
have one and a half in Aboriginal programming, two in the 
work and family program that I described a bit briefly in my 
opening remarks. We have two in the communications branch. 
We have two in occupational health and safety where, 
incidentally, Saskatchewan is, I believe, one of two jurisdictions 
in Canada that . . . certainly one of the first two that has an 
ergonomics officer in that occupational health and safety area, 
and we’re very proud of that. And there’s the two that we’ve 
described in the Labour Relations Board. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. A question 
concerning certifications and decertifications: has there been an 
increase in certifications to date, or has there been an increase in 
decertifications? Do you have the numbers up to date on both 
certifications and decertifications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Member, I’m told that we can have those 
numbers here this evening for certain, or as certain as we can 
be. I shouldn’t maybe couch it in those frames but we think that 
in just a matter of not too terribly many minutes we’ll have it. 
Would you, in the interest of time, care to move to another 
subject and we’ll come back to that when the numbers come in? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. There may be other 
items like that coming up. 
 
Just in a general term, what is the current caseload of the 
Labour Relations Board or do you have specific numbers for 
that right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, the 
answer to the last question first is that we have no way of 
knowing. I do not get a regular report nor does the department 
get a report from the Labour Relations Board. It is set up as a 
. . . I’ll describe it as a semi-judicial process, and they keep 
track of their numbers. In fact, I am advised that we find out 
about matters before them in the same manner that you or other 
members of the public would. That is, typically it’s an employer 
or an employee brings it to your attention or you read about it in 
the media or see it on the 6 o’clock or 11 o’clock news. 

With respect to the other question you asked about 
certifications, and I can report to you that there were 113 
certifications in ’99-2000 — 113. That is a little less than what 
it was in ’95-96 but it’s up from last year. 
 
The decertifications, I’m advised there were 12 decertifications 
in that same ’99-2000 period. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
in the, basically, the day-to-day operations of the Labour 
Relations Board, are there any limits? You had mentioned 
before that there was a number of concerns from employers, 
and I assume from unions and workers, that there are delays in 
the decisions by the Labour Relations Board. Is there any limits 
as to how long the board has to render a decision, either in a 
decertification or certification? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, with the 
current legislation there is no time limit respecting rulings of 
the Labour Relations Board. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — So I would take it from that, Mr. Minister, that 
the board could make no decision on a certification or 
decertification at all? It could just basically ignore it. Or how 
does that process work when it comes to some timely decision 
being made on these decisions in these matters? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I think what the member 
is asking is on the one hand there is no time limit that the 
Labour Relations Board has in which to rule. In theory this 
could drag on indefinitely, and the member is saying what is it 
that stops that. 
 
There is again a two-part answer. We’ve been experiencing a 
fairly heavy workload in the Labour Relations Board relative to 
its staffing levels. The cases have a complexity that simply have 
required a little additional horsepower — person power I guess 
is a much better phrase — and we’ve added those two person 
power to the Labour Relations Board this year. 
 
With respect to the timing, though, in addition to the resources 
that are available, in practical terms the best description, the 
best way I can do this is with an analogy to a court. And there is 
lawyers on both sides and they ask for adjournment and so 
things, you know, drag for a while. But ultimately the 
chairperson of the Labour Relations Board will ultimately say, 
enough is enough; this is dragging on for too long. And it’s the 
chairperson’s sole domain — sole domain. When the 
chairperson of the LRB (Labour Relations Board) says 
enough’s enough, let’s get a decision, and it will be made then 
very shortly. 
 
(19:30) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. My next question or number of 
questions goes to the certification process. And as you’re well 
aware of our party’s policy . . . private member’s bill really 
speaks to the spirit of democracy in this process of certifying 
and decertifying. And I’m just wondering what your thoughts 
are on the right to give a secret ballot to workers, in the spirit of 
democracy, to whether they want to be certified or decertified. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, I’m 



818 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

delighted to take that question. We’ve had a trade union Act in 
Saskatchewan for about 50 years now and it’s worked very, 
very well. And I’ll remind the hon. member that we’ve had 
Liberal, and we’ve had Conservative, and we’ve had CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), and we’ve had 
Liberal again, and we’ve had New Democratic, and 
Conservative again, governments, all of which have left The 
Trade Union Act basically as it is. 
 
And I remind the member that for a certification to take place in 
a workplace, what is required is 50 per cent plus one. In other 
words, the majority of employees must sign the card. And 
signing a card, when you sign your name on a card, that, we 
say, and under The Trade Union Act, that is your vote — when 
you sign your card. And working people that do sign a card 
understand that. The system has worked for 50 years, and it’s 
worked very, very well. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I would argue that the 
process of signing a card is not democracy whatsoever. It opens 
the door to coercion, to intimidation, to all sorts of undue 
pressure on the potential union member. 
 
And it’s interesting to note when two unions are fighting over 
an association of workers, the decision goes to a secret ballot. 
Those workers have a secret . . . they have an opportunity to 
vote whether they want to belong to A union or B union. And I 
don’t understand why, in this society where we value the 
democratic right to vote in a secret ballot, why when people are 
deciding whether they want to join a union or not, why they 
can’t have that opportunity of a secret ballot. 
 
And it goes much deeper than just that commitment to a secret 
ballot. It’s always a concern, it’s always thrown out there about 
coercion and undue influence. But even if that takes place, even 
if people signed a card but at the end of the day the final 
decision was made by a secret ballot, what could be more fairer 
than allowing those workers to make that decision through a 
secret ballot where any possible intimidation by either side, 
employer or union side, can be dismissed and no one knows 
how anyone has voted? 
 
I don’t understand why that basic democratic right is denied 
workers in this province. They have that right in an election. All 
elections are secret. They can make the decision in the privacy 
of their polling booth, but not when it comes to deciding 
whether they’re going to join a union or not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, as I said 
in my earlier answer, for about 50 years now The Trade Union 
Act has worked. We feel very strongly that when an individual 
signs a membership card, when they sign a membership card 
that is their vote. It requires — if it’s a question of how much 
thought is required — it requires more thought to sign one’s 
name as opposed to put a check mark or an X. 
 
With respect to the privacy or the secrecy, I want to point out to 
members opposite, Mr. Deputy Chair, that if an organizer has 
an employee sign a card, that organizer cannot show that card. 
They’re prohibited from saying, this employee signed the card. 
So in effect it is a secret, who has signed, who has not signed. 
It’s a secret. It’s not a matter of public knowledge. 
 

So we again say The Trade Union Act has worked well. And 
indeed a fairly large number of provinces in Canada follow a 
similar process, that is a signed card is considered a vote for the 
union. And as soon as you have a majority of vote, you can 
have yourself a union. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, it’s interesting you’re 
saying a member of the union leadership gets to see who signed 
the card. I mean that’s not exactly by any stretch of the 
imagination a secret ballot. Nor would it be proper for an 
employer to see who signed the card or did not sign the cards. 
And the whole point of this is that only one side of the debate 
gets to see who signed the card, and that’s the union leader. 
And in no way that is fair or democratic in any way. 
 
And again, my point before was if it’s okay for two unions to 
try to unionize or take over a union, to have that debate where 
the workers can sit and listen to the unions’ reps from union A 
or union B and then make the decision through a secret ballot, 
why is it not also right that a worker or potential union . . . in a 
certification process not be able to sit and listen to the 
employer’s side and the union side, and then vote through a 
secret ballot whether they want to join that union or not. 
 
More specifically, could you tell me how many provinces in 
Canada deny the workers the right to a secret ballot in decisions 
relating to certification and decertification? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, I want to 
go to the very opening remarks when you had talked about the 
union organizer having access to the working person that that 
organizer had signed up and how unfair that is. And it struck me 
as rather odd that that would come into question at all in that, I 
mean when you have an organization drive, whether it be for a 
trade union or you’re organizing to build a rink in your local 
community, by definition somebody has got to go out and talk 
to somebody else. 
 
In this case it’s, by your words, a union organizer. It could be a 
co-worker that has decided to form a trade union in their 
workplace. But someone has to have the cards in their 
possession and speak to either co-workers or the workers in that 
workplace. So of course they would know who they’ve signed 
up. And I just . . . it escapes me how it could be any other way. 
 
This has worked very, very well for a great number of years and 
part of the wisdom of The Trade Union Act is, and I’ll refer the 
hon. member to section 11(1), unfair labour practices, where it 
says: 
 

It shall be an unfair labour practice for an employer, 
employer’s agent or any other person acting on behalf of 
the employer: 
 

(a) in any manner, including by communication, to 
interfere with, restrain, intimidate, threaten or coerce an 
employee in the exercise of any right conferred by this 
Act; (it goes on) 
 
(b) to discriminate or interfere with the formation or 
administration of any labour organization or contribute 
financial or other support to it; 
 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 819 

 

and the Act goes on. 
 
This is for employers — section 11(1). 
 
For employees, it is section 11(2), and The Trade Union Act, 
the very same Trade Union Act says: 
 

It shall be an unfair labour practice for any employee, trade 
union or any other person: 
 
(a) to interfere with, restrain, intimidate, threaten or coerce 
an employee with a view to encouraging or discouraging 
membership in or activity in or for a labour organization. 

 
And it goes on. Now I’ve just read some prohibitions in the 
same section dealing with employers on the one hand and 
employees on the other. The rules are very fair; the language is 
fairly clear. There is always a dispute no matter how clearly an 
Act is written, but the language itself is fairly clear. 
 
This Trade Union Act has stood the test of time; stood the test 
very, very well. We maintain that any employee that has signed 
a union membership card, that is every bit as good as if they 
were to mark an X and stuff it in a ballot. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, that’s fine. 
You’ve read out the rules and regulations in what can and can’t 
be done, but you forget a couple of obvious things. 
 
The first thing is, the union can communicate with the workers 
about the certification process; the employer cannot 
communicate with the employees about the certification process 
— not fair. And the other point: who has the list of who signs 
the cards? A union rep — not the employer; not that I’d want 
the employer to have it The union rep does, though. So there’s 
two big problems in your argument about fairness and coercion 
and that whole area. It’s all lopsided one way. 
 
What I’m discussing, what I would like to see, is a balanced 
approach — fairness. I see nothing wrong with the worker 
having the right to get information from both sides. Yes, there 
has to be rules concerning coercion and intimidation. There 
absolutely is no doubt about that. But have the access to both 
sides and make an informed opinion through a secret ballot. At 
the end of the day coercion, undue influence, all that is gone 
because that employee knows he or she puts a checkmark 
beside yes or no — whether they want to join the union or not. 
And that takes away all of the problems and the concerns 
around coercion and fairness. 
 
I’d like to go on to some questions concerning Workers’ 
Compensation. And in the past number of weeks, Mr. Minister, 
I’ve asked quite a few questions related to WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board). And you have answered that you cannot 
answer them because you are not nominally in charge of WCB. 
 
Can you explain to us what you mean by nominally in charge? 
 
(19:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, as the 
hon. member knows, the Workers’ Compensation Board is in 
fact an operation that is run arm’s-length from the government. 

What the government is responsible for is The Workers’ 
Compensation Act. We’re the ones that control the passage and 
the amendments to The Workers’ Compensation Act. We 
appoint three people, the board — the chair, the labour 
representative, and the employer representative. But I would 
point out, and the member probably, I suspect, knows already, 
that with respect to the latter two, both the employer and the 
employee representatives, those are appointed after a broad 
consultation with each respective group, that in fact they 
nominate . . . put names forward, and the process is then that the 
minister selects a name for appointment. 
 
Because, in addition to what I’ve already stated, the Workers’ 
Compensation Board . . . Unlike a line department, the 
Workers’ Compensation Board is funded exclusively by 
employer premiums. Employers are responsible to submit 
workers’ compensation premiums, as opposed to a line 
department where we have a clear line of taxes in, service out 
from the department. So that’s different. 
 
Because of those differences we’re simply not responsible for 
the day-to-day decisions that are made in the Workers’ 
Compensation Board, in the running of the board. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Deputy Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
Well it begs the question concerning the plan to shut down 
WCB offices in Saskatoon and Regina, bus employees from 
Saskatoon to Regina to a party, a goodbye party for Stan 
Cameron, which was going to cost the WCB, and which is 
funded by the employers of this province, $7,000. And you 
stated that you stepped in to put a stop to this party; and now 
you’re saying that this, the WCB, is run at arm’s-length. Could 
you just explain what is your relationship with WCB in light of 
this $7,000 goodbye party for Stan Cameron. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — I thank the member for that question. The 
issue here is one of . . . certainly it’s inappropriate to shut down 
an office for a, in this case, a farewell party. Whether it’s an 
arm’s-length operation or a direct-line department, it’s still 
inappropriate to shut an office down. We communicated with 
the Workers’ Compensation Board and they saw the wisdom of 
that, and as a result, that particular event was cancelled. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well it brings up 
another matter. An official from WCB was interviewed and 
stated that the party’s still going ahead. So is it going ahead at 
some later date, and if it is, who’s paying for it? What are the 
circumstances around it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees. There is agreement between the Workers’ 
Compensation Board, or with the Workers’ Compensation 
Board, that that was an inappropriate plan to shut down the 
office, and I’m advised that to date there are no plans for a 
replacement party. 
 
I do want to say that Stan Cameron — the Chairperson we’re 
talking about who resigned due to ill health from the Board, Mr. 
Deputy Chair — Mr. Cameron, after nearly eight years as Chair 
of the Workers’ Compensation Board, is deserving of an 
opportunity to say goodbye to Workers’ Compensation staff; 
and they in turn to bid him farewell and wish him regained 
health and I’m sure a long and happy retirement. 



820 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

It’s my hope that we’ll be able to find an appropriate venue for 
that to happen, but I can say that I’ve no reason at all to believe 
that it would be an event . . . the event that shuts down an 
office. I just do not see that happening. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The whole affair 
around this party, it seems to bewilder me that anyone in WCB 
would ever consider holding a party like that under any 
circumstance. I’ve got nothing against the gentleman. I’ve never 
met him and understand he left because of poor health. But it 
was totally inappropriate at any point for any official and WCB 
to even consider spending employer money on an extravagant 
party — $7,000 and closing an office. And I was wondering, 
was anyone reprimanded for this decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair, first off I have stated 
publicly before tonight, and certainly tonight too, that I agree 
with the inappropriateness of what had been planned. Mr. 
Deputy Chair, I spoke with the Acting Chair of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board who saw that in a similar light agreed. It’s 
regrettable that it went as far as it did, I guess, I can describe it, 
but fortunately we found out and were able to make the changes 
in a timely fashion and I very much believe that the Acting 
Chair of the Workers’ Compensation Board and anyone else 
that was involved with this learned from that. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, I 
would like to just ask a couple of questions concerning the 
whole issue around the severance pay paid to Mr. Cameron. If 
he was in ill health, and I understand he was, and I’ll take your 
word for that, why was he paid such a huge severance pay 
instead of applying for workman’s comp benefits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — I think the question was, why didn’t Mr. 
Cameron receive workers’ compensation benefits. Is that what I 
heard at the end . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s what I 
heard. The question is, why wouldn’t Stan Cameron receive 
workers’ compensation benefits instead of a retirement 
allowance? The simple, simple answer — and I’m just shocked 
that the member doesn’t know this — Stan Cameron didn’t 
suffer a workplace injury. He has a health problem, but he 
didn’t suffer a workplace injury. Workers’ compensation is 
designed when a work person gets injured; then they’re entitled 
to collect workers’ compensation. He was not injured at work. 
 
The first part of the question was, why did we choose the 
roughly $150,000 option, and I want to share as broadly as I 
can. It’s really, really simple. After nearly eight years as Chair 
of the Workers’ Compensation Board, having made a 
significant number of changes — not everyone will agree all of 
the changes were positive but I can tell you a significant 
number of positive changes at the board. After eight years, Mr. 
Cameron realized he could not finish his term. He had nearly 
three years left in his term as Chair. When he realized that, he 
approached the board and said, I need . . . I can’t continue this 
job. My doctor is saying get out, can’t continue. Then they 
sought the low-cost, frankly, option which was a retirement 
bridge. That was the lowest cost option that there was, and in 
addition I come back to the fact that Mr. Cameron simply was 
not entitled to receive workers’ compensation benefits, so we 
went to what did work. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Again you’ve stated that it wasn’t 

. . . it’s only . . . workers’ comp is only for injuries. Well I have 
to disagree with the minister. I mean there’s illnesses that 
people claim that are from the work which would include stress 
leave and any number of emotional or physical things other 
than actually an accident where they got injured. So I’m not 
quite sure what the minister is getting at in that area. 
 
And the second point, the second point. What does that say to 
the workers in this province when the chairman basically gets a 
separate deal which you’ve stated? You took two options and 
that was the best option they could give. Why not just apply for 
disability leave or pension? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, the short 
answer is that long-term disability is a more costly option than 
was the $150,000 retirement allowance that was agreed upon 
after . . . through negotiation, through discussion with both 
parties. We’re, I think, very pleased with the end result. 
 
I cannot, Member . . . I cannot get into a description of what it 
was specifically that caused Mr. Cameron not to be able to 
finish his mandate, but I can assure you that it was not because 
of a compensible injury or anything compensible. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Again if an 
employer carries insurance, an employee is ill for whatever 
reason and can’t do their job, they apply for long-term 
disability. Life goes on, the insurance company picks up the 
disability, and that’s the normal procedure how it works. 
 
But in this case it seemed to have a . . . he seemed to get a 
different type of settlement than is available or was available at 
that time or is to anyone else. The other question is, will the 
chairman be replaced at any time soon, or what’s your plans as 
far as a new chairman? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, I’m 
pleased to say that yes, the Chair of the Workers’ Compensation 
Board will be replaced and an announcement will be made at an 
appropriate time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Could you go into some 
explanation of the application process to hire a new chairman 
and what the qualifications would be of people, I assume, that 
have the opportunity to apply for the job? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair, yes. The answer is that 
the Chair of the Workers’ Compensation Board is appointed in 
the same manner as any other permanent head in the 
government and that is it’s an order in council appointment. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. We have put 
several questions to your department regarding the dismissal of 
four senior officials from WCB, regarding the reasons these 
people were let go and how much severance each received, and 
your department has refused to answer these questions. Is this 
because you don’t know or won’t say the amount? 
 
(20:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, as I’ve 
stated earlier, The Workers’ Compensation Act is the 
responsibility of the Minister of Labour and the Ministry of 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 821 

 

Labour who are responsible for the passage and the 
maintenance of The Workers’ Compensation Act. We are in 
fact responsible to promote the Chair of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board, and we appoint an employer and an 
employee member of the board. The day-to-day running of the 
Workers’ Compensation Board is the responsibility of the 
Board. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I’m just wondering if these 
dismissals were all related to the contents of the Dorsey report 
which you’ve been sitting on for . . . your department’s been 
sitting on for seven months. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — I thank the hon. member for Redberry for 
that question. As I’ve said on several occasions publicly, Mr. 
Deputy Chair of Committee, the release of those four personnel 
in question, regrettable as it may be, I can absolutely state 
unequivocally is not related in any way to the Dorsey report. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. So far, Mr. 
Minister, you’ve refused to release the Dorsey report. Can you 
give us a firm commitment tonight when it will be released? 
Can you give us the date when you’ll release it to the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, the 
Dorsey report has been in this minister’s possession for about 
10 weeks now, along with a whole host of other things. As I 
said about an hour and four minutes ago how pleased I was to 
stand here for my very first time in estimates, tonight is a night 
of firsts for me, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees. There are 
many, many, many firsts as I get to know, not only the 
Department of Labour and all of its mandate or much of its 
mandate, but I get to know the Workers’ Compensation Board 
and the other area of responsibility that I have as well as, and 
the list goes on and on. 
 
We are in the process of considering very carefully the Dorsey 
report. This report deserves our very careful consideration. It’s 
been now in — and the member will probably say it’s been far 
too long that we’ve not . . . that the Dorsey report has not been 
public. I happen to share that sentiment. I look forward to the 
Dorsey report becoming a public document in the near future. 
I’m just in . . . What I can share this evening is we are in the 
process of giving the Dorsey report very, very careful 
consideration and I anticipate in the relatively near future being 
able to make it a public document. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
your government had no problem releasing the Fyke report. 
Why don’t you release the Dorsey report, let the people see it? 
What’s the difference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, I could 
go through the exact same answer, but in the interest of time, I 
will share with the hon. member, I want and expect that we will 
be releasing the Dorsey report in the relatively near future, and 
certainly it will be released in due time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, there’s been several 
reviews of WCB in the past, and one of the recommendations 
that came out of at least one of these reviews was to do away 
with the provisions that says injured workers cannot sue their 

doctor if in the course of treatment their condition is made 
worse. This has been to justify . . . This is being justified 
because doctors are also employers. Do you believe this 
interpretation that extinguishes an injured worker’s right to sue 
a doctor who injures them through negligence? Is that within 
the spirit of WCB? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees. And I know what the hon. member is driving at 
with respect to doctors, and it’s the truth, yes. And what we’ve 
had is a situation where successive committees of review have 
dealt with this issue and made recommendation. 
 
And it’s a serious matter because . . . I think I’ll describe what I 
think you’re getting at. A doctor could be guilty of the most 
gross malpractice in the world and not be sued, and that’s 
problematic. I want to share with the hon. member though that 
it’s about, I’m advised, 18 months ago in a Robert Lindsay 
case, the Supreme Court of Canada ruled that doctors are in fact 
employers, and as such cannot be sued through the Act. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. That may be true. I agree that’s 
what the courts did say. But are you contemplating any changes 
to that to protect the patient and the worker from doctors, unfit 
doctors? Has that been coming up in any of your 
recommendations that you receive? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Mr. Deputy Chair, that brings 
us to the next piece of good news. I’ve said repeatedly that this 
is the year of change at the Workers’ Compensation Board. It’s 
a year where we’re going to have a new chairperson, and both 
the terms of the labour and the employer representatives are up, 
so we’re going to have three positions at the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. I point out not all necessarily new 
positions, but new and/or reappointed. 
 
We’ve got also the committee of review that is going to be 
announced this spring yet. And this is a matter that is very 
appropriately referred to, and I trust that the committee of 
review will make some comment about it. And I very much 
look forward to receiving their thoughts on how this should be 
handled. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d like to move on to 
another topic regarding the office of the Workers’ Advocate. 
Can the minister tell us what the current backlog of cases is? 
And I understand that for many workers who are availing to this 
office for help the waiting list can be up to one to two years. Is 
this correct? Is this how long the waiting lists are at the 
Workers’ Advocate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, with 
respect to this particular area, the Workers’ Advocate’s office, 
I’m advised that there are roughly 800 cases outstanding which 
we’re finding . . . I’m finding unacceptable. When I toured the 
Workers’ Compensation Board shortly after I became minister 
— in the first month — I stopped in and spoke with the good 
people that are working there and I know they share my 
frustration as does the department generally. 
 
We’re working to actively find ways of reducing that backlog. 
There are, I’m told, about 300 cases under current review. And 
I’m also advised, Member, that there are a number of 



822 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

long-standing cases that have recently come to fruition, and 
frankly some of them with some good news for the injured 
worker — in one case, $125,000 settlement that was a 
long-standing dispute and in another case it was a quarter of a 
million dollars. 
 
So it’s good to see. I’m hoping this is some breaking of the ice 
jam, if I can describe it that way. That’s what we’re really 
hoping for and freely share with anyone who cares — 800 and 
this 300 actively being looked after, 500 in the queue. That’s 
not where we want to be. We’re working to get that number 
down. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, going back to my question, 
how long of a waiting list if someone went to the Workers’ 
Advocate today? Are you looking at a year or two before you 
would get help? And the other question is: you have 800 
outstanding cases today; how many were there a year ago? I 
assume it’s increased in the last year. And what steps are you 
taking, Mr. Minister, to alleviate this situation at the Workers’ 
Advocate? 
 
(20:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I shared moments ago 
that the 800 injured workers at the Workers’ Advocate’s office 
is unacceptable. Part of your question was, where was it a year 
ago? Short answer — about 700. What has transpired in the 
ensuing time is, I’m pleased to say, we’ve done an internal 
review of both the Workers’ Advocate’s office and the 
Workers’ Compensation Board and we’ve focused specifically 
on the relationship that they had, those two areas had, trying to 
resolve some areas of . . . some sources of annoyance that both 
were experiencing. 
 
And I’m happy to say that they’ve a much better understanding 
of each other, that is the Workers’ Compensation Board and the 
Workers’ Advocate’s office have a better understanding of each 
other’s needs and there is a renewed sense of co-operation 
which also, I’m advised, developed a fast-tracking approach to 
try and fast track — I’m reluctant to give you a number — but 
to try and fast track some of these 800 in the backlog. 
 
So I’m very optimistic that next year, should you be asking the 
questions and should I be giving the answers, I’m really 
optimistic that next year we’ll have some genuinely better 
numbers and better news for you. And I thank you for the 
question. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to move on 
to another topic. Is your department, your government, bringing 
agricultural workers under The Labour Standards Act this 
session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the issue of inclusion 
of agricultural workers under labour standards is a very 
important one to a fair number of people, and it’s an issue that 
has very strong feelings. I know this because I’ve met with 
labour representatives and I’ve met with employer 
representatives. I’ve gone out, made a point of stopping in a 
community that has hog barns, inquired of a few people . . . 
actually I knew a few people there and talked to them about it to 
get their sort of feel on the whole issue of hog barns in this 

instance. 
 
And I mean there’s a great many facets to that, but in a nutshell, 
there’s strong feelings on the part of working people. There’s 
strong feelings on the part of employers, and it’s an issue that, I 
think it’s safe to say, we’ve been looking at fairly seriously and 
steadily for a number of years now. In due course, there may 
well be an announcement of some kind. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I’d like the minister just to really give a 
definition of . . . the common term is bringing intensive 
livestock operations under The Labour Standards Act. Is that 
correct? And what is the definition of an intensive livestock 
operation? What kind of operation does that include? Does it 
just include hog operations, or does it include other types of 
agricultural operations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there have been no 
decisions made on this and I’m certainly in no position to talk 
about definitions. It’s a serious matter. It’s one that we will 
continue to look at and evaluate but there’s been no decision 
made on it. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just one more 
comment and a question. The previous government . . . and 
throughout the winter the government has said that agriculture 
or intensive livestock operations will be . . . legislation will be 
introduced during this session. Now you’re on record, Mr. 
Minister, as saying . . . I’ll quote from The StarPhoenix: 
 

The employees of intensive livestock operations in 
Saskatchewan may have to wait another 50 years before 
they receive the protection of The Labour Standards Act. 

 
So I’d just like to know, Mr. Minister: has there been a change 
in the government’s thinking because it seemed at one point it 
was definitely going to be introduced this session, and now 
you’re saying . . . you threw out the words 50 years before it 
will be introduced. Could you be a bit more clear on where the 
government’s heading on this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, indeed agricultural 
workers have not been included under The Labour Standards 
Act since The Labour Standards Act was first introduced in this 
very legislature in 1947. It’s a serious matter and it’s been 
reviewed, I would describe in a . . . I can’t say a constantly 
ongoing but it’s been reviewed on an ongoing basis and 
revisited from time to time subsequent. 
 
No, there’s no change in that status. We’ve always intended to 
review it and we are. And if there’s an announcement, I will be 
making it in due course. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. On to another 
issue, Mr. Minister. Can you tell us whether the government 
will be introducing legislation this session regarding maternity 
leave provisions in Saskatchewan so that job security provisions 
in provincial law match maternity leave positions of the federal 
government, federal law? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, did I hear the hon. 
member say, are we introducing maternity, paternity, parental 
leave benefits to bring our benefits in line with the federal 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 823 

 

government this session? The answer is yes. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Minister, some have suggested that even 
though it makes sense that the provincial job security law 
matches the federal leave law, it would be more fair to at the 
same time to increase the amount of notice an employer 
receives. 
 
Some have suggested that employers get six weeks notice from 
employees leaving for maternity leave and four weeks from 
those who are coming back. Have you looked at this, and do 
you believe this is reasonable? And will you be considering this 
in the law that you bring down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly we 
consulted around this Bill. We heard those comments. Indeed I 
heard those comments made in my office since I was invited to 
join the cabinet. 
 
With respect to the details of the Bill, I think it’s much more 
appropriate for us to have the Bill before the legislature and 
then we can discuss those very details. 
 
But the other part of the answer I’ve already given is certainly I 
heard those comments respecting notice for return to work 
being made and a very cogent argument on behalf of small 
business. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d like to ask the minister 
on another topic. In the early 1990s your government passed a 
wide-ranging Labour Standards Act that included a section 13.4 
which dealt with the assignment of hours for part-time workers. 
This most available hours provision was left unproclaimed. Can 
you tell us at the time why this decision was made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, with respect to the 
additional hours, this came to us as a recommendation of a joint 
commission on part-time work that was reported to the 
government at that time. And I can share with you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that in 1993 there was just a barrage — you may well 
remember — a barrage of complaints of individuals working 
part-time who didn’t have an ability to increase their hours so 
that they could, in fact, pay the rent, buy the food, you know, 
pay for the very basics of life. I mean, people manage, but in 
. . . all too often in those days, people were managing by doing 
two and three and four, and I know in some cases, even more 
part-time jobs. In fact, that’s part of why this government 
introduced the changes in the legislation then. 
 
And what we tried to do is to make it where there was no 
disadvantage for employers to employ full-time workers versus 
part-time workers. If your costs per hour are basically equal, 
then employers could make a decision based on what works for 
the employee and for the employer, how can they best provide 
the good or the service — whatever it is their reason for being 
in business. 
 
But in those days there was just a phenomenal number of 
part-time employees and there was . . . I don’t want to paint 
every employer this way because there was a good number of 
very good employers that did not use and abuse their 
employees, but unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was 
too many employers who did abuse their part-time employees 

and gave them very few hours. So it was . . . there was a big 
demand, if I can describe it, from working people to have 
available hours included in the legislation. 
 
What happened was there was no ability at that time to arrive at 
a method to implement the additional hours or by another name, 
most available hours. What might work for retail would not 
work in a different service industry. So the Department of 
Labour continues to be willing to consult, to discuss this with 
employees, employers, but they’ve not been able to come close 
to a consensus on how to implement in the various sectors. So 
those additional hours, that portion of The Labour Standards 
Act remains to be proclaimed. 
 
(20:30) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I guess my next question is: do 
you have any plans to proclaim the most available hours 
provision in the near future? And you’ve . . . I guess, you’ve 
basically . . . has stated that you’re looking at it. 
 
But I’d like a bit more of an explanation — exactly what is the 
concept of most available hours, and how that applies to private 
employers. Could you give us a bit of a definition of what the 
Department of Labour is looking at as far as the definition of 
that concept? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, tempting as it is to 
expound for the next sort of hour or so about my personal 
knowledge or lack thereof of what most available hours or 
additional hours is, I won’t do that. And there is a number of 
reasons, not only out of respect for everyone here. 
 
But the department would be willing certainly to consult, to 
work with employers, employees, to see if they can, we can 
help facilitate an agreement or an understanding of what 
additional hours legislation means. But we are not actively 
pursuing that right now. 
 
And let me share. I talked earlier about the huge shift from 
part-time to full-time work. I asked for the numbers. They, I 
think, tell quite a story. In Saskatchewan, from February, 2001 
to March 2001: part-time employment increased by 200; 
full-time employment increased by 2,700. 
 
This is part of . . . remember earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
spoke about the crisis almost in terms of having a skilled 
workforce, skilled labour. And I used then the description of the 
construction industry, where right across Canada over the next 
six to eight years they’re expecting more than 600,000 turnover. 
That’s the equivalent of virtually everyone that’s working today 
in a trade being replaced over the next six to eight years. 
 
Obviously not everyone is going to be changing but obviously, 
equally obviously, a huge, huge number of baby boomers are 
going to be sliding out of the workforce over that next six to 
eight years. We’re seeing it starting. It’s happening as we speak 
and that will continue. As that happens, we’re in a situation 
increasingly where employers are in a situation of having to 
work with whatever they can and get the full-time employees. 
It’s becoming a more . . . It’s closer to a worker’s market than 
an employer’s market that it probably was 10 years ago. 
 



824 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just one more 
question on that topic. There’s been discussion among the 
business community that the government may begin to apply 
the most available hours provision to certain sectors and that . . . 
such as the restaurant industry. Is that a possibility? Is that 
being considered that you just might do it in one sector and 
work from there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m reminded of TV 
ads that I have seen around teenage sex, and that’s just say no. 
There’s no plans to introduce most available hours in any sector 
this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move the 
committee report progress for the Department of Energy and 
Mines. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I’d just like to thank the minister and his 
officials for attending this evening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just wish to also 
thank my officials for providing the answers and I very much 
enjoyed this evening’s exchange. I thank the hon. member for 
Redberry for making this minister’s first go at estimates 
memorable. You’ve asked some very important questions, some 
very good questions, and I think the people of Saskatchewan, be 
they working people or employers, were I hope well served by 
tonight’s exchange. So I thank you for that. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
 
Subvote (EC01) 
 
The Chair: — I’d invite the minister to introduce his officials 
here with us in the committee this evening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. To my right is the deputy minister of Economic and 
Co-operative Development, Larry Spannier. To his right is 
Denise Haas, executive director of investments and corporate 
services. To my left is Debbie Wilkie, executive director of 
marketing and corporate affairs. 
 
Directly behind me is Jim Marshall, assistant deputy minister of 
policy. To his right, Lynn Oliver, chief information officer of 
information technology office. And just behind me to my left is 
Bryon Burnett, the assistant deputy minister of community and 
economic business development. And along the back rail are 
Roy Anderson, president and CEO (chief executive officer) of 
Tourism Saskatchewan; Tim Frass, director of finance and 
administration for Tourism Saskatchewan; and as well, John 
Treleaven, president and CEO of Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. And 
greetings to all of your officials that are here with us tonight. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to just start off with a few of the summary 
numbers in the budget for Economic Development. And I 
would ask that you may explain some of the increases that I’d 
noted. 

There has been quite an increase in the summary of 
expenditures over the last year, in fact over the last two years. If 
I looked at the annual reports from the year 1999-2000, and 
2000 and 2001, and estimated for 2001 and 2002, I see the 
increase actually of over 37 per cent. That’s a very significant 
jump. 
 
Just in the last year there’s been a jump of almost 15 per cent. 
Can you give me some guidance as to why there’s such an 
increase in the expenditure of Economic and Co-operative 
Development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. There are some substantive increases in the budget 
for this fiscal year. Our department’s budget will be $54.144 
million, which is an increase of $7.44 million. And I’d like to 
highlight for the member opposite what those increases are 
comprised of. 
 
The Government On-Line Fund, it’s a $2.3 million fund that is 
very much a highlight of this budget. The CommunityNet 
accounts for some of the increase. There’s a commitment over 
the next six years of $71 million to provide high-speed 
communications and Internet access for 366 communities 
across our province. 
 
We also have $400,000 in the budget for co-coordinating the IT 
(information technology) office on this project. The other, I 
guess, highlights within the budget are an increased allocation 
to the Innovation and Science Fund from $10 million to $15 
million, and the additional $5 million is part of our budgeted 
commitment to the Synchrotron project. There have been as 
well, within these figures, an allocation of $400,000 to address 
salary pressures, and they’ll be applied across the department to 
deal with shortfalls that were, in the past, dealt with through 
vacancy management. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that the increase in the Science 
and Innovation Fund, the commitment to Synchrotron, and the 
programs that the budget has delivered in this province does 
represent an increase. But I think one can make a very strong 
argument that administering science and innovation, Internet 
technology, high-speed access in rural Saskatchewan, is very 
much a positive issue for economic development and education 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. There’s certainly 
been some increases, particularly in the research area. The 
Synchrotron, I think, is a very notable project that we’ve had 
the opportunity to visit and see what the potential is on that 
particular expenditure. 
 
I’ve noticed, though, that there is an increase in the full-time 
equivalents of about 12 people, or 6 . . . over 6 per cent. That 
seems to be a bit higher than other departments. And I 
wondered if there’s a reason for full-time equivalents, and why 
the administration of your department is 5 per cent increased 
over the last year. 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 
breakdown in terms of the changes in full-time equivalents are 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 825 

 

with respect to administration. That has actually gone down 
from 34 full-time equivalents to 33 full-time equivalents. We 
have increased six full-time equivalents in the business and 
community economic development area and that, I would 
suggest, is probably money well spent in terms of working with 
communities and delivering programs. Policy is down one 
full-time equivalent. We have added four people, four full-time 
equivalents, to the information technology office. And that’s 
what comprises the increase in personnel in the department. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Referring then to 
the business and community economic development program, 
when you say that you’ve been working with the communities 
and the businesses, that’s certainly a commendable objective, 
but I notice that the regional development or the REDAs 
(regional economic development authority) hasn’t increased in 
your budget. That’s a very much of a hands-on, working with 
the regions opportunity. 
 
Special projects and investment services has made a fairly 
significant increase; business development actually has 
decreased. The largest increase by far is the marketing and 
corporate affairs under that business and community economic 
development. It seems strange that if you’re going to work with 
the community, the business community in particular, those 
kind of budget numbers would appear in this budget estimate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say that 
we have continued to fund regional economic development 
authorities and their organizations. And I think that it’s money 
very much well spent with respect to marketing and corporate 
affairs. We will be working with communities and with 
chambers of commerce, with REDAs. 
 
In terms of marketing this province, and I think that it’s one of 
the areas that people have, as I’ve travelled around the province, 
suggested that we need to know more about ourselves, about the 
successes in our province, the businesses who have taken risk 
and who have taken opportunities to generate profits and create 
jobs, and so part of that certainly is marketing and the increase 
in the marketing and corporate affairs department. 
 
I want to say in terms of the business development, that’s a 
result of one, as I understand it, one full-time equivalent being 
moved in these. So that’s why the decrease there. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, with regards to the rural 
economic development authorities, the REDAs, they are very 
profile in most areas, cities and rural regions. The funding is 
stable from the previous estimate to this one, as you mentioned. 
 
Could you give me some idea of maybe the return on that kind 
of investment when you’re dealing at the regional level because 
those are the areas where investment, in particularly the rural 
REDAs, or the regional REDAs, is very important to the 
revitalization of our rural area. And I see that the increase . . . 
There is no increase for them, and yet I think it’s very 
important. Is there a return on investment there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chair, I think it’s always 
difficult to gauge in that kind of an activity what your return is 
on your investment. I think as an overview, and just someone 
who is new to this department but who’s very much aware of 

the work that REDAs have been doing in this province, we’re 
very much receiving a return on our investment that’s 
appropriate. 
 
And I guess I would speak to some of the meetings that I’ve had 
with REDAs in the last while. I’ve been in the Yorkton area and 
met with REDAs in that region — Melville, Yorkton. I’ve been 
to Swift Current. Certainly I’ve met with the REDA in 
Saskatoon, who is doing a very good job in that community, 
and the REDA here in Regina, the REDA in Prince Albert. 
 
And I guess in the Melville, Yorkton area, I was there just a few 
days ago, and their work with the chambers and with the 
Aboriginal community and with young people in that area, 
developing an economic game plan very much excites me. So a 
return on investment to, I guess, put a figure on it, would be 
very much difficult to do. But I think it’s very fair to say that 
communities in those rural areas, and indeed across the 
province, are very much pleased with the work that REDAs are 
doing. And I think it’s a long-term investment in development 
of our provincial economy, and I want to say that I support very 
much the REDA concept. 
 
I support the people who for the most part are volunteering a lot 
of their time to better their communities. I would probably give 
an example which I’ve used before, the community of Moose 
Jaw, which the member will be very well aware of. That 
community has gone through some pretty dramatic transition. 
And part of that is dream and part of that is a concept that has 
been put together by the business community, which includes 
the REDAs and which includes the town . . . the city council. 
And they really have transformed the downtown area of that 
community. 
 
So a rate of return, I guess I would just use Moose Jaw as an 
example. Drive down the main street and have a look at the 
transformation that’s taken place there in the last few years. 
That’s a rate of return for me that is incalculable. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I might 
agree that there are some very positive aspects to that REDA 
development. 
 
I guess what I’m looking at is the REDA involvement in the 
areas that I’m more familiar with, for instance, in the 
Northwest. I think the programs are in place, but we’re not 
seeing a great deal of economic activity flowing out of those, 
although maybe as partnering with some of the other incentives. 
 
Let me have a look at the business investment program which is 
also a subvote here. And I wonder if you could give me a bit of 
an idea here of what is the purpose of these investment 
programs. I see there is a Strategic Investment Fund. There is 
the Innovation and Science Fund, which I assume has much to 
do with the research areas, economic partnerships, 
small-business loans. Can you give me some idea of what is the 
expenditure there in that particular subvote, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Chairman, I’ll just go through the list of the subprograms here: 
the Strategic Investment Fund is basically a fund designed to 
deal I guess outside of the other programs that you might find 
available in the Innovation and Science Fund which is a 



826 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

matching fund. It’s matching funding to research and 
development, matched by the federal government through the 
CFI (Canada Foundation for Innovation) fund. 
 
The Economic Partnership Agreements is a federal/provincial 
agreement that is right now in its fourth year of a $40 million 
program. We’re committing to that 3.75 million as you can see 
for this fiscal year. 
 
The Small Business Loans Associations is a fund that is set 
aside for loan loss provisions from that program. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that 
clarification. And maybe just one more clarification. When I 
read through these estimates, there’s a section called 
expenditure by type, and transfers for public services has a 
subheading and a category that kind of is included in the other 
numbers. Can you tell me what that means, transfers for public 
services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, while my officials 
are bringing forward that information, I just want to revert back 
to the REDAs and just examples of what they have been 
achieving on sort of a provincial basis. With the REDAs, 
they’ve moved forward with 200 specific projects and 
initiatives and these are all focused on building infrastructure, 
economic infrastructure in the province. They’ve been involved 
in more than $3 million in research and planning activities. And 
so as you can see they incorporate a very wide breadth of work 
and initiatives within the province. 
 
I’ll just check to see if that information is available on your last 
question . . . Mr. Chairman, expenditure by type really is a 
summation of the funds that are under the subprograms, 
Strategic Investment Fund, the Innovation and Science Fund, 
and the Economic Partnership Agreement which in total 
comprises the figure $24.312 million. The transfers to the 
individuals would be basically the individual loans that come 
under the Small Business Loan Associations and under that 
program. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you for that clarification, Mr. 
Minister. The amount of money that you indicated in your last 
response focusing primarily on REDAs but also business 
development — I’m thinking in terms of again of rural 
revitalization. I know that some of the activities that are going 
on in Saskatoon, Regina, Moose Jaw, and some of the larger 
cities do in fact show some pretty positive numbers and that’s 
certainly appreciated in this province. 
 
In order to revitalize the rural, which I think is a very important 
part of your government’s initiative, appointing a new minister 
particularly to review that, which we talked briefly about last 
time, what would the . . . it seems to me there’s a real challenge 
to try to attract those kinds of businesses’ investments, even 
with the kind of programs that you have outlined here, at the 
same time as the schools in the rural areas have not kept up with 
the necessary development or expansion or at least even 
keeping up to the current status. The rural hospitals have 
experienced considerable frustration and under the new Fyke 
report it may in fact be looked at in an entirely different way. 
 
I guess what I’m saying is that when you look at that aspect 

against the money that you’re expending, in particular the rural 
areas with REDAs and other initiatives, are the two not in 
conflict? Trying to revitalize the rural is going to be a whole 
package of things and some of them certainly haven’t been 
there. 
 
(21:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
and I will agree on a number of things this evening, and one of 
them will be the magnitude of the challenge in terms of 
developing our rural Saskatchewan economy and the transition 
that has been taking place. 
 
The member will be well aware of the fact that in rural 
Saskatchewan, in particular in agriculture, there have been 
thousands of jobs lost and it’s every year. And we’ve been 
trying to offset that and those jobs in other areas outside of the 
agricultural sector. And I want to say, in spite of the fact that 
over 30,000 jobs have been lost in the last 10 years in rural 
Saskatchewan, the province and the business community has 
created over 50,000 jobs. 
 
But certainly when you have that kind of a drain in rural 
Saskatchewan, it puts challenges on the education system, it 
puts challenges on the hospital system, and certainly it 
challenges this province in terms of economic development in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite . . . and we talked 
about some of the programs that we have here, consist of 
economic development in rural Saskatchewan. But you know I 
just want to share with the member opposite a meeting I 
attended about a week ago in LeRoy, Saskatchewan. And I 
think it was one of the exciting times that I have had as Minister 
of Economic Development in the last few months. 
 
A small community; a small RM (rural municipality), the 
community banded together over 120 partners in a new 
generation co-op to establish and finance a feed mill, to put 
together the equity to build hog finishing barns, partnering with 
a local entrepreneur and farmer to develop an intensive 
livestock area in that RM. And I’m told by people in that area 
that 35 per cent of the people involved and live in that RM are 
in one way or another involved in the development of that 
project. It’s some $40 million as I understand it from start to 
finish. It would be the largest producer of hogs as I understand 
again in this province. 
 
And this was all done by local initiative, people who saw a 
vision, saw an opportunity, and captured it. Now this isn’t done 
by any particular government program because we have no 
program dollars in. 
 
And what they’re looking for is support with respect to the 
infrastructure. They need a road system that will handle the 
increased traffic that this investment is going to bring. They 
need water to supply to the hog barns and they’re asking for us 
to look at ways where government can help to facilitate the 
infrastructure. 
 
Now those are the challenges. You have private sector 
investment of $40 million, or $4 million — $40 million — 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 827 

 

sorry. You have the whole community involved. Now there’s 
new pressures on that infrastructure. So it’s our responsibility to 
help to facilitate from my department and other departments 
within government those things to help that facility to grow. 
 
Certainly the hundred employees that are going to be in that 
area and those facilities around LeRoy, Saskatchewan may put 
some added pressure on the school system. They may put some 
added pressure on the health care system, but I think that’s the 
kind of pressure that we want to see. I think what is less 
encouraging is when you see small communities dying with 
infrastructure left and no kids to attend to the schools and little 
utilization of the health care facility, because the farms have 
gotten larger, the economy has changed fairly dramatically and 
people have moved on. And that’s evidenced by the number of 
people in rural Saskatchewan and who are working in 
agriculture where we’ve seen some fairly substantive decreases 
over, not the last year or the last two years, but it’s been 
ongoing. And the projections as I understand it are that the 
number of jobs in agriculture will remain fairly static, which 
will be a challenge. 
 
But I think on the upside, when you see the growth of 
infrastructure and of opportunities, economic development 
opportunities such as I mentioned in LeRoy, Saskatchewan, it 
encourages me. Because I think that those are the things that are 
going to revitalize this province, revitalize rural Saskatchewan, 
and I want to commend all of those people who have been 
involved in putting that project together. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I certainly don’t 
disagree that we have to champion those kinds of things. We 
have to look at all the opportunities that we can in the 
agricultural sector and certainly in the value-added aspect of 
agriculture. Agriculture, as we talked earlier, is going to change. 
I have a great deal of optimism for agriculture in this province. 
It may not look like the same agriculture as we have seen in the 
past. And an example you used at LeRoy, I guess I have to . . . 
Maybe we’ll talk about that one shortly other than to say that 
when we try to develop a particular project in an area we have 
to make sure that we’re not picking and choosing any particular 
one operator, any one aspect of the industry. All parts of the 
industry should be treated equally with the same incentives 
whether it’s a tax incentive or if it in fact should apply then to 
the infrastructure needed as you alluded to. 
 
I’d like to talk about that shortly, but before we do that I’d like 
to go to the next subvote here, the next section called 
information technology office. You’ve talked a little bit about 
this already and one of the things that strikes me is that there 
has been a very large increase in the budget, and that was a 
highlight in the budget as you mentioned going to the different 
aspects of Internet — high-speed Internet, wider bandwidth 
Internet, and so on. 
 
My question would be: what relationship do you have in this 
aspect in information technology pertaining to this Internet? 
What relation do you have with SaskTel’s role in this? I 
understand that SaskTel becomes the sole source supplier of 
that kind of service. Do I understand that correctly? And why 
do you . . . why would you have picked SaskTel as a sole source 
supplier of this service? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Chairman, I think there are two components for what we’re 
talking about here and one is CommunityNet, which is a $71 
million investment that is going to range over a six-year period. 
 
I’m told by my officials is what they have done is they’ve taken 
all of the existing contracts from within the different 
departments and they’ve moved them into one; they’ve 
compiled it into one contract. SaskTel had the contracts before, 
but now it’s under one new contract and it’s with SaskTel. 
 
The information that you requested with respect to Government 
On-Line is information from government that will be accessible 
for businesses, and people interested in what is happening 
within the Government of Saskatchewan. And that is the 
On-Line initiative that’s on page 39, the one that you referred to 
as well. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I want to 
talk a little bit more about information technology, but I’d like 
to defer to my colleague from Swift Current, if I may, to ask 
one or two questions about information technology. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, and 
welcome to your officials as well. I have some questions 
regarding the information technology office, in specific. But 
just before I do that, a general question is . . . I notice some of 
the subvotes and some of the areas of your department as it 
relates to special projects and investment services. Certainly in 
the department there are people who have the skills and the 
training to be able to certainly assess business plans, assess 
business opportunities, who will have experience with due 
diligence. 
 
And I’m just wondering if you can confirm whether or not, at 
any time, any of the department officials, who might have those 
services, have been contacted by or invited by Crowns who 
might be interested in making . . . developing new businesses, 
new ventures? Has your department historically been contacted 
by those Crowns to request some assistance with business 
planning or due diligence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the answer, I guess 
quite simply, is no. The Crowns are served by the infrastructure 
within the individual Crowns. CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) may be asked by the individual 
Crowns to play a role but with respect to an analysis of 
individual business initiatives that the Crowns are embarking 
upon, the answer is the department does not do that. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman. A 
question then more specific to the area that my colleague from 
Lloydminster was getting to, an area of your department called 
the information technology office and we see some additional 
resources for that office in this budget. 
 
Earlier this day we highlighted concerns by your predecessor 
with another project of the government called ISC (Information 
Services Corporation of Saskatchewan), and the concerns 
related specifically to your department and to this subvote, at 
least for a part of it anyway. The concerns were, specifically 
regarding the potential for ISC as it apparently expands from its 
land and geomatics role into more of an IT sort of generalist, 



828 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

there is concerns that it would be competing with other IT 
involved agencies of the government. Listed were two, SaskTel 
and this particular branch of your department. 
 
And so I wonder, Minister, if you would comment on that and 
whether you agree that indeed, if they do expand into this, there 
could be some infringement by ISC into this area of your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Chairman, this arm of Economic Development is basically to 
serve the executive side of government and that’s what it is as I 
understand. ISC, it was established to deal with land titles and 
automation of the land titles systems. We see no reason to 
believe that there would be any infringement on what this 
department and what this component of our department does. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess what we’re 
hearing then is that it’s believed now that these concerns were 
unfounded at the time that they were made, or maybe they are 
now or . . . but basically currently they’re not well founded. 
 
There was another concern that was raised as well, and it 
certainly concerns your role as the Minister for Economic 
Development. One of the important industries in our province 
of course is the IT industry. I know I had known and met 
personally with several small companies in this particular 
industry in Saskatoon. And they’re relatively new companies, 
but they’re certainly vibrant and they’re growing, and they will 
be an important part of our economy as we head off into the 
future. 
 
And there was a concern expressed, again by your predecessor 
in a note only three months old or so, I guess four months old, 
about that particular industry, and about whether or not the 
expansion of ISC beyond the roles that you mentioned, Minister 
— and I don’t think people would disagree that that was the 
understood original mandate of this corporation, land titles 
automation and geomatics — but as that role expands there is a 
concern, it was expressed quite well I feel by your predecessor, 
that there is a potential to infringe upon the small but growing 
information technology sector here in our province, that they 
will be getting into areas of business and commerce that are 
currently being provided by the private sector, or at least that 
the private sector has aspirations to provide in the future. 
 
And so I wonder if you’d comment on that, on whether you 
agree that there is a concern with respect to the private 
information technology sector. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to say, as 
our department’s developed new electronic services for the 
people of this province, I think it’s fair to say that we’re 
stimulating the development of the IT sector. For the most part, 
private IT companies are contracted to develop these services, 
and these companies are able to develop new skills by creating 
innovative services, and they can then be applied to private 
sector entrepreneurs to make their businesses grow. 
 
With respect to private sector industry, I think it’s fair to say 
that, as minister, very much I support the growth of that part of 

our economy. It’s an important part of the economy; there are 
some growth opportunities. And I want to say that as the 
minister, and I know this department is very much supportive of 
the private sector developing in all areas of the economy, and 
this one is no different than any of the others. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I certainly accept what 
you are saying and I don’t think you’ll find much disagreement 
with that. But the question I think is, do you feel there is a 
potential as this new corporation of government expands into 
other general IT areas, and granted we don’t know exactly what 
that all might be but certainly that there is an expansion we 
know that. And so the question is this: do you agree that the 
expansion of that corporation into these more general IT 
industries will in fact result in an infringement on the private 
information technology sector that we currently have here in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would rather 
deal with fact than a hypothetical scenario. I say that this 
department is well aware of the work we’re doing internally. 
We’re well aware and I hope the general public is well aware of 
the support we have for the growth of business opportunities in 
the province. 
 
And I’m here to answer to the projected expenditures for the 
years 2001-2002 for the Department of Economic Development 
posted in the blue book and that’s what I intend to respond to 
tonight. I’m not going to hypothesize or speculate. I’m here to 
deal with fact. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Minister. I 
think it’s fair to say as we deliberate on these numbers here that 
we’re also talking about the general role of your department and 
how these resources help you carry that role out. And certainly 
a part of that role, as you have mentioned, is to encourage the 
growth of and the expansion of Saskatchewan industry, small, 
medium and large. 
 
And really that’s what these questions go to the heart of. Here 
you say you’re only interested in dealing with facts. Well it’s 
not very subjective to suggest that other forays of this 
government into the private sector, and I can point to SecurTek 
as a good example, one that I know a few facts about in terms 
of their impact on small businesses because I felt that impact 
through constituents’ concerns voiced directly to me. 
 
One of the impacts when Crowns do that of course is that they 
are competing with, with considerable resources, with the 
resources of the Crown and the resources of a large company, 
they are competing with small businessmen and women from 
across this province. And that would be of a concern to you. 
That would be of a concern in terms of the resources you’re 
committing on one hand here in these estimates to try to 
buttress and support that particular industry. 
 
And on the other hand, another arm of government is certainly 
affecting it in a negative way when they go into competition 
against these same small businessmen and women that may 
even occasion your offices in the regional areas for business 
planning and counselling. 
 
So it’s very germane to the issues that we’re talking about here 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 829 

 

today. And we simply asked, if you want to treat it more 
generally, does your department have any concerns at all about 
ISC or any other Crown’s forays into the private sector where 
they are clearly competing with small businesses that look to 
you and your department for leadership in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think it is fair to 
say that the responsibility of this department and me as the 
minister — or myself as the minister — responsible for it, is to 
ensure that there is a good and a stable business climate here in 
the province. And I intend to do that. 
 
We’ve developed policies where we can facilitate investment 
and attract investment from our federal counterparts in terms of 
research and development. And I want to say that that is very 
much a climate that I think has been focusing specifically at the 
Saskatchewan business community, and I think that the 
economic growth that they have helped to provide has created 
very much a good base to build the future of this province. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to say with respect to specific questions 
as it relates to the Crowns, the member can certainly avail 
himself of the officials and of the ministers at Crown 
Corporations Committee, which is the format and the venue that 
would allow these questions to be asked. 
 
I would just close by saying, what we’re looking for here in this 
province and what I would like to see and I think the people of 
Saskatchewan would like to see, is a balance. I think they see a 
role for all the different sectors of our economy — whether it be 
the co-operative sector or whether it be the private sector or 
whether they be the public sector. They all have had historically 
a role to play. 
 
So in terms of the overall development of our economy we use 
the tools that work for us in this province. I don’t think there’s 
any one template. It’s a matter of creating a balance and a 
balanced economy, a strong urban economy. We know that 
we’ve got some work to do in rural Saskatchewan, as that part 
of our province is very much in a transitional phase. We know 
that we have some work to do in value adding our commodities 
and we know that there are private sector investors who are 
willing to do that. 
 
We also know that the co-operative sector plays a big part, but 
we also know that the public sector has played a part in the 
development of this economy. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, just to thank the minister and his officials 
and, Mr. Chairman, and to offer encouragement that the 
department do whatever they can actually to ensure that other 
arms of the government aren’t running counter to the efforts of 
your department in terms of the small business sector. 
 
And also very briefly to thank the minister and Tourism 
Saskatchewan who provided a lot of information on a question I 
had asked during our last session on hoof and mouth disease 
and the many people who are in the working ranch industry in 
the province. So thank you. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, if 
I could then just follow up on that particular question with 

something that is maybe a little more generic. 
 
Under information technology, the definition or the explanation 
says provides government-wide policy development and 
coordination. Could you give me — and I agree this is a very 
important section that has a lot of potential — could you give 
me some ideas of what your department is doing in developing 
policies so that this particular industry, information technology, 
can begin to flourish in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think 
it’s fairly clear that the public is demanding, and when it’s 
available, certainly using more Internet Web sites, all of the 
things that come across that screen when you punch that button 
and make those things happen. And what we have been working 
on and will continue to work on is to improve the government 
Web site. I think there’s some work yet that we need to do on 
that. We need to open those doors and those windows to have 
an open portal to the different lines and the different parts of 
our government. 
 
We’ve been working with our partners. As you will know 
CommunityNet is a very large initiative that we think will have 
some very wide-spread economic benefits in the province, once 
it is finally established in the 366 towns and villages and 
communities that I mentioned a little earlier. 
 
We’ve also put in place a $2.35 million Government On-Line 
Fund to assist the departments in achieving two targets set out 
by the e-government strategy — and that’s by 2002. We’re 
attempting to have all paper-based forms used by the 
government available on-line. And that by 2004, 90 per cent of 
the transactions between the provincial government and 
Saskatchewan citizens will be available on-line as well. 
 
And I think this speaks very much to looking to the future. The 
ability to do business in small-town rural Saskatchewan, the 
ability to do business in the far North of our province, no matter 
where you are. And so I think these are all things that will have 
a very positive benefit for our province. And what we do is 
attempt to coordinate, to improve security so that the public has 
confidence that transacting business on-line works and works 
well. But they have to have that system in order to make that 
happen. 
 
So I think the other component is that we are attempting to 
work with the civil service and the business community and the 
public about their rights and about their obligations under 
Canadian privacy law. So it’s not only putting the service in 
place, but insuring that it’s a system that will protect business, 
that will protect the general public. 
 
So we have a little work to do, but I think division and the focus 
and the direction is the right direction. So the policy is to put 
that framework together, then attempt to establish the capital in 
order to make the infrastructure and have the infrastructure 
there, and that’s the role that our department sees itself playing 
in a very large way. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I 
think in order to encourage as much of this information 
technology to develop in the province is a very laudable 
objective. I think we have to go full tilt in that particular 



830 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

direction. 
 
But we have to remember that there are lots of companies that 
want to play in this particular game, that have a lot of expertise 
and want to expend. And we also have to realize that there’s a 
lot of competition from outside of our particular province. 
 
I guess the question would be from the provincial budget a year 
ago when information technology services were . . . provincial 
sales tax was applied to that, do you see that as a particular 
deterrent in our ability to expand the role or expand the 
development of information technology and in particular as we 
are competing against other jurisdictions in Canada? 
 
(21:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, and to the member 
opposite, I think there is no doubt that if we had our choice we 
wouldn’t have a sales tax in the province whether it be on Web 
design or whether it be on other initiatives or other services or 
other sales in this province. I mean the goal and the desire 
would be to have zero tax. But we, as this government, as all 
governments should, have to live in the realm of the possible 
and the reality. The reality is that people in Saskatchewan don’t 
want to see deficit budgets. Their priority was for income tax 
reduction. We put in place a plan to reduce that. 
 
But I want to remind the member that we have reduced, in a 
very substantive way, the provincial sales tax. We’re the lowest 
tax with the narrowest base of any province outside of Alberta 
who has no tax. And why do they have no tax? Well, pretty 
simple. They’ve got billions of windfall oil and gas revenue; 
they as well have a much lower debt level than we have. 
 
We spend in the neighbourhood of $650 million a year 
servicing our provincial debt. Now if that provincial debt were 
to just suddenly and miraculously disappear, there wouldn’t be 
a need for sales tax and we could have a zero sales tax, so this 
wouldn’t be an issue. But unfortunately the people who 
preceded this government in the 1980s embarked upon 
spending patterns that people of Saskatchewan never want to 
see again. And they racked up a billion two a year in debt. It 
totalled at the end of their term $16 billion. We’ve got that 
down to something in the neighbourhood of eleven, eleven and 
a half billion. But the fact remains it’s still there; it needs to be 
paid down. 
 
Do I see sales tax as a difficulty for us? Of course I do. When 
you’re competing with a zero tax province no one should deny 
that that differential between a zero tax province and our 
province is an irritant and it is. We’re working as fast as we can 
and as best we can to manage this province out of debt. And in 
the last ten years I think we’ve had a pretty good go at that and I 
think we’ve had some success. 
 
Have we had enough success? The answer is no. But we live 
within the reality and tax reductions have to happen as they can 
occur and when it’s sustainable because it doesn’t make any 
sense to this year reduce a tax knowing in three, four years you 
may have to impose the same tax again. So is sales tax an 
impediment? Well, I would have to say in the Saskatchewan 
context I think that all Saskatchewan businesses who are 
competing with each other are playing under the same rules. 

You talked earlier tonight about a level playing field. In 
Saskatchewan quite clearly there is. Our goal is to reduce that 
tax to a point where it really isn’t relevant any more. And that 
might be five points, it might be four, it might be three. But 
that’ll only be done when you stack that up against people of 
Saskatchewan’s other priorities, which in the past were income 
tax, both corporate and personal. In this budget a reduction of 
the small business tax by 25 per cent, and an increase of the 
threshold from 200,000 to 300,000. 
 
So what we’re trying to do is listen to people, determine what 
their priorities are, and if in the realm of our fiscal reality we 
could move on those things, we do. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think we can 
agree that if we can reduce the tax it would certainly be doing 
the right thing for the industry. I think in another day you and I 
may have to have a little chat about how we go about doing 
that, and at what rates and so on. 
 
However, under the estimates for Economic Development, I 
would like to move on to just another area if I could. And that 
would be the subvote on Tourism Saskatchewan. The question 
that I might have under that subheading would be along this 
line. 
 
I really . . . I believe, and I think you do too, that there is a huge 
potential for tourism in Saskatchewan. I think it’s rather maybe 
untapped, and I think you have the right format, and maybe the 
right people in place to try and address some of this. 
 
My question would be though, the format of Saskatchewan 
tourism is an industry buy in and your department supplies a 
certain amount of funding. Do you agree that that format should 
be enhanced? Should it be changed? Should we be doing 
something different? Is there an opportunity to develop 
Saskatchewan tourism even further with maybe some other 
adjustments in the format of that program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Chairman. I want to say with respect to the relationship between 
the Government of Saskatchewan and Tourism Saskatchewan, 
it’s very much a partnership arrangement, as the member will 
know. It was instituted some years ago and I think has been 
serving the tourism industry in the province very well. But I 
think we need ongoing analysis in terms of our relationship. 
There are always ways to improve, I guess the way we dialogue 
with each other and the way we function, government versus 
Tourism Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the areas of discussion right now is core funding and we 
. . . I guess at this point in time and the agreement that we have 
in place now for this fiscal year, it’ll remain at just under $7 
million, although the new arrangement will allow Tourism 
Saskatchewan the ability to submit a request for incremental 
funds that will be harmonized within the department’s 
budgeting process. I think it’s critical that we allow Tourism 
Saskatchewan to be able to compete with other jurisdictions, 
with programs, with advancing opportunities here in the 
province. 
 
But I think the most critical part of this . . . Funding is important 
and certainly everyone can use more money to do more good 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 831 

 

things, but I think having a look at some flexibility in terms of 
the number within the Department of Economic and 
Co-operative Development’s budgeting process is important 
and every bit as important as having a good positive working 
relationship with Tourism Saskatchewan, with the government, 
and the business industry . . . and with business. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman, is the format having people 
buy into membership? Do they have to belong to this? Do they 
become a member of Saskatchewan Tourism? Is there a way 
that they themselves are contributing to the ongoing . . . I 
noticed over the last, I think probably three years at least, the 
level of funding has not increased but I’m sure the expenses for 
Saskatchewan Tourism has increased. So is there an increase in 
membership with an increase in revenue generated from the 
industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Chairman, I want to say to the member opposite that there is no 
doubt that the relationship between the industry, Tourism 
Saskatchewan, their association, and the Government of 
Saskatchewan is working. 
 
I am told that we have . . . Tourism Saskatchewan has 2,000 
paid up members which makes it the largest association in 
Canada. So I think it speaks something to the partnership that’s 
been built. 
 
In terms of funding, the new agreement is going to allow for the 
discussion to take place with respect to what is an appropriate 
core funding. I think it’s fair to say that Tourism Saskatchewan 
is not like — not unlike — other RMs who are responsible or 
who depend on government support for many years in this 
province, spending in many areas has been flat. 
 
Now do we see an opportunity here to build tourism — 
certainly we do. This is clearly the right vehicle and we are 
open and we are in the process of looking at the core funding 
and a new core funding agreement with Tourism Saskatchewan, 
and hopefully we can find a figure that makes everyone happy. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman, I would agree. I think that 
the format is right; and I have spent a little time reviewing the 
program and I understand it to the level of where I think it has a 
lot of benefit. 
 
The question I would have would be this: that Saskatchewan 
tourism can’t operate necessarily on its own. It has to work in 
an environment with other organizations in your government 
and the organizations — and agencies — within your 
government. 
 
I want to bring an example, a specific example, that I think will 
bring this home. I have a constituent in my home city that is 
very interested in developing a tourism facility in northern 
Saskatchewan. He has tried now for over a year, almost two 
years. He has substantive money to invest. 
 
He is not able to move ahead in terms of being able to acquire 
leased land. He’s not able to move ahead in terms of developing 
his tourism dreams in terms of an all-weather family holiday 
centre, and I’m not sure what the roadblocks are specifically. I 
guess I could guess. 

But the roadblocks are not with Tourism Saskatchewan. The 
roadblocks are trying to co-ordinate with other departments in 
the government and as a result he is to the point of frustration 
and finally will be taking his 2 or $3 million to either northern 
Alberta or northern British Columbia. And I think that’s a 
tragedy because we need that kind of investment, we need that 
kind of loyalty to our province, and yet we’re turning people 
away because of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would be 
more than willing to discuss the specific issue. I’m not aware of 
the details nor the individual that the member speaks of, but I 
want to say that I’m very much open to discussing, on an 
individual basis with the member, the specifics of this case. 
And I hope the member will take me up on my offer. I am very 
sincere. I like to see investment. I want to see investment in the 
province. 
 
But I think it’s also fair to say that, you know, just the 
relationship — Tourism Saskatchewan first of all, as the 
member will know, is not a regulatory body. There are different 
regulations with respect to the environment, different conditions 
and policies in terms of developments in northern 
Saskatchewan, and sometimes there are conflicts between the 
desires of the developer and the regulations and policies put in 
place to protect the environment, the ecosystem, and all of the 
things that we are able to sell northern Saskatchewan for. 
 
With respect to operations in Saskatchewan, I think that we do 
have some very unique opportunities in that we do have a part 
of the world that is largely intact. And that’s part of the beauty 
of what we have to sell in this province. There are few areas in 
the world left where one can, it seems, catch endless amounts of 
pickerel in a beautiful stream that you can see to the bottom. I 
think our neighbours to the West might envy us with respect 
too, the fact that we still have kept our resource intact. And it is 
there as a marketable initiative and marketable opportunities, 
and does attract people from throughout the world. 
 
In terms of a development that is having difficulty, I can say to 
the member opposite, I can’t guarantee that we can be 
successful but I’m certainly more than willing to listen to the 
member’s case as he would present it to this particular 
individual. 
 
(21:45) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate the 
offer. I guess I used the example to draw attention to the fact 
that there is a bigger problem. And I think we have to solve this, 
not by redirecting people to various agencies and departments, 
but I think there should be an one-stop approach to this, and try 
to co-ordinate it. 
 
Albeit we have to recognize environment, we have to recognize 
other priorities that is the responsibility of the governance of the 
province. So I do appreciate your offer and we’ll likely discuss 
this. I think we’ve discussed it with some of your people in 
Saskatchewan tourism already. 
 
I just have maybe one more question to follow up if I could. 
And that would be, there is a — I would see — a real 
opportunity to develop Saskatchewan tourism trying to attract 



832 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

American dollars into our province. I assume that there’s quite 
an effort being made to attract Americans here. But with the 
dollar at whatever it is in the low 60s, mid-60s cents, I would 
imagine that we should be having a swarm of Americans 
coming into our province. Is that on the increase? Is that a 
potential that we can tap? What’s being done in that vein 
please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 
member, as I share this information with him, will know that 
it’s not my brilliance that achieved this. My official had the 
facts right beside him on the page. 
 
So I will share with you that the American expenditures 
increased 18 per cent in, I believe it’s in the year 2000, up to 
$158 million. Non-resident dollars in the province were 444 
million in 1999 and that increased 9 per cent over the year 
before. So we’re seeing some growth and I think it’s not . . . it’s 
fair to say that it’s not totally overwhelming growth but it 
certainly is there. The fact that the American expenditure is up 
18 per cent I think speaks well of the businesses who are the 
people who attract the Americans to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you for that information, Mr. 
Minister. I certainly encourage Saskatchewan tourism to 
continue the work they’re doing trying to attract dollars from 
outside of Saskatchewan. That is a real lifeline; that is dollars 
that, particularly from the Americans, can be in a multiplier 
effect and that’s very important. 
 
One of the things that will likely keep people coming back — 
which is I think an important aspect of tourism — is the quality 
of life here in Saskatchewan, the quality of our environment, 
and the friendliness of our people. So that’s just a comment that 
I wanted to add. 
 
If I could now, Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask a question or two in 
the remaining moments that we have regarding Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership, if I could. I’ll wait for your 
official to get seated. Under the program — Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership — I understand it’s a similar 
organization where we have a lot of industry buying into the 
aspect of export and trade, and in fact are in that particular 
business, and a small amount of your budget goes toward them 
in lump sum and it’s administered by that organization. Is that a 
correct assumption? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think your analysis of the 
arrangement that we have with STEP (Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership Inc.) is fairly accurate. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you give 
me an idea of how many members there are in this STEP 
program? Any idea of the number of countries? And could you 
give us an idea of the amount of export dollars that are being 
generated under this particular program? Is it on the increase? I 
think that would be a real good indication of the success of this 
program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Chairman, I’m told that the number of corporations, full-service 
corporations, that belong to STEP are at 220 — 220 which is up 
70 in five months. So I think it really does speak something to 

the, you know, the wealth of assistance that STEP has provided 
industry here in the province. 
 
I’m told that they do market intelligence, they do . . . and 
provide leads to businesses in terms of areas that they have been 
able to develop these contacts. And I think really what says it 
all is the amount that we’ve seen in terms of exports. Export 
sales in Saskatchewan in the year 2000 increased by 28 per 
cent. So I think that is . . . it speaks a world of what STEP has 
been able to achieve working with industry, on behalf of 
industry, and partnership with the provincial government. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, those numbers are 
very encouraging. And I certainly would support any initiative 
that would increase numbers like that for the benefit of this 
province. 
 
I do know though, Mr. Minister, that in some of these exports 
out of Saskatchewan and internationally from my previous 
experience in an earlier life I realized that there’s always 
complications. The deals aren’t always very smooth. Most of 
them are fine. Some get very complicated and some can get 
actually downright messy. What risk is the province at in any of 
the exports by the companies? Is there any risk by the province 
as such? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With 
respect to the risk to the provincial government, STEP provides 
law and recourse advice. They would use normal business 
practices to determine agreements that they may reach with 
people in other parts of the world and companies in other parts 
of the world. But with respect to the liability of the province 
through STEP, the answer is there isn’t any. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is STEP itself at 
any risk? If a particular export deal goes a bit sour, is STEP as 
an organization at any risk and through them the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the answer is no. 
They do provide advice. They provide leads. They provide 
market research, but it’s all non-recourse in terms of what STEP 
does. I’m told that some of the contracts that happen with 
SEDA (Saskatchewan Economic Developers Association), you 
know, their services basically from the members that are 
purchased by SEDA through STEP, there’s insurance that is 
available and that is used in those circumstances. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. To encourage 
exports out of Canada there is some kind of financial incentives, 
loan guarantees, or export . . . such entities as Export 
Development bank. Does the province of Saskatchewan assist 
STEP with those kinds of export dollars as well in terms of 
bridging financing or just some kind of on a loan basis to help 
them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the province has no 
programs with respect to the issues that you’ve raised. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, it may be in the future 
something that you may want to look at if that would facilitate 
the loan . . . the exporting of any particular commodity from 
this province. I know there are other agencies that will look 
after that and private capital funds as well. But it may be 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 833 

 

something we want to look at. 
 
Mr. Minister, are there specified trade offices overseas? Is there 
anybody from Saskatchewan assigned to particular areas that 
either live full time maintaining an office or is there any 
Saskatchewan people that are specific agents for specific parts 
of the world? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 
last question, I’m told that the officials of STEP work with I 
guess 148 trade offices, 600 trade commissioners around the 
world. We as a province though have trade offices as such. 
 
I want to just refer back to a question or a comment that the 
member made previously with respect to financing. STEP 
works very, very closely with banks, with the Export 
Development Corporation in terms of putting our exporters 
together with capital to help them facilitate the sales across in 
other parts of the world. 
 
So the work really that STEP does is created with very limited 
liability or little if any in terms of helping to facilitate 
Saskatchewan business opportunities in other parts of the world. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would . . . as I 
said, I would encourage both the agencies, STEP and Tourism 
Saskatchewan, to continue doing the work they’re doing 
because of the outside-the-province dollar that they’re 
generating. 
 
And I don’t have any further questions in terms of either 
Tourism Saskatchewan or STEP. Maybe in the future if there’s 
other questions that come up as we continue I’ll try and pass 
them along to you, to alert your officials from those two 
agencies at least, whether we need to address further questions. 
But I appreciate them being here to answer those questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I want to say, on behalf of our partners in Tourism 
Saskatchewan and STEP, that we very much appreciate the 
comments that you’ve made in terms of the effectiveness and 
the ability of both organizations to serve industry here in 
Saskatchewan very well. 
 
And I want to say that although the member opposite and I 
don’t agree on every issue on this, these are certainly two areas 
that we can. And I want to say that with respect to ongoing 
information, or dialogue in terms of the operations of either of 
these entities, I would certainly be more than willing to work 
with the member opposite in terms of facilitating that 
understanding. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chair, if I could I would like to thank 
the officials of the minister for responding to the questions that 
we had this evening. We have ongoing questions in other areas, 
but at this point I appreciate the response that we were able to 
achieve. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:04. 
 
 


