















































Hansard: May 24, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1273 
 May 24, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand today to present a petition from constituents in 
my area of the province who would like to voice their opinion 
in support of comprehensive tobacco control legislation. And 
the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places and workplaces, and to control youth access 
to tobacco products. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Guernsey, Humboldt, Cudworth, St. Brieux, 
Lake Lenore, St. Gregor, and Lanigan, and also Middle Lake. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
here about the government’s report, the Saskatchewan EMS 
Development Project, which calls for provincially run and 
centrally operated ambulance services. Mr. Speaker, the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from my 
hometown, the community of Beechy. And I’m pleased to 
present this petition on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
today regarding the Fyke report: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena health centre 
be maintained at its current level of service at minimum, 
with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and doctoral services 
available, as well as laboratory, public health, home care, 
and long-term care services for the users in our district and 
beyond. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Wadena. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the Assembly 
today to present petitions on behalf of the people from Swift 
Current and area concerned with the state of the Swift Current 

Hospital. The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by citizens of 
Swift Current and the community of Ponteix, south of the city 
of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: —Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency who 
are concerned about their ambulance service, and the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Radville, Lake Alma, 
Weyburn, Gladmar, and Vernon, BC (British Columbia). 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the EMS (emergency medical services) service. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance service. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is presented . . . is signed by people in 
the Redvers area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available, as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to the users from our district, 



1274 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2001 

 

southeast Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and 
beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Bellegarde, Redvers, 
Storthoaks, and I know that I’ve seen the name of 
Gainsborough on these also, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also arise today to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about poor cellular 
telephone coverage in their area. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of Rabbit 
Lake, Hafford, Blaine Lake, Leask, Radisson, Borden, 
Perdue, Maymont, Mistawasis, and Muskeg Lake. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from the Blaine Lake town and 
area. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
signed by good citizens concerned about the high rates of 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Davidson, Radville, Regina, 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by folks of the province. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall gas and oil revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to the Saskatchewan 
consumers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks from Unity, 
Evesham, Cut Knife, and also Senlac. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with a petition to stop further cuts at Assiniboia 
Pioneer Lodge. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed in total by the citizens 
of Mossbank and Mazenod. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition. 
The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to call on the 
provincial and federal governments to provide immediate 
financial assistance to the city of North Battleford in order 
to facilitate necessary improvements to the North 
Battleford water treatment plant. 

 
Your petitioners come from the communities of Battleford and 
North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

These are petitions of citizens of the province requesting 
that services be maintained at the Weyburn General 
Hospital, the Bengough, Radville, and Pangman health 
centres. 

 
And 11 other petitions that are addendums to previously tabled 
sessional papers. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Estimates 

 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Ms. Harpauer, Vice-Chair 
of the Standing Committee on Estimates, presents the second 
report of the committee which is hereby tabled. 
 
The committee has adopted the estimates of the Legislative 
Assembly and recommends as follows: 
 

That upon concurrence of this report by the Assembly, the 
sums as recorded and approved shall be included in the 
next Appropriation Bill for consideration by the Legislative 
Assembly. 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move the motion, seconded 
by the member from Regina Northeast: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Estimates be now concurred in. 

 



May 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1275 

 

Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
very happy to introduce to you and to members of the 
legislature today, 28 students from MacNeill School in my 
constituency. And they are accompanied by their teacher, Ms. 
Cindy Nelson. And parents who are accompanying them are 
Ms. Shay, Ms. Hustak, and Ms. Brightman. 
 
I would like you to all join together with me in welcoming them 
to this legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
also like to introduce a school group visiting today from St. 
George School, from my riding in Saskatoon Northwest. They 
are 34 grade 7 students accompanied by teachers, Ms. Troesch 
and Ms. Koller; and chaperones Ms. Holt, Ms. Sadoway, and 
Mr. Perrin. 
 
And they are here obviously to observe the proceedings and I’m 
sure will be heightened by question period. I have had the 
opportunity to visit St. George School a couple of years ago and 
to address the grade 7 and 8 class at that time. 
 
And I would ask all members to welcome the grade 7 class 
from St. George School. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 
15 grade 6-to-8 students from the Gainsborough School, seated 
in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are accompanied by their 
teacher, Pat Wolensky, along with chaperones Kim Murray, 
George Howden, and Rod Murray. 
 
I would ask that everyone welcome them here today and hope 
they enjoy the proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Party Meeting 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last night was a big night in Saskatoon for the Saskatchewan 
Party. Speaking to a packed house, the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party laid out his vision for rebuilding our great 
province. 
 
And I say rebuilding, Mr. Speaker, because after a decade of 
NDP (New Democratic Party) mismanagement, Saskatchewan 
has been driven to the bottom of the economic ladder. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party message was very well received by 
more than 750 community, business, and education leaders in 
Saskatoon, many of whom expressed the desperate need to get 
rid of this tired and arrogant NDP government. 

Mr. Speaker, the most commonly asked question last night was, 
how soon before the next election so we can have a chance to 
get rid of this NDP government? Mr. Speaker, it’s clear the 
people of Saskatchewan are ready for a change. 
 
And apparently the sentiment is even held by some prominent 
members of the NDP. The NDP member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley was so interested in how to fix the mess his 
government has created, he drove all the way to Saskatoon to 
hear the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party first-hand. 
 
Former NDP presidents, NDP leadership candidates also took in 
the event in Saskatoon last night and by all accounts, Mr. 
Speaker, even these long-time supporters of the NDP liked what 
they heard. 
 
It’s great news for the Saskatchewan Party and the people of 
Saskatchewan but for the NDP I’m afraid the forecast is for 
more rain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Opposition Checklist for Growing Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Up until yesterday 
I couldn’t understand what all this fuss about these so-called 
brown envelopes was about. But you know, Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I too got a brown envelope. Contained therein was the 
opposition leader’s speech for that night. 
 
I never thought I’d live to hear it, Mr. Speaker, but the first 
words in that speech were Saskatchewan . . . is booming. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t agree more. 
 
But I knew it was too good to be true and alas, Mr. Speaker, it 
was. It wasn’t long before the opposition leader launched into 
that same old checklist for growing Saskatchewan. 
 
But let’s look at the checklist. Number one was cut taxes. Well 
that’s really new. I can only imagine why they didn’t bother to 
support the budget that did just that. 
 
Number two: reduce the public debt. Now let’s just say that this 
time I hope when the opposition promises it that they offer us a 
money-back guarantee. Actually we’d just be happy to get the 
money back from the 1980s. 
 
Number three, number three: the opposition leader says stop 
propping up dying industries. I’m waiting for the list as to what 
those dying industries are, Mr. Speaker, but I’m sure it’s 
coming. 
 
Rounding up the list, what else: welfare reform. Mr. Speaker, it 
seems it’s those pesky poor people that are holding us down. 
 
This is clearly, Mr. Speaker, the same old recipe for economic 
success. It’s voodoo economic, trickle-down, snake-oil formula 
that we saw in the ’80s and we want nothing to do with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 



1276 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2001 

 

Congratulations to Graduating Students 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to take this opportunity to recognize the thousands of 
post-secondary education students in Saskatchewan who are 
taking part in convocation and graduation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
take this opportunity to recognize the thousands of 
post-secondary education students in Saskatchewan who are 
taking part in convocation and graduation ceremonies over the 
next few days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of the students who have completed their 
education at one of our universities or technical institutes are 
undoubtedly excited and perhaps even a little nervous as they 
leave this relative safety of the post-secondary education system 
to enter the workforce. 
 
I hope that they feel very proud of the work that they have put 
in earning their degrees and diplomas. Finishing a 
post-secondary education program, whether it be at the 
university or one of our technical schools, is no easy task, Mr. 
Speaker. And I want to congratulate each and every one of 
those students for their major accomplishment. 
 
I also want to recognize the faculty and administration at the 
various post-secondary institutions who work very hard to 
provide Saskatchewan students with their best education 
possible, sometimes under very challenging circumstances. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, congratulations to all those taking 
part in the convocation and graduation ceremonies this month. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Business Awards Banquet 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There was a fine 
awards dinner last night in the great city of Swift Current. The 
third annual Swift Current Business Excellence Awards 
banquet. There are three things that need to be said about this 
event. 
 
First of course, on behalf of the Assembly, I want to 
congratulate the winners as well as all the nominees in all seven 
categories. 
 
The winners were Etcetera, Etcetera for property appearance; 
Standard Motors for heritage; Boston Pizza for new business; 
Best Western Inn for customer service; McElheran Woodworks 
for young entrepreneur; Wheatland Machine Shop for business 
choice; and Pharmasave for business of the year. 
 
Second, it is worth noting that the sponsors of the event were 
the chamber of commerce, the credit union, the city, the Royal 
Bank, our Department of Economic Development, the Business 
Development Bank of Canada, two area development 
corporations, and SaskTel. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, a generous mix of private, public, 

Crown, co-operative, and service organizations, the same mix 
which enriches our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Economic Development 
was in Swift Current to bring greetings and share in this 
celebration of business success in Saskatchewan. The member 
from Swift Current and his colleagues were not. Pity. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

West Central Pelleting Limited 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the House today to inform members of West Central Pelleting 
Limited, a community-based company located in the town of 
Wilkie that processes grain screenings into quality-assured 
livestock feeds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the board of directors of West Central Pelleting 
recently announced a $10 per share dividend paid to 
shareholders. This means more than $82,000 will be returned to 
shareholders under declared dividends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also pleased to say that West Central Pelleting 
Limited has completed a profitable year of operations with 
retained earnings of $22.45 per share. Although it’s a relatively 
young company, West Central Pelleting has already expanded 
at the Wilkie site and is planning future development. 
 
According to director Paul Marshall, the company is looking at 
future growth in two areas: a second plant at Wolseley, and 
improving the service and encouraging growth of the cattle 
industry in its region. 
 
What makes this West Central Pelleting Ltd. so special, Mr. 
Speaker, is the fact that this company has realized success 
without government subsidies, intervention, or bail out. This 
kind of business success, the members on this side of the House 
are all too happy to talk about, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Special Needs Transit Vehicle 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, we all know how important 
transportation is. It enables a person to access services, to work 
and to live independently within the community. For people 
with special needs, access to reliable and safe transportation is 
important and it can be hard to obtain at times. This is why I 
was pleased to be in Moose Jaw last Friday when the member 
from Moose Jaw North and I had the pleasure of presenting a 
cheque to Mayor Schwinghamer. 
 
On behalf of the government, we presented $55,000 to the city 
of Moose Jaw to go towards purchasing a new special needs 
transit vehicle. A new special transit vehicle will ensure that all 
residents of Moose Jaw are able to fully participate in and 
contribute to their community. 
 
The money for the province’s contribution comes from the 
Centenary Fund. And as we know, the Centenary Fund was 



May 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1277 

 

established to leave a legacy for Saskatchewan’s centennial, and 
for future generations. It is used to fund projects that are of 
provincial or regional interest and that develop municipal 
infrastructure. 
 
Moose Jaw is one of 78 communities to receive funding 
through the transit for the disabled program, which supports 
both the operational and capital costs. 
 
I want to congratulate the city of Moose Jaw for its dedication 
to providing this important service to its citizens. The addition 
of a new special needs transit vehicle will surely better the lives 
of many residents in Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Melfort Mayor Inducted into Saskatchewan 
Baseball Hall of Fame 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
members, the esteemed mayor of Melfort will be inducted into 
the Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame this summer. 
 
Mayor Dub Henderson started playing ball while attending 
school in Simmie, Saskatchewan. He went on to teach in 
several rural communities in Saskatchewan and continued to 
play ball wherever he went. His Worship usually played in the 
outfield as centre fielder, but in the later years of his baseball 
career he switched to catcher. 
 
Over the years, Dub enthusiastically supported the sport he 
loved not only by playing, but coaching all ages from the 
youngest ball players to midget teams. 
 
Dub was often found acting as an umpire at sports days and 
exhibition games. He also helped to organize games, sell 
tickets, prepare ball diamonds, and held positions such as team 
manager and president of the local athletic association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly, I ask that you join 
me in taking our baseball hats off to His Worship Mayor Dub 
Henderson for his induction into the Saskatchewan Baseball 
Hall of Fame. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inquiry Into North Battleford Water Problems 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Yesterday a $5 million lawsuit was launched on 
behalf of victims of the North Battleford tainted water scandal. 
The lawsuit names three provincial government departments as 
well as the Saskatchewan Water Corporation and the 
Battlefords Health District. 
 
The Justice minister has also announced the appointment of 
Justice Robert D. Laing to lead an independent public inquiry 
into the tainted water scandal. 
 
Will the Premier make the commitment today that the lawsuit 
filed yesterday will not delay or postpone the investigation and 

final report of Justice Laing’s independent public inquiry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, a very similar question was 
put to me by the media this morning and I answered that no, 
there will be no delay in the inquiry that we’ve asked Justice 
Laing to conduct. There will be no delay as a result of the 
launch of the lawsuit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Termination of Employee of Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure you’re 
glad to see the enthusiasm for question period today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this House I asked the Minister of 
Justice if he felt a special constable has a duty to uphold the 
law, co-operate in police investigations, and provide any 
evidence of illegal activity to the proper authorities. 
 
The minister agreed with that statement. Then, moments later, 
we heard that the NDP fired a special constable for doing 
exactly that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Justice. Given the statements 
the minister made yesterday, how can he support SLGA’s 
(Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) decision to fire 
the supervisor of investigations for providing evidence to the 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police)? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday in response to the member’s questions, I wasn’t 
aware that he was raising a case-specific matter. Today it is 
quite clear that it is a case-specific matter, that this matter will 
be before the courts and plainly — and the member would 
know this — it would be inappropriate for me or indeed any 
other minister to comment any further on it. 
 
And I’d ask the member to indeed respect the roles of the 
Legislative Assembly and the courts and to respect that the 
process is one which we should not interfere with. And indeed, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d remind the member that these very matters that 
he’s asking will be addressed in that very court proceedings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — We had the effort of waffling made 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, by a different minister. This is not 
before the courts as of today, and if this government wasn’t so 
inept it would never have gone before the courts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP has a very disturbing 
view of the relationship between government and the criminal 
justice system. The NDP says that cabinet documents should be 
withheld from the police even if they are crucial to the 
investigation. The NDP says the cabinet — the cabinet — not 
the police should decide what evidence is turned over to the 
police. In short, the NDP believes that the cabinet is above the 



1278 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2001 

 

law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s action in this matter constitutes 
political interference in a police investigation. Does the 
Minister of Justice believe that the cabinet, not the police, 
should decide what information is passed on to the RCMP and 
what information is withheld from the RCMP? 
 
Does the Minister of Justice support this kind of political 
interference with our police investigations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’ll restate my answer to the last question. This matter is a 
matter which will be addressed — which will be addressed — 
in due course in the normal proceedings that these matters 
follow, i.e. before the courts. 
 
It would be inappropriate for me to respond and indeed, Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s inappropriate to continue this line of 
questioning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Out of respect for 
the people of this province, we will continue this questioning 
until we get some answer out of one of those two ministers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, in his affidavit, RCMP Mike 
Morrisey says, and I quote: 
 

I requested (requested) a copy of this document. I wanted 
the document so I could accurately complete a crime report 
on my continuing investigation into SIGA (Mr. Speaker) 
and the SLGA’s knowledge of any criminal activity. 

 
Repeat, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . and the SLGA’s knowledge of any criminal activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the RCMP officer requested a copy of this cabinet 
document. He thought it was important for his investigation. To 
the Minister of Justice again: what was Joe Dosenberger 
supposed to do at this point? 
 
Yesterday the minister said that a special constable has a duty to 
co-operate with police investigations. Doesn’t he have a duty to 
turn over this document to the RCMP once it was requested? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is kind of 
interesting, sometimes the opposition likes process and 
sometimes the opposition doesn’t like process. 
 
It just so happens, Mr. Speaker, that the process that is 
appropriate for this instance is that the issue will be resolved in 
the normal court proceedings. And, Mr. Speaker, the varying 
questions the member is answering will be at the core of that 
very court proceedings. 

I would just ask the member to respect the process that our 
courts follow and respect the process, which makes it 
impossible for me to respond to those specific questions dealing 
with the administration of justice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Isn’t it shameful, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government is so inept they have to have their own dirty 
laundry taken care of by the justice system through the courts 
when they should handle it themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this document was specifically requested by the 
RCMP as evidence in an ongoing police investigation. Joe 
Dosenberger complied with the RCMP request and, for that, he 
was fired, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Does that Minister of Justice believe that Joe Dosenberger 
should have complied with this request? He can answer that. Or 
does he believe, as the Gaming minister does, that he should 
have taken his request to cabinet and let cabinet decide what 
information should be given to the RCMP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what I can say is 
that this matter will be pursued in the normal course of justice. 
This matter will be addressed in that way. 
 
The member should know, and the member indeed does know, 
I’m sure, that this line of questioning is inappropriate. It is not 
. . . Mr. Speaker, the questions that the member is raising will 
indeed be addressed in the proceedings that we know will be 
taking place. And I would ask the member to simply respect the 
role of this Legislative Assembly and respect the role of the 
courts. 
 
I am respecting the rights of this Assembly and the role of the 
Assembly, and I am respecting the role of the courts, and he 
should do the same thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, how can the minister stand 
there and thumb his nose at the people of this province by not 
answering a question asked by the opposition? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we heard both the 
NDP minister of Liquor and Gaming and her hand-picked CEO 
(chief executive officer) — who is just getting her notes — so 
that the cabinet document contained absolutely no information 
of value to the RCMP. 
 
Who are they to make that judgment? Here we have a veteran, 
31 years with the RCMP, requesting a document from a 28-year 
veteran of the RCMP as part of an ongoing police investigation, 
but the NDP says they know better, Mr. Speaker. They will 
decide when to hand over a document to the RCMP. 
 



May 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1279 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister and her CEO are neither qualified 
 or not impartial enough to make that decision, yet the NDP 
wants to take criminal justice decisions made by the police and 
turn them into political decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Minister of Justice believe that ministers 
should be making ongoing political decisions about police 
investigations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — What I believe, Mr. Speaker, is that 
we should follow the normal course here. We should await the 
court’s decision. Mr. Speaker, we shouldn’t try to interfere, we 
shouldn’t try to interfere with the way in which the courts will 
conduct their work and we shouldn’t try to prejudice a case 
which will come before the courts. 
 
The member knows how difficult it is for courts to resolve these 
matters in the first place. He should not be trying to push his 
own political agenda on this question. It’s a serious matter, Mr. 
Speaker. It will be addressed by the courts. The member knows 
that and the member should not only appreciate that but he 
should respect that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — This, Mr. Speaker, has absolutely nothing — 
absolutely nothing — to do with where the courts are at today. 
 
The question again for the minister is: does the Minister of 
Justice, very simply put, believe that ministers should be 
making political decisions about police investigations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, what I believe is that we 
should respect the system, we should respect the process, and 
we should await the decision the court will arrive at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member knows this. It is not this side, Mr. 
Speaker, which is playing politics with this issue. It’s the 
member opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the interference with 
police investigation didn’t stop there. The government not only 
fired its lead investigator in the SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian 
Gaming Authority) case, and then it went to considerable 
efforts to retrieve that cabinet document from the RCMP. 
 
According to RCMP Mike Morrisey, SLGA took an extreme 
step of going outside its own organization and hiring a private 
investigator who demanded the cabinet document back from the 
RCMP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the government interfering in a police 
investigation by demanding that document back from the 
RCMP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll try again. As the 
member knows, this . . . the Liquor and Gaming Authority is 
being sued by a former employee. He’s making it quite clear 
that he’s talking about this specific case. The matter will be 
before the courts and the member knows that I can’t comment 
any further. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I will ask the minister, Mr. Speaker, a 
question that has nothing to do with the courts, is not before the 
courts. It is this question: why is the government interfering by 
going back to the RCMP and asking for documents to come out 
of the file the RCMP has so they can hide them in the cabinet? 
That’s the question. Nothing to do with what’s in front of the 
courts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member can 
huff and puff as much as he wants. This matter is before the 
courts. He knows that and I can’t comment any further. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — This minister better be praying for rain, Mr. 
Speaker. It’ll be a long, hot, dry summer for him as he 
continues trying to answer these questions by avoiding it. 
 
Again, nothing to do with the court case; with you and with 
your cabinet . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I think the member knows what I’m going to 
say. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — As he very well knows, it has something to 
do with his cabinet and how his cabinet operates. And here’s 
the question: why was the government interfering in a police 
investigation by demanding documents back from the RCMP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I suppose I could try and 
say this longer and more fully and in simpler language. The 
member knows that this matter is . . . this matter, Mr. Speaker, 
will be addressed before a court. 
 
The member knows that the surrounding circumstances of all 
that he raises will be addressed. Mr. Speaker, I ask him to 
respect that court process and I ask him to respect, Mr. Speaker, 
his role in asking questions which are important to this House. 
It does not help, Mr. Speaker, when the opposition does not 
respect the courts of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great cop-out. 
He’s going to answer the same question, the same way — 
maybe in simpler terms. It has nothing to do with the courts. It 
has to do with his cabinet and he’s avoiding the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Kathy Langlois went one step further in 
interfering in this investigation. On June 22, 2000, SLGA 



1280 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2001 

 

investigator, Ron Ferguson, was assigned as the new lead 
investigator in this case. He received the case file from Joe 
Dosenberger. We’ve discussed that for a while. But even before 
he had a chance to look at it, Kathy Langlois came barging into 
his office, Mr. Speaker, took two pieces of paper out of that 
particular file — presumably the cabinet information item — 
and then left. 
 
Why was the government interfering in that investigation by 
taking information out of that file, Mr. Speaker? Why is the 
government making such a concerted effort to recover that 
document that both the RCMP and its own investigator saw as 
being pertinent to the case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, all these issues will be 
resolved in due course before the courts, and I would ask the 
member, as I have asked him before, to respect that process. 
There is nothing that will be clearer than once a decision is 
made by the courts. I would ask him to have a little patience 
and to respect the process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The only one that hopes for patience on our 
side is that minister hoping that we’ll drag this on till it does go 
before the courts, where it isn’t today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on June 22, 2000, Joe Dosenberger was removed 
from this investigation and it was reassigned to Ron Ferguson. 
The SLGA then went out of its way to ensure its new lead 
investigator knew absolutely nothing about the case. 
 
Listen to this, Mr. Speaker. They took the cabinet document 
away from him. Then when he asked a senior SLGA executive 
to be briefed on the alleged wrongdoings of SIGA and the 
nature of the investigations conducted to date, his request was 
denied for reasons of confidentiality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s incredible. They turn the job over to 
someone else and say but we’re not going to tell you what to 
investigate or what to do or what to find. Then they refuse to 
brief their new lead investigator. Is the NDP trying to get to the 
bottom of this matter or are they just trying to bury it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Justice. Don’t these actions 
constitute interference with a police investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the more the member 
asks the questions, the more he confirms the point that this is a 
matter that is before the courts. The SLGA has been sued by a 
former employee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member talks about police investigations and 
so on. I ask him, once again, to respect the process. This matter 
will come, this matter will come out. All the facts, Mr. Speaker, 
before the . . . will be before the judge, and the judge will make 
a decision on the very questions the member is asking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I also have some questions for 
the minister of Gaming and about what she knew and when she 
knew it. 
 
The minister maintains she knew nothing about the problems 
with Dutch Lerat and SIGA until June 2000. Yet — yet, Mr. 
Speaker, SLGA’s own former lead investigator says, and I 
quote: 
 

Since 1997 Sgt. Morrisey and I had shared highly 
confidential information and intelligence about the various 
illegal activities of Dutch Lerat. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Dutch Lerat has been under investigation by the 
RCMP and the SLGA since 1997. Yet the minister claims she 
knew nothing about it until June 2000. How is that possible, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
And if the minister is telling the truth, why was the SLGA 
withholding this vital information from her? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member continues to raise 
questions about the specific case that he began addressing 
yesterday. And I can tell the member that this matter is before 
the courts; it would be inappropriate for me to respond. The 
member knows that, and I ask the member to respect that 
process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This has nothing to 
do with the courts. This has to do with what the minister knew 
and when she knew it. That’s the important part. And I don’t 
think she’s in court as of today. 
 
So the question again for the minister of Gaming, and if the 
minister was telling the truth yesterday, why was the SLGA 
holding this information from her? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
would know that I have answered this question very often in the 
past and would continue to answer the question that he poses. 
 
As a regulator, Mr. Speaker, SLGA is involved in many 
ongoing investigations. There wouldn’t be anything that would 
come to me unless a wrongdoing had been verified. 
 
I would tell the member opposite I was not aware of any 
investigation in the nature that he’s talking about. What I 
became aware of was the information that had been verified, 
Mr. Speaker, verified by the external auditor in early working 
papers. Once it became a matter of verifying that information, it 
was given to me on June 14. I acted quickly to take action on 
the matters that were placed before me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister has a 
very mixed-up view of her job description. She thinks it is her 



May 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1281 

 

job to interfere with police investigations but it’s not her job to 
keep informed about SLGA’s ongoing investigations about 
SIGA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister’s explanation doesn’t pass the smell 
test. The RCMP and the SLGA have been investigating Dutch 
Lerat since 1997. In the spring of ’99 the Provincial Auditor 
identified the concerns. Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty hard to believe, 
but if it’s true, then someone at Liquor and Gaming was 
extremely negligent in keeping the minister briefed on her own 
department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why was the minister unaware of the problems 
surrounding Dutch Lerat when he was under investigation in 
1997? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
interesting on one hand that I would be interfering and on the 
other hand that I should have somehow known about innuendo 
or allegations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not to know those kinds of things. Mr. 
Speaker, what I do know is that once an investigation verifies 
information — not innuendo or speculation or gossip — when 
information has been verified on an individual, that information 
is brought to me, Mr. Speaker, in my role as minister 
responsible by the Provincial Auditor. That information came to 
me June 14 in a verified manner by a letter from the Provincial 
Auditor. Once that became a matter of knowledge to myself, we 
took action very swiftly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — How, Mr. Speaker, can things be verified 
when this cabinet goes around pulling papers out of files and 
documents that the RCMP have collected? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to a statement by RCMP, Sgt. 
Mike Morrisey. He said and I quote: 
 

I wanted the document so I could accurately complete a 
crime report on my continuing investigation into SIGA and 
the SLGA’s knowledge of any criminal activity. 

 
In other words, he wanted to know what did the government 
know and when did they know it. That’s why he asked for that 
cabinet document. That’s why Joe Dosenberger gave him the 
cabinet document, and for that he was fired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the SLGA trying to cover up its knowledge 
of the SIGA scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re back to the 
issue of the investigator and the case before the court, Mr. 
Speaker. And I would just remind the member that this matter 
will come out at the court . . . these issues will come out at the 
court proceedings. The member will know that, and the member 
should respect the fact that all these questions will be answered, 
Mr. Speaker, by the judge, as the judge decides the very issues 

that the member is raising. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whether or not these matters should be . . . 
whether these matters are privileged, Mr. Speaker, all those 
matters will come out before the court. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 

Youth Planning to Leave Province 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Canada West 
Foundation has issued a report which reveals that a staggering 
40 per cent of Saskatchewan people aged 18 to 24 anticipate 
moving out of the province within five years. 
 
That’s 42,000 young people voting with their feet because they 
see no future here. The expectation of moving is even higher 
among those who say they are students. 
 
In effect, Mr. Speaker, we are paying to educate our young 
people to leave. Saskatchewan’s future is in jeopardy. This is a 
matter of urgency, but I frankly don’t sense any urgency on the 
part of this government; I hear yawns over there. 
 
Are they asleep at the switch? Mr. Premier, are you aware of 
this ticking time bomb of our best . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member kindly just restate his 
question through the Chair, please. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I ask what is the Premier going to 
do to defuse this time bomb of 42,000 of our best young people 
planning to leave us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
Saskatchewan economy, I want to say that this government, and 
the people of this province, frankly, have a lot of faith in the 
future, and job opportunities for Saskatchewan’s young people. 
 
This economy has grown for eight consecutive years. The GDP 
(gross domestic product) has been leading the country, with the 
exception of Alberta on occasion. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I want to say that the 
biggest opposition to young people staying here and working 
and raising their families, is the attitude . . . the negative attitude 
of those members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the job index . . . well, if they will listen . . . well, 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t . . . if they won’t listen, there’s no sense me 
trying to . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Energy Conservation and Ethanol Production 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we all know that two of the serious challenges we face here in 
Saskatchewan are the rising cost of energy and the revitalization 



1282 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2001 

 

of our rural economy. These issues affect all of us and they 
demand, in my view, careful thought and long-term solutions. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, our government today made a very 
exciting announcement on energy conservation and ethanol 
production. 
 
Over the next several months, two MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) will be working on special assignments. 
The member from Saskatoon Greystone has been named 
Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Energy and Mines. He 
will coordinate a greenprint for energy conservation. 
 
As you, Mr. Speaker, and all members will know, this particular 
member has great expertise and passion for energy 
conservation. And he will be a great asset to the people of 
Saskatchewan in this area. 
 
With the market price for natural gas and oil rapidly escalating, 
we must develop practical initiatives to help Saskatchewan 
people save money. And each step we take to reduce energy 
consumption is also a step in reducing harmful greenhouse 
gases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Greystone will 
combine the ideas of Saskatchewan people and interested 
stakeholders with his own good sense to come up with a plan 
that will help us save energy and save money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley has 
been named Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Economic 
and Co-operative Development. He will be also working closely 
with the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister Responsible 
for Rural Revitalization. 
 
This member will coordinate a greenplan for ethanol production 
in Saskatchewan. The member has demonstrated a keen interest 
in the possibilities for expanded ethanol production in our 
province. There could be, Mr. Speaker, significant benefits to 
developing a vibrant ethanol industry in the province. Ethanol 
production could allow us to boost the rural economy, stimulate 
economic investment, and improve our environment at the same 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m just going to pause in the statement to note 
that members of the opposition do not seem to have an interest 
in ethanol production, in the potentials for rural Saskatchewan, 
in the protection of our environment. And I’m sorry to hear that 
this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m also going to observe off-text here that 
the member from Regina Qu’Appelle was so enthused about 
this assignment, I’m told that he was in Saskatoon just last night 
looking for the raw material to produce ethanol and he tells me 
he may have found some. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley will provide the hard analysis that we need 
to decide whether expanded ethanol production offers real 
benefits for Saskatchewan people and for our environment. 
 

Mr. Speaker, over the next several months these two members 
will be analyzing issues surrounding energy conservation and 
ethanol production in our province. They will consult 
homeowners, farmers, environmental organizations, and 
business people, working with them to design green plant . . . 
greenprints for energy conservation and ethanol production. 
Focused action plans for each of these areas will be ready by the 
fall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these members have agreed to take on these extra 
duties with no extra remuneration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as they complete their work, I know that the input 
of Saskatchewan people will be of great value. Mr. Speaker, 
there will be e-mail opportunities, Internet site opportunities, 
and phone numbers; and those will be publicized and 
advertised, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to thank the Premier for sending over a copy of his 
statement prior to question period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this current government is heading down the same 
slippery slope of the last administration — the appointment of 
legislative secretaries to fulfill political debts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the government was serious about the current 
energy costs, they would pass some of their windfall profits 
back to the people, back to the homeowners of Saskatchewan. 
This would provide more . . . And provide more, Mr. Speaker, 
than their miserly $25 per household. 
 
Saskatchewan needs to look at all potential energy sources, Mr. 
Speaker — wind, solar, gas, coal, and nuclear, Mr. Speaker. 
Nuclear is very environmentally friendly. You don’t have to 
dam any rivers; you don’t have to dig up any mines, any coal, 
Mr. Speaker; and you don’t have any CO2 emissions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ethanol program is certainly a valuable one. 
The program was started, Mr. Speaker, in Lanigan in the 1980s, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s taken the members opposite, the NDP 
government, 15 years to recognize that it has some value, Mr. 
Speaker. Value that the people of this province and the 
businesses of this province recognized a long time ago, Mr. 
Speaker. They have built a successful ethanol plant in 
Saskatchewan at Lanigan. 
 
What we need now though, Mr. Speaker, is the government to 
get out of the way and allow more of these types of construction 
to take place. Unfortunately though, Mr. Speaker, the newly 
minted Legislative Secretary is one who wears his philosophical 
blinders very tight and believes that only government should be 
allowed to progress and to prosper in this province. 
 
I ask the government, Mr. Speaker, take off those philosophical 
blinders, allow private enterprise to build the ethanol production 
in this province. Government, get out of the road and get off of 
the back of the people. Let them be free to prosper. 



May 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1283 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Battleford on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Leave to respond to the statement, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Ministerial statement. 
 

CommunityNet Telecommunications Network Launched 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday, Saskatchewan took a giant leap forward in Internet 
access and performance. Premier Calvert and several of my 
colleagues, along with a large group of educators and students, 
officially launched CommunityNet, the new broadband 
telecommunications network which was announced in the 
spring budget. 
 
You may not know, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan, through 
SaskTel, was the first — the first — in North America to offer 
commercial high-speed service in 1996. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, CommunityNet will bring high-speed 
Internet access to schools, health centres, government offices in 
366 Saskatchewan communities, the majority of which will be 
in rural and remote areas. 
 
Now currently, 54 per cent of the population has high-speed 
service but, on completion, the majority of the population of 
Saskatchewan will be covered. Over the next three years, we’ll 
connect 834 educational facilities, 310 health facilities, 86 First 
Nations schools, and 256 government offices. And one 
important point to note is that none of these facilities will incur 
increased costs for receiving a great enhancement in their 
services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CommunityNet will help us bridge the gap 
between rural and urban, north and south. And it means that 
location, for the first time possibly in history, won’t dictate the 
type of quality of education that children receive. Location 
won’t limit the kind of health care provided and it won’t be a 
barrier to accessing programs and services. 
 
It’s important to note that CommunityNet will enable SaskTel 
to deploy high speed commercial service sooner and cheaper 
than would have been otherwise possible because we are 
combining resources for mutual benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with CommunityNet, the government is making 
an investment in the future, $71 million to ensure that we have 
accessible, top-notch education, health care, and government 
services. And one of the important points to note is that the 
infrastructure in telecommunication service is enabled by 
SaskTel and the Saskatchewan Communications Network 
allowing us to make these connections and bridging the digital 
divide through provision of affordable Internet service. 
CommunityNet will ensure that Saskatchewan remains 

competitive. 
 
In fact once CommunityNet is operational, some of the smaller 
communities like Tisdale and Meadow Lake will have a higher 
level of connectivity than some parts of downtown Toronto. 
 
Mr. Speaker, starting in June of this year we’ll begin linking 
communities. Over the next year, more than 700 facilities and 
100 communities will be connected. In the following two years, 
the remaining schools, health centres, and government offices 
— roughly 800 in number — and I’m sure that there are many 
anxious people wondering when their community will be 
connected. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer to those queries can be found by 
logging onto the special Web site, www.communitynet.ca. And 
I encourage all members and the public to visit the site to learn 
more about CommunityNet and the exciting way that it’ll 
connect schools, health facilities, and government services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday Saskatchewan took a giant leap forward 
in Internet access and performance. And I want to tell the 
legislature that I’m very proud to report that to the legislature 
today. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. It’s a 
privilege to rise in the Assembly to respond to the minister’s 
statement. And through you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 
minister for providing an advance copy of the ministerial 
statement that she presented here in the Assembly today. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, it is a pleasure to offer 
some comments as it relates to CommunityNet, which was 
originally announced in the budget and now reannounced more 
recently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important for members on both 
sides of the House and the public of Saskatchewan to know that 
they will find little disagreement, I think, in this place about the 
importance of connectivity in every part of the province — rural 
and urban, north and south. Clearly, this is absolutely essential 
for the future . . . for our economic future in this province. If we 
are to take advantage of the new technologies in the global 
economy, we need connectivity. 
 
But as is the case in so many initiatives of this government, 
currently and in the past, they’ve taken a concept, a solid and a 
positive concept, and they’ve clouded it, Mr. Speaker, with 
what I think people will agree are poor decisions as it relates 
specifically to CommunityNet. And I’ll touch briefly on them in 
this response to the ministerial statement. 
 
The first one, Mr. Speaker, and one that has the entire 
information technology industry in this province talking. And 
by the way, Mr. Speaker, we met with many of them last night 
at the dinner that was mentioned earlier for the leader, the 
member for Rosetown-Elrose . . . Biggar. We met with many of 
these IT (information technology) companies. They’re very 
concerned about CommunityNet specifically because it is a sole 
source project for SaskTel. 
 



1284 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2001 

 

(14:30) 
 
Here was an opportunity for the government to use $70 million 
that they’re prepared to invest in a worthwhile concept. They 
were prepared to invest it in a worthwhile concept, but they 
completely shut out the entire IT industry in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to tell you today and, through you, tell the minister, 
the IT industry in this province has taken note of it. And I think 
we’ll be hearing more from them in this Legislative Assembly 
and in the media of the province of their concerns that SaskTel 
has completely shut them out of this particular project. They are 
the sole source benefactor of this IT investment that the 
government has made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out a couple of other concerns 
that we have with the initiative. Although we agree with the 
concept in general, I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that we have 
some concerns. And we’re concerned, Mr. Speaker, specifically 
we’re concerned with the technology that’s being used here, 
because if they were listening to the IT industry instead of 
yelling from their seats, as the member for Regina South is 
doing, if he listened to the small-business IT industry in this 
province, he would hear clearly that they have a concern about 
this technology in particular. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, again yesterday at the dinner I attended in 
Saskatoon, I was in receipt of this document prepared by Robert 
Kavanagh, who’s a Ph.D. (Doctor of Philosophy) from the 
University of Saskatchewan. He spent 29 years working at the 
University of Saskatchewan. He’s currently retired, Mr. 
Speaker, but he spent some time as the vice-president at that 
university in charge of IT issues at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I won’t go into detail, Mr. Speaker, but let me just sum up 
my comments by paraphrasing what he had to say in a 
document I received last night from an IT firm. He says 
recently announced plans to spend — and he had the number; 
he was light on the number, he has 50 million here; it’s 70 
million — to spend 70 million on CommunityNet has the 
potential of being a highly visible failure of stewardship of 
public funds and service of public interest if Saskatchewan 
chooses to spend more money for much less capacity than is 
available in other parts of our country. 
 
These are the concerns we have. We appreciate the concept but 
we will be watching for the details. It’s our job, and we’ll be 
working on behalf of the IT industry in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Occupational Health and Safety 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 39, The 
Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2001 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave 
to make a brief statement with regard to World Catholic 
Education Day. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

World Catholic Education Day 
 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to rise in this Assembly to highlight a special 
event being celebrated in countries throughout the world. Today 
is World Catholic Education Day, a day when Roman Catholic 
schools engage in activities to recognize their contributions to 
education. 
 
Since 1860, Roman Catholic schools have played an important 
role in our province’s K to 12 system. Mr. Speaker, I would like 
to acknowledge the contributions made by Catholic education 
and Catholic schools to our province’s system of publicly 
funded education. I want to commend the Canadian Catholic 
School Trustees’ Association and the Catholic section of the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association for their tremendous 
dedication in preparing young people for their responsibilities 
as caring and respectful citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to extend a warm thank you to 
all the teachers in Catholic schools throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan for their commitment to their students and to the 
excellence that is education in this province. 
 
In closing, I ask that all members of the House join me in 
recognizing the significance of World Catholic Education Day. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: —Mr. Speaker, with leave to respond to the 
minister’s statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Draude: — On behalf of the official opposition, I am 
pleased to join with the minister to highlight World Catholic 
Education Day, and I thank him for the notes he sent over 
previously. 
 
A publicly funded Catholic education system is considered an 
integral part of the growth of our province and has been 
recognized since the mid-1800s. The trustees of the Catholic 
school system spend many hours dealing with the issues 
involving the religious aspect of educating children and we 



May 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1285 

 

commend them for their dedication. We’d also like to thank all 
the educators in the Catholic school system who are committed 
to preparing our children to be responsible, caring citizens. 
 
The significance of World Catholic Education Day is of the 
utmost importance for a large percentage of the children and 
parents in this province. And I ask all members to join with me 
in congratulating everyone involved in this very special day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased today 
to stand and respond on behalf of the government to written 
questions no. 193, 194, and 195. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 193, 194, and 195 
have been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Water Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very proud 
to introduce this amendment to The Water Corporation Act to 
all of you here today. Though few in words, this amendment is 
a very important matter for all of Saskatchewan residents and, 
in fact, for all Canadians. 
 
In summary, the amendment says, and I’ll quote: 
 

Saskatchewan remains opposed to the bulk export of water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note the words, remains opposed. 
Sask Water, and indeed the provincial government, has always 
been opposed to the notion of bulk export of water. I’m proud 
to say that Saskatchewan was one of the first jurisdictions in 
Canada to formally recognize the risks associated with bulk 
water removal and developed . . . in 1992 also adopted a policy 
prohibiting bulk water export. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment we are talking about today is also 
a matter the government introduced a few years ago in a 
document called the Water Management Framework. The 
framework is essentially a blueprint to guide the province in 
future water management activities. 
 
An important part of drafting the framework came from a 
public consultation process with a variety of stakeholder 
groups. From this process Saskatchewan people clearly — 
clearly — indicated their wish to be more involved in water 
management decision making and nearly all who responded 
were opposed to the export of water. To reflect this, action 30 
of the framework calls for the provincial government to develop 
legislation to strengthen current policy preventing the bulk 
export of water. 
 

That’s a bit of a background about why we are talking about 
this today. This amendment solidifies our position on this very 
important issue by including it not only as policy, but including 
it in the very legislation that governs water management in 
Saskatchewan, The Water Corporation Act. 
 
By definition, bulk water removal or export means transporting 
water by rail car, tank, or truck, canal or pipeline, or by using a 
structure such as a dam to divert the natural flow of water in a 
river system to a new location. In most, cases bulk water 
removal is considered to mean moving or exporting raw and/or 
treated grounds or surface water out of the country. 
 
To date, Mr. Speaker, I am happy to report Sask Water has not 
received any requests for large-scale bulk water removal. At the 
same time, we are not content to wait until the day we might get 
such a request because we believe that water demands from 
beyond Saskatchewan’s boundaries could jeopardize water 
supplies for the future use of our provincial residents. We will 
not let that happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to inform you of the province’s right to 
make this amendment. It was the Natural Resources Transfer 
Agreement that gave Saskatchewan ownership of its water 
when the responsibility for natural resources were transferred 
from the federal to the provincial government. By doing so, 
Saskatchewan assumed total authority to manage the province’s 
water resources. This is being done by Sask Water. 
 
And because the province owns the resource, we believe that 
provincial legislation to prohibit bulk water removal is the best 
available option to control the movement of water in bulk 
quantities. 
 
Currently, six other provinces in Canada have water export 
legislation either in place or pending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize the efforts of a number of 
government agencies who have worked on this particular issue. 
Sask Water officials together with their counterparts from 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs, Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management, and Saskatchewan 
Justice have been working diligently to bring us to this day. It’s 
an issue important to them, and I know it’s important to all of 
you here today and, indeed, to all of Saskatchewan and other 
Canadians who don’t want to see our most precious resource 
being shipped to the United States or other countries. 
 
How do I know it’s important? Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a topic 
that’s been in the news quite a lot lately and garners much 
attention each time. In fact, when the issue of bulk water hit the 
national news stage about a year ago, more than 500 people in 
Saskatchewan took the time to write to Sask Water to let us 
know where they stand on this issue. And they told us in no 
uncertain terms, they are against bulk water export. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to emphasize again the 
importance of this amendment being discussed here today. It’s 
something the Saskatchewan government supports. It’s 
something many Saskatchewan citizens have told us they want. 
And it’s something we have the authority to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, water is our most precious resource and we here in 



1286 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2001 

 

Saskatchewan are fortunate to enjoy large supplies of good 
quality water. This amendment to The Water Corporation Act 
will help us to retain this resource. 
 
Let me assure you that, as the province’s water manager, Sask 
Water will continue to work, to manage, protect, develop, 
control, and administer the province’s water and related land 
resources for the benefit of all Saskatchewan people today and 
tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 
12, The Water Corporation Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this Bill, as the minister outlined, deals with the 
transfer of water between watersheds. Nowhere in reading this, 
Mr. Speaker, do I see the term bulk water sales. Rather, it talks 
of the transfer of water between watersheds. 
 
The minister, I listened carefully, didn’t explain what he meant 
in the transfer of water between watersheds. Is he talking about, 
Mr. Speaker, the transfer of water out of one creek, one 
watershed, to another watershed? 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, right now we’re suffering a drought 
across the western half of this province. If we’re to be denied, 
Mr. Speaker, the opportunity to transfer water between 
watersheds, that means that it would be impossible to transfer 
water from one creek across into another watershed area, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we need the ability to store water 
and to transfer water in times of drought. And perhaps, Mr. 
Speaker, this very legislation that the minister is presenting 
today will deny us that opportunity, Mr. Speaker. If, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister had wanted to deal with bulk water sales 
outside of this country, then why doesn’t the legislation say so? 
But no place in here, Mr. Speaker, does it talk about bulk water 
sales. But it talks about the transfer of water between 
watersheds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It says yes, there are exceptions. If you load up your 5-gallon 
water can to go camping and put it in your vehicle and drive up 
to La Ronge from Regina, that is allowed, Mr. Speaker, even 
though it is a transfer of water between watersheds. That’s 
permitted. Or if the Boy Scouts load up their canteens to go for 
a hike from the Wascana Creek to the Moose Jaw River, that 
would be acceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But no place does it say anything, Mr. Speaker, about bulk 
water sales. This really reminds me, Mr. Speaker, of the NDP 
cry in the 1980s against the Rafferty-Alameda project. Mr. 
Speaker, those dams were for storage. They claimed that they 
were for storage and for the sale of water to the US (United 
States). 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Chicken Littles in the NDP didn’t 
realize that without those dams in place the Americans were 
already getting all of the water for free, Mr. Speaker — for free. 

Mr. Speaker, this is another simple example of that, that this 
government is hollering the sky is falling, the sky is falling, 
when there isn’t even any proposals for any bulk water sales 
outside of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m glad though to see that the government is not 
going to have Sask Water involved in a commercial enterprise 
dealing with the sale of water. Because, Mr. Speaker, we simply 
cannot afford to have any more losses of money through 
SaskPower’s inept — no, excuse me, not SaskPower — Sask 
Water’s inept and this government’s inept business acumen, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I stated earlier, there are no prospects in the 
near future for any bulk water sales, but Chicken Little 
continues to claim the sky is falling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move we adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation Amendment 
Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill introduces amendments to The 
Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation Act that will, first of all, 
respond to several task forces, including the interim heritage 
council, whose recommendations speak to the creation of a 
strong, arm’s-length heritage agency. Secondly, achieve some 
internal administrative clarification for the Heritage Foundation 
and assist in responding to the heritage community’s wish for a 
redefinition and clarification of the government’s heritage 
involvement, leading to the provincial centennial celebrations in 
2005. 
 
We bring these amendments forward, Mr. Speaker, because we 
are sensitive to the concerns and issues in the heritage 
community. We wish to clarify and strengthen the foundation as 
the province’s lead heritage agency. 
 
Since its inception in 1991, the Heritage Foundation has 
effectively used cost-sharing grant assistance programs. These 
assist individuals, municipalities, communities, and non-profit 
organizations across Saskatchewan to identify, research, 
conserve, and promote a diverse array of heritage assets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes proposed in this Bill are ones the 
Heritage Foundation Board has sought for some time. It is 
appropriate and timely that they proceed now. Mr. Speaker, the 
following are the key provisions of this particular Bill. 
 
We will expand the maximum term for board members’ 
appointment from two consecutive two-year terms to three 
consecutive two-year terms. Amendments will expand the 
foundation’s funding authority beyond the current restriction to 
tangible heritage property. And we will raise the ceiling for 
financial commitments requiring order in council approval from 
$10,000 to $50,000. 
 



May 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1287 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, this Bill responds to concerns in 
three areas. The heritage community’s wish for a strong, 
arms-length agency to fund and support heritage initiatives. 
 
Secondly, the need to broaden the agency’s funding authority in 
fairness to Aboriginal applicants whose heritage is less likely to 
be associated with tangible resources. And thirdly, the need to 
achieve more consistency in the relationship between the 
Department of Municipal Affairs and Housing and the agencies 
which have a reporting relationship with it. 
 
The provisions within this Bill, Mr. Speaker, address each of 
these concerns and warrant support from all members of the 
legislature. They are in the best interests of the province’s 
heritage community as well as the municipalities and individual 
heritage property owners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 31, The 
Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege for 
me today to speak on Bill No. 31, An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation Act. It appears a number of 
the areas in the Bill are housekeeping Bills concerning 
extending the length of membership on the board up to six years 
— three two-year consecutive terms. 
 
And also the area where the minister has outlined concerning 
the First Nations. And I think this is a very important area that 
the Bill addresses. And it’s too bad that the government hasn’t 
addressed this, because the Native people of Saskatchewan need 
to be and are a full participant in the province, and they need to 
become more engaged in the province’s economy. 
 
And they have a very rich heritage, and that needs to be 
addressed and promoted in this province to help not only the 
Native community in this province, but the whole economy of 
the province where we can have increased tourism and 
economic activity in, on, and in and around the reserves. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, also the area where the minister has spoken 
about raising the ceiling from 10,000 to $50,000 for financial 
commitments. This is an area where we will as an opposition 
need to talk to the stakeholders, and our critic will be doing that 
in the future. 
 
It brings up a number of concerns when we talk about increased 
financial commitments; a number of things arise. 
 
First is the financial accountability concerning areas of funding. 
And with the history of this government in SIGA and the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming committee, and also the 
Crowns, how there is a lack of accountability and a lack of 
proper audits done in those areas, it gives me some pause to 
wonder what is going on in this particular Bill. 
 
So at this time I’d like to take this Bill and let our critic check 
with the stakeholders of the province concerning this area. And 
at this time I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
 

Bill No. 32 – The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2001 
/Loi de 2001 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur 

la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 
move second reading of The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 
2001. 
 
This Act authorizes regulations establishing a mandatory parent 
education program. Under the new regulations, the parties 
involved in a family law proceeding where custody, access, or 
maintenance of children are an issue, will be required to attend 
a parent education program at the beginning of the proceeding. 
 
The parent education program provides an opportunity for 
parents involved in these disputes to learn of the detrimental 
effect on the children of continued conflict between the parents. 
The government expects that this will result in a 
decision-making process respecting custody, access, and 
maintenance that is focused on the best interests of children. 
 
During the past two years the government has undertaken 
broad-based consultations throughout the province to determine 
the issues in custody, access, and maintenance disputes as well 
as the options that are available to address these issues. 
 
One of the suggestions that was frequently made during these 
consultations is that parents should educate themselves about 
the impact of separation and divorce and the needs of the 
children in these situations. 
 
This legislation requires attendance at such a program at the 
beginning of the family law proceeding so that the parents will 
approach these issues in a less adversarial manner. 
 
Initially the parent education programs will be established as 
pilot projects in Yorkton and Saskatoon. The judges of the 
Court of Queen’s Bench who deal with family law matters are 
very supportive of this initiative. Family law lawyers in 
Yorkton and Saskatoon have been consulted and are also 
supportive of this program. 
 
The government believes that the parent education programs 
will help divorcing and separating parents to cope with the 
emotional effects of separation and to work together in making 
parenting arrangements for their children. We are confident that 
this will have positive results for everyone involved in these 
disputes, especially the children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of an Act to 
amend The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to rise and join into the debate on the second reading 
of Bill 32, an Act to amend the Queen’s Bench . . . or Queen’s 
Bench Amendment Act, I guess is the proper way of saying it. 
 
I was interested to hear and read a little bit of the Bill in the 
short time that I’ve had the opportunity to, but read and also 
hear the minister talk about mandatory courses for parents that 
are entering into . . . going through the courts for a divorce. And 
the mandatory of having . . . forcing parents to go through these 
courses regarding . . . And I guess the whole point of the course 



1288 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2001 

 

is regarding the whole issue of child custody and that issue 
which is, of course, can be very, very difficult for both parties 
and also very difficult for the court too. 
 
And I guess if the courses that are going to be offered, 
obviously with consultation with some of the groups in the 
Yorkton and Saskatoon area, they feel that this would be a 
benefit, that may help the parents on each side cope, and also 
the kids to understand what the impact will be on the kids 
involved. You know, we could think that would be a . . . it 
sounds on the surface like a real good idea. 
 
I do know though, from my experience in adult education in the 
number of years that I spent, and that is it really depends a lot 
on the course and what type of courses. Are there courses out 
there already? Is it being done in other provinces? 
 
And we have a lot of questions on that. I would be very 
interested in seeing the whole outlay and the design of the 
course and what will be discussed and what will be talked about 
in that program — the length of the program, who pays for the 
program, what is the cost of the program, and who is to pay for 
it. 
 
Because quite often I think a lot of times in these cases, when 
you see the various sides battling in court with custody, 
finances is a big issue. And now they have to take this course. 
 
And you know I was quite interested that that was never 
mentioned when the minister spoke to this Bill and I’d be very 
interested in finding out some of those questions, Mr. Speaker. 
Because when we’re forcing people to take courses and 
especially when no doubt emotions are frayed, to say the least, 
dealing with child custody, I can think of a number of cases 
where, you know, it’s just . . . it’s really been a mess. And I 
guess, as I said, if this goes to help the process work better, that 
is good. But until we are able to move this Bill along, we’d like 
to see a little bit more of the information as to the content of the 
course and the price and those things. 
 
(15:00) 
 
It’ll be very interesting to see how the pilot project works in 
Yorkton and Saskatoon and whether you’ll be looking at 
expanding it across the province because, well I guess with the 
trial basis we’ll be able to find out how effective this was, as I 
said. And quite often when you deal with adult education, 
you’re dealing with ideas and frames of mind that have been 
developed not just in the last year or two but over a real long 
period of time. And to change I guess the way a person thinks 
on any one issue in a short course, and again with my 
experience through adult education is that that’s a very tough 
task to do. I mean the best you can maybe have them listen and 
if the information is good enough they’ll take it, but to change 
the way a person feels, to change the way a person thinks on a 
specific issue is going to be very, very tough. 
 
So I’m glad that they’re rolling it out in a pilot project process 
to begin with. And as I said, Mr. Speaker, until we have a few 
more of the questions answered that we feel are necessary to be 
answered, we would like to move adjournment of debate on this 
Bill until those questions are answered. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill 34 — The Saskatchewan Natural Resources Transfer 
Agreement (Treaty Land Entitlement) 

Amendment Act, 2001 
 

Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure today to rise in support of Bill 34, The 
Saskatchewan Natural Resources Transfer Agreement (Treaty 
Land Entitlement) Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, this Act is technical in nature. At the 
same time though it protects the interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan by ensuring recognition of the fulfillment of its 
legal obligations to Canada for First Nations with which the 
province has negotiated treaty land entitlements — settlements. 
 
This legislation accomplishes two important objectives, Mr. 
Speaker. First, it will provide constitutional certainty that 
Saskatchewan’s obligations to the Government of Canada to 
assist with the fulfillment of treaty land entitlements are met 
with respect to the Cowessess, Carry The Kettle, and 
Kawacatoose First Nations. 
 
Secondly, it will also provide constitutional certainly that 
Saskatchewan’s obligations to the Government of Canada are 
met for First Nations that conclude treaty land entitlement or 
TLE settlements in the future. Treaty land entitlement 
agreements, Mr. Speaker, ensure that First Nations receive land 
promised to them by the federal government under treaties but 
which they have not yet received. 
 
In 1992 Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada entered 
into a major treaty land entitlement agreement involving 25 
First Nations in Saskatchewan, and a separate agreement with 
the Nekoneet First Nation. 
 
Since 1992 the province of Saskatchewan and the Government 
of Canada have successfully concluded agreements to settle 
outstanding TLEs with the First Nations of Cowessess, Carry 
the Kettle, and Kawacatoose. 
 
Saskatchewan is a party to those agreements because of its legal 
and constitutional obligation to assist the Government of 
Canada in the fulfillment of outstanding treaty land 
entitlements. 
 
This obligation is clearly set out in paragraph 10 of the Natural 
Resources Transfer Agreement or the NRTA. Paragraph 10 of 
the NRTA requires that the province of Saskatchewan set aside 
unoccupied Crown land as requested by the Government of 
Canada in order for Canada to fulfill its TLE obligations. 
 
In the TLE settlements, the province of Saskatchewan is 
meeting this obligation by a cash payment to the federal 
government that is to be used to enable the entitlement First 
Nations to acquire land, either from the province or from other 
willing sellers. 
 
Paragraph 26 of the NRTA provides for this variation in 
meeting the province’s obligation by agreement between 



May 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1289 

 

Canada and Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan and Canada, Mr. 
Speaker, entered into agreements to vary the NRTA in the 1992 
TLE Framework Agreement. That was signed with 25 
Saskatchewan First Nations, the province of Saskatchewan, and 
the Government of Canada, as well as in all subsequent TLE 
settlement agreements. 
 
To be fully effective these variations must also be confirmed by 
concurrent federal and provincial legislation. The amending 
agreements for the 1992 TLE Framework Agreement and the 
Nekoneet TLE Settlement Agreement were confirmed by both 
federal and provincial legislation. 
 
The provincial legislation that provided this confirmation is The 
Saskatchewan Natural Resources Transfer Agreement (Treaty 
Land Entitlement) Act, which was enacted in 1993. However, 
the 1993 legislation does not confirm subsequent First Nations 
specific TLE settlement agreements. This means that the 
Canada/Saskatchewan agreements to vary the NRTA, which 
form part of these TLE settlement agreements, have not been 
confirmed by provincial legislation. As a result, The 
Saskatchewan Natural Resources Transfer Agreement (Treaty 
Land Entitlement) Act needs to be amended, and that is what 
this second reading is all about. 
 
As I said at the beginning of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, the 
proposed amendment will recognize and provide constitutional 
certainty that Saskatchewan’s NRTA obligations with respect to 
Cowessess, Carry the Kettle, Kawacatoose First Nations and 
First Nations that enter into TLE agreements in the future have 
been met. 
 
It is also noteworthy to add that there is also a need for the 
federal government to amend its legislation in a similar fashion 
to the Act before us today to confirm the NRTA amendment 
agreements for Cowessess, Carry the Kettle, and Kawacatoose 
and for future First Nations that conclude TLE settlement 
agreements. 
 
The federal government, I understand, Mr. Speaker, has drafted 
a Bill for this purpose. Indian and Northern Affairs Canada 
expects to introduce the Bill in the fall of 2001. It is our intent 
to proclaim our legislation concurrently with the passing of the 
companion federal legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, it is important to focus briefly on the 
benefits of TLE. Many of my colleagues in this House have 
articulated the vision of the government in the past. Our vision 
is one where all Saskatchewan people enjoy prosperity and a 
high quality of life, where we seize the future with confidence 
and a spirit of innovation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s changing demographics are well 
known. We have an aging workforce. We have a decreasing 
size of the current workforce. We have a young, rapidly 
growing Aboriginal population and unacceptably high levels of 
unemployment within the Aboriginal community. This 
government recognizes that the economic and social status quo 
for Aboriginal communities in Saskatchewan is simply not 
acceptable. 
 
I have worked, Mr. Speaker, with many Aboriginal individuals 
and organizations since assuming my responsibilities as 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs. Without exception, the 
Aboriginal people with whom I have spoken share this 
government’s vision for a brighter future. And they want to 
work with this government to improve their current 
circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, treaty land entitlement is an important component 
in the larger provincial goal of advancing First Nations 
initiatives and improving the economic, social, and political 
circumstances for First Nations people. This government 
believes that First Nations people cannot achieve sustained 
self-sufficiency, sustained economic and social well-being 
without access to a range of economic development 
opportunities. 
 
The treaty land entitlement process gives the First Nations 
involved the resources to develop economic opportunities for 
their members. TLE gives First Nations a firm foundation on 
which to build economic well-being for future generations, both 
economically and socially. 
 
TLE is a practical, sustainable, successful means of making the 
future vision of Saskatchewan come true for everyone in 
Saskatchewan, including members of the First Nations within 
our province. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to this legislation today, 
Mr. Speaker. With that, I move second reading of Bill No. 34, 
The Saskatchewan Natural Resources Transfer Agreement 
(Treaty Land Entitlement) Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise today on this Bill because it was not a proud 
day, Mr. Speaker, when our forefathers failed to meet their 
obligations under the treaty agreements. And we, their 
descendants and beneficiaries, Mr. Speaker, need to meet those 
commitments, and this does go in that direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the fact is, Mr. Speaker, there were two new reserves 
formed in my own constituency over the last 15, 20 years or so 
from agreements that were signed back in the 1980s. Pheasant 
Rump and Ocean Man are both new reserves in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, and are doing very well. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency the White Bear First 
Nation completed their treaty land entitlements, Mr. Speaker, 
and it certainly had a positive impact on the members of that 
band, Mr. Speaker. And one of the areas that it’s had an impact 
was the development of a casino on the reserve between White 
Bear and Kenosee, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, and a very beautiful golf course as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the problems though that has arisen with 
the treaty land entitlements and the specific land entitlements is 
with the arrangements with the federal government and the 
agreements between the federal government and the 
municipalities and school boards involved. And I would 
certainly encourage the minister to do all she can to move that 
ahead. 
 
Under the treaty land entitlements, the federal government 



1290 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2001 

 

compensates the school boards and the municipalities, I believe, 
at 20 times the taxed value for those lands because they can no 
longer collect taxes once they become reserve lands. 
 
The problem isn’t in that particular area, Mr. Speaker. It’s on 
the specific lands that the First Nations collect their revenues 
from the federal government as compensation, then go out and 
buy land in the general public, general venue, Mr. Speaker, and 
those lands become . . . treaty lands become reserve lands and 
the federal government only compensates the municipalities and 
the school boards at five times. 
 
You know, you have to ask yourself why, on one hand, is a 
piece of land compensated at 20 times when the next piece of 
land right beside it is only compensated at five? And, Mr. 
Speaker, it was changes made by the federal Liberal 
government, when they formed government in 1993, that 
brought those changes into place. 
 
And as a province we need to do all that we can to push the 
federal government to recognize that there is a discrepancy in 
place there. I know in discussions with the previous minister for 
Aboriginal Affairs, the current Minister of Labour, that she was 
very much in agreement, Mr. Speaker, on that: that the federal 
government needed to live up to their obligations as well; that 
this was not the way things should be done, Mr. Speaker. And 
we support that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do have one bit of concern on this Bill though. On clause 
2(2)(d), Mr. Speaker, where it says that this Bill applies to “any 
agreement between the Government of Canada and the 
Government of Saskatchewan,” but it doesn’t describe what 
these agreements might be or in what field they might be, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that’s troubling because it shouldn’t apply to any 
agreement, Mr. Speaker. It should apply to agreements dealing 
with treaty land entitlements. 
 
And so perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the minister should take a very 
serious look at that particular subclause to ensure that it applies 
to agreements dealing with treaty land entitlements and not to 
just any agreement at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’d certainly like to talk to the minister about that particular 
area and see if some change can’t be made to the clause that 
would make it more specific, so that it wouldn’t just be any 
general agreement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Therefore I would like to move adjournment of debate at this 
time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(15:15) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Affairs and Housing 

Vote 24 
 
Subvote (MG01) 

The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m very 
pleased to introduce this afternoon Brij Mathur, who’s the 
acting deputy minister. Peter Hoffmann, who’s here — Peter is 
the assistant deputy minister of housing. John Edwards — John 
is directly behind myself — he’s the acting assistant deputy 
minister, municipal and community services division. 
 
Lana Grosse is here as well, Mr. Chairman. She’s the executive 
director of protection and emergency services. And I also have 
Doug Morcom, who’s director of grants administration; and 
Marj Abel, who’s the director of finance and corporate 
planning. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, I have a few questions I’d like 
to direct to the minister. I’d like to welcome him here today, 
and his officials. 
 
I know you’ve talked about grants and going out to municipal 
governments. But I’ve had some concerns brought forth by my 
constituents. I’ll read one letter from the mayor of Craik, and it 
kind of summarizes of what a lot of them have come to me, 
have phoned. And this is pretty well the gist of most of the 
towns in my constituency: 
 

Recently I read a letter to the editor in my local paper that 
concerned me. The letter was from Mr. Osika, the Minister 
of Municipal Affairs. The gist of the article was that the 
provincial government has not only been holding the line 
on unconditional grants, but they have been increasing the 
grants to municipal governments. Hogwash! 

 
The town of Craik in 1997 received $34,000 in 
unconditional grants. In 1997 this grant was reduced to 
17,000 and has stayed at this level since, at the same time 
increasing our share of the policing costs 14,000 in the last 
three years. We have lost elevator after elevator in our 
town, reducing our tax base. This year our provincial 
government’s great wisdom they eliminated the business 
tax — another $5,000 of lost revenue. 

 
Where are we supposed to make up these shortfalls? He 
also mentioned that there was a variety of conditional 
grants available. But what we would like to know is for 
whom? As this provincial government continues to press us 
for economic development in rural areas, we have tried 
numerous times to access money from the WEPA (Western 
Economic Partnership Agreement) fund, Centenary Fund, 
and other grants supposedly earmarked for rural 
governments. 

 
The WEPA mandate was, we’ll direct 40 million over the 
next four years towards initiatives and encourage new jobs, 
support new economic infrastructure, tourism products, 
export and marketing initiatives, and new economic 
opportunities including rural, northern, and Aboriginal 
economic development. 
 
The last time we asked for detailed information on where 
the money had been spent, over $30 million had been spent 
with absolutely none going to any rural areas. This is 
unacceptable. The provincial government keeps raising 



May 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1291 

 

energy costs and not increasing our funding so as we can 
maintain our recreational and cultural facilities. 

 
I realize that our provincial government was not serious 
about rural Saskatchewan when they sent the then minister 
of Municipal Affairs, Mr. Serby, to meet with the SUMA 
delegates at Lanigan. Clay said, it is time for you as 
municipal leaders to look at yourselves and say that maybe 
I am the one who should save the taxpayers’ money. It’s 
easy to point fingers at everyone else, but now is the time 
for municipal governments to take responsibility. 
 
I know that our provincial government has forgotten us in 
municipal government. I hope that you in the Sask Party 
don’t do the same. As my MLA I would appreciate you 
raising these questions for me. Thank you for your time and 
concern. Remember that if you want to know what 
municipal leaders are thinking, the easiest way is to just ask 
them. 

 
This was submitted by the mayor, Ron Haugerud, from Craik. 
 
And I’ll just read this one letter, but I have many from different 
towns that run along the same theme — grants being dropped 
over the last few years, revenue-sharing grants. 
 
I would like to . . . I guess the question I want to ask you on that 
is, I know in the budget you’ve said that you’ve increased or 
you’re holding the line, but yet I’m getting letters and calls 
from mayors saying no, our grants have been cut over the last 
few years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the member 
opposite, the revenue sharing has remained stable. The revenue 
sharing has remained stable and perhaps that’s where some of 
the confusion lies, unfortunately. 
 
And the same-cheque policy for revenue sharing, at the request 
of SUMA and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities), has been maintained. Where the grant, the 
additional monies have come from, from the provincial 
government, are through the targeted programs, such as grants 
in lieu of and infrastructure programs. 
 
So the financial assistance in transfers to the municipalities has 
remained strong from two years ago with the introduction of 
$10 million of provincial funding for provincial-municipal 
infrastructure. Those were the years when the federal 
government was no longer participating in this type of a 
program. The province introduced a municipal-provincial 
infrastructure program to assist municipalities in attending to 
some of their needs. 
 
It was just now recently that the federal government has 
returned to participate in what they finally recognize as being 
very important to rural infrastructure and to our province for 
sure and to our rural communities. 
 
So I hope that there’s not that confusion. And the responses that 
have been sent to inquiries from a variety of communities — I 
have received a number of them — we’ve tried to explain very 
succinctly how the revenue sharing, albeit it’s recognized, it’s 
remained stable; it’s remained the same. But considerable 

amount of additional monies have gone out for targeted 
programs through the provincial-municipal programs, through 
the Centenary Fund, through grants in lieu of. 
 
So there has been an ongoing effort, despite the maintaining the 
stability of the revenue sharing, there has been a serious effort 
made in recognition of municipal needs, to funnel money in a 
different way and make it accessible to rural municipalities 
throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman. 
Well like I say, you’ve received numerous letters and I think the 
gist of them was that even if funding is holding at the same for 
towns, that they need more money coming up with the loss of 
the elevators, stuff like that. 
 
So it’s something I want to impart on you for next year. Even in 
this year, if you find extra money, to increase grants. And just 
with some of the things that were brought up in this particular 
letter is towns losing elevators, losing some of their tax base, 
along that line. 
 
But also move on to, there’s a question I have about the 
education portion of the tax. This was faxed to me from the 
Saskatoon East School Division, and what it is is it breaks 
things down here, but I have 25 different villages, RMs (rural 
municipality), and towns in it. And out of them 25, there’s only 
two towns that the percentage is going to be going down. 
 
And what I’ll break it down to is percentage increase in dollars 
and what they’re going to be is what the school division is 
taking more in tax this year when it was sent out. I’ll just read 
some of the higher ones out of the 25. Out of 25, there’s 23 that 
they’re raising. Village of Clavet is going up 39 per cent; 
village of Elstow, 38 per cent; town of Aberdeen, 28 per cent; 
town of Dundurn, 57 per cent; town of Vonda, 65 per cent; the 
hamlet of Thode, I believe, 32 per cent; RM of Corman Park, 
going up 26 per cent; the RM of Grant, going up 102 per cent; 
RM of Morris, going up 20 per cent; the RM of Rudy, going up 
27 per cent. This is on the school tax of it. 
 
Could you address that? 
 
I’ve got a few letters. They’re just starting to come in now 
because the assessments have gone out, the mill rate has gone 
out, it’s been set. And this is the percentage of tax that’s going 
to be collected from these towns. 
 
And I have an individual that wrote from Dundurn that: 
 

Please be advised that 57 per cent increase in the school 
portion of the property tax rate is unacceptable. 

 
He says basically, I can’t afford it; I’m on a fixed income. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, thank you for the question. 
That is a question that’s raised as well from time to time and 
asked of myself and my department, our department. 
 
But the only answer I can offer in that respect is that the 
education portion, there was an increase in operating grants of 
$33 million. And that money going out to school boards, the 
decisions rest with those boards as to how they set their mill 



1292 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2001 

 

rates. 
 
So the money is provided through education, and the mill rates 
that are set and how that money is applied may vary. Some 
school boards have increased, have raised their mill rates and 
others have reduced them. So it’s a choice that the school 
divisions make. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you for that. Another point I guess I just 
want on that end of it, it’s also the way SAMA (Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency) was assessing a lot of the 
property. So it just wasn’t the school division raising it; it was 
the way . . . the total taxable assessment — I could also read it, 
but for all these ones I read — has gone up dramatically really. 
And it was SAMA doing the reassessment from total taxable 
assessment 2000 to 2001 has jumped quite considerably with it. 
 
In fact, I think the school division even dropped the mill rate as 
part of a percentage point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Yes, in some instances some of the 
assessments did go up. I know for agricultural land the 
assessment, instead of 75 went down to 50 . . . or 55, pardon 
me. So that offset or should have offset. But in some cases, no 
question, as a result of the reassessment some properties went 
up, others went down. 
 
For agriculture there were some . . . for example, the buildings 
were not . . . were exempted. So there were some concessions 
given to recognize the effects that the economy was having on 
agriculture. There were some targeted attempts to ensure that 
the results of assessment would be minimized as much as 
possible or lessened. 
 
Unfortunately, in some cases in some areas, the assessments 
went up as opposed to going down. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’d like to bring 
to the minister’s attention a copy of a letter I received from the 
village of Kelliher, which is in my constituency, expressing 
some very grave concerns with the revenue-sharing grants this 
year. The letter starts out . . . And I won’t read the whole letter; 
I’ll read portions of it. The letter starts out that: 
 

The 1986 revenue-sharing grant appears to be the highest 
for Kelliher at $32,000. The 2000 grant was $11,662. For a 
village of 340 people, only 191 taxable properties, this 
$20,000 difference has a high impact. Even with the higher 
assessment changes in ’97 and 2001, this loss was not 
recoverable through taxes. The recent infrastructure grants 
cannot, and do not, make up for the unconditional monies 
as the provincial government often tries to make us believe. 
One-third of the money must be available before 
applications can even be considered. This results in aging 
infrastructure, repairs, maintenance, and being . . . and 
maintenance being allowed to continue to deteriorate. Not 
because of poor management, but the necessity to cut back 
just to survive in general. 

 
And then the letter goes on to say in another . . . outline some of 
what the reduction in revenue-sharing, the effects of it. And it 

states: 
 

For Kelliher, the reduction in this revenue-sharing grant has 
meant unfinished street paving. Not all our citizens enjoy 
the same paid services. A $50,000 debt for repair to our 
water treatment system. Emergency repairs don’t follow 
infrastructure grant dates and deadlines. 

 
And I know in speaking to that town council and to their 
administrator, this was a major concern of theirs — that they 
have these emergency repairs, it doesn’t fit the grant application 
deadlines, and therefore they have to just assume the total cost. 
Because they can’t plan far ahead enough to do the regular 
maintenance as needed because they don’t have the funds, and 
so therefore they’re faced with these emergency repairs that 
they just cannot ignore. 
 
It goes on also to state: 
 

A doctor’s clinic that is dreary, dull, and in much need of a 
facelift must continue to be put off. A library that leaks and 
requires a new roof; books and computers that are in danger 
of damage. A leaking lagoon in 2000 requires immediate 
action that was not budgeted for and again, will not wait for 
infrastructure approval. 
 

Again another example of because they are living from hand to 
mouth, they can’t plan well in advance and therefore they are 
faced with these emergencies and must deal with them, are 
forced to deal with them. 
 

Environmental concerns are always looming — lagoons, 
landfills, abandoned fuel tanks, condemned houses. These 
are potential costs that all small communities face and are 
very unprepared to tackle. 
 

And then further on in the letter, they state: 
 

Kelliher has had to take a line of credit to cover three or 
four months before new tax levies are available. 
 

Over the last 15 years with all the decreases to revenue-sharing 
grants, an approximate average of $15,000 per year which 
makes up a total of $225,000 over that time frame, that would 
have been the equivalent of three years of total tax levy for their 
village. 
 
So there’s some real concerns with the underfunding and 
forcing them to live on a hand-to-mouth basis. 
 
And as another note, I realize that this area does not fall within 
the minister’s responsibilities, but I think it’s worth noting at 
this time. The express concern about the number of dollars that 
are leaving their community from the VLTs (video lottery 
terminal). There was, initially when that program was 
introduced by government, there was a proposal to return at 
least a small percentage of the dollars collected through the 
VLTs back into the community and this is what they deal with. 
And I’ll just read that paragraph. 
 

On another note, what about the promised 10 per cent of 
the lottery revenues being returned to the communities. It is 
estimated that as much as $3,000 per week leave Kelliher 



May 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1293 

 

through VLTs and up to $150,000 per year. Ten per cent of 
that number would be a great help. 
 

These are just some of the comments from this letter, Mr. Chair, 
and I’d like the minister to respond to some of the concerns 
raised by the community of Kelliher. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the concerns 
that the member has expressed on behalf of the community of 
Kelliher and it echoes the concerns of communities that have 
the same types of issues and concerns. 
 
And as I mentioned earlier, the revenue-sharing grants have 
remained constant. But in order to try and assist communities, 
there were targeted programs put in place. And as a matter of 
fact, that was at the request of SUMA and SARM that we look 
at infrastructure programs, which the provincial government did 
in 1998-99, ’99-2000. 
 
And I hear what you’re saying. And your comments with 
respect to the VLT sharing of revenue, I recall that. And it came 
to the point where SUMA, SARM and SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations) could not agree on how 
those revenues should be equally shared, or adequately shared, 
or how they should be targeted. 
 
The one thing that I can assure the member, Mr. Chairman, is 
that I’ve had considerable dialogue with both SUMA and 
SARM and these issues are serious concerns and we will be 
communicating and discussing perhaps how we can alleviate 
some of the situations that the member has brought to the 
attention of the House here and to our department with respect 
to their situations. 
 
The targeted programs are still two-thirds of the money being 
supplied for those communities that need assistance with some 
of the projects that they have underway. 
 
And I guess if there’s any consolation for the monies not being 
reduced, and has not been reduced in any given years outside of 
the revenue sharing, the revenue sharing has remained constant. 
It has not been reduced. The monies through these targeted 
programs and grants has continued to increase each year. And 
that’s a positive thing. 
 
But I can appreciate what the member is expressing on behalf of 
the community of Kelliher and other similar communities. And 
those are issues that I’m very anxious to continue to meet with 
SUMA and SARM to discuss and see if there may be some 
other ways of assisting in the future. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the minister stated that the 
revenue-sharing grants have remained constant. But in effect 
with the increased utility costs and other additional costs that 
municipalities are facing, with freezing the number of dollars 
that municipal governments receive in revenue-sharing grants, 
with the increasing costs, the net effect is that there is less 
dollars for these municipal governments to operate with 
because of the higher costs. 
 
I should quote one additional paragraph from the letter that I 
think summarizes the tough position that many municipal 
governments find themselves in. The letter states: 

Tax increases are inevitable, but only to survive and 
continue to provide the basic services. Rural urbans have 
the right to these services. There are no big wages, expense 
accounts, or benefit packages here. 

 
So what these people are saying is that, just in order to survive, 
they’re going to have to increase their own tax rates. And 
because of the nature of the infrastructure grants and so on, as 
they’d indicated earlier, they don’t always have the capacity and 
they don’t know when they’re going to be facing some of these 
major expenses dealing with water and sewer and those type of 
things. 
 
And so therefore when they’re faced with a situation by . . . 
they have to come up with all the costs. And if there was some 
mechanism whereby that problem could be addressed, I think it 
would help solve some of their problems. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, in 1997, recognizing that 
revenue sharing had been reduced, in 1997 it was SARM and 
SUMA that had asked for grants in lieu of programs, and 
infrastructure programs and some assistance in the areas of 
education funding. And that’s all been attended to; that’s all 
been addressed. 
 
So there has been an effort to acknowledge and respond to 
needs of communities in that respect. And those associations 
came to government and said, look, let’s have the same-cheque 
policy for revenue sharing, however, what we do need is some 
money in education so perhaps that can ease some of the burden 
and some of the effects of education funding. 
 
They asked also for infrastructure money. In 1998-99 — that’s 
the province on its own — put up $10 million in that first year 
and $10 million in the second year. Grants in lieu of was 
something else that the SUMA and SARM had asked for, and 
that was put into place. 
 
Prior to 1998, prior to 1998, there was zero dollars — zero 
dollars — for grants in lieu of from the government — zero 
dollars. This fourth and final year of that agreement, that 
amount’s gone up to $13.1 million, which is a significant and 
substantial amount. 
 
To the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, Mr. 
Chairman, in reviewing our records, there’s not been an 
application from Kelliher for any assistance under any of those 
programs. So I would just suggest that if there were some of 
those programs that are announced, it’s open and I recognize 
. . . and there needs to be — and I’m sure the member will 
appreciate — that there needs to be a process to follow. There 
needs to be applications filled out and priorities of projects and 
their importance. And there needs to be timelines and deadlines 
for these applications to be submitted. 
 
As the member will appreciate, there are numerous, numerous 
communities that do participate and submit applications for 
some attention for some assistance. And there needs to be 
priorities. There needs to be evaluations and priorities of these 
projects put in place in order to qualify for monies under these 
different targeted programs. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the minister stated that there was no 



1294 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2001 

 

applications received from the village of Kelliher. In 
conversation with those folks from Kelliher, they indicated that 
when some of these emergencies arose they were in contact 
with Municipal Affairs and we’re told that you hadn’t applied 
. . . you missed the deadline as such, and therefore you won’t be 
eligible. 
 
At the time that the deadline was in effect . . . or in that time 
frame, they didn’t have an emergency. It happened after that. 
And so therefore if they . . . I believe that some of the deadlines 
are in the early part of the year as I understand it. And if they 
had their water problems later in the year, they had missed the 
deadline, so what was the point of applying. 
 
And the minister mentioned last year the $10 million in 
infrastructure programs. I know there was numerous 
communities in my constituency complained that in some cases 
they received notification after the deadline. There was such a 
short time frame that the money was all used very rapidly by I 
would assume the larger centres and so on, and that very few if 
any of them were able to receive any granting or any funds 
under that particular program. 
 
So I would urge the minister to look at these programs. It seems 
like the small communities, as they stated in the letter, in order 
to apply for some of these infrastructure programs, have to have 
the money in place. Because they’ve had these emergencies in 
past years, quite often they don’t have the funding to put their 
one-third up. 
 
And so therefore they say, well we’ll take a chance for a year or 
two that nothing’s going to happen very seriously in our 
community, that we can get by so we can get some funds in 
place. And what quite often happens, another emergency arises 
and they’re left holding the bag entirely on their own. 
 
And I think that whole area has to be addressed, so where there 
perhaps could be some retroactive applications and that sort of 
thing. And I would simply urge the minister to look at that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The retroactivity, 
again as I mentioned, the numbers of applications that are 
received, it’s difficult then, after deadlines, to accept 
applications for projects. 
 
However what I have encouraged municipalities to do, and I 
know perhaps that it’s frustrating, and they say well, we were 
refused this year — I suggest, well apply again. In the event 
that the monies as you say have run out . . . the Centenary Fund 
was one that people were encouraged to reapply if in fact they 
had missed the initial deadlines. I know that that had happened. 
 
So I appreciate it’s frustrating. You bring up some very valid 
points. And I continue to look forward to discussing with the 
leaders of those associations, leaders of communities, how do 
we perhaps overcome some of those very important issues that 
you’ve brought to our attention here. I sincerely mean that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I hope what you’re seeing today is a trend. And 
we have responses so far, over 200 municipalities, and that 

includes cities, towns, villages, RMs, the whole slate right 
across, and we’re seeing a trend that’s pretty near, I would bet, 
97 per cent in these things. 
 
(15:45) 
 
You talked to the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood 
about the government increased education funding and 
addressed that problem. But if that had addressed that problem, 
then how come we’re also seeing that most school divisions are 
actually taking in more dollars of tax dollars than they were last 
year. The assessment may have gone up, the mill rate may have 
gone down, but there’s actually more dollars going in because 
one never matched the other and the school division still needed 
more money. 
 
So number one, the money that was put into education certainly 
has not addressed the whole problem. In fact I think the 
problem we’re seeing is it didn’t even adequately hold the 
status quo. So the school divisions needed more money. 
 
Now what we’re seeing from the municipalities of all sorts, the 
member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, the member for Arm 
River, every member on this side from rural Saskatchewan has 
got feedback like this. We’ve got replies from these people that 
said, we’ve done everything within our power; we cannot hold 
the line. 
 
And there’s some exceptions. There’s a few that we’ve had that 
have actually . . . the assessment’s gone up, they’ve lowered the 
mill rate, and they’re actually taking in less dollars. But that’s 
the exception to the rule, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I think why we’re doing this today, Mr. Minister, is trying 
to bring to your attention and your department’s attention just 
how serious this problem is. 
 
Revenue sharing we know was not increased. And I believe you 
said that SUMA and SARM had asked for infrastructure 
money. And I agree with you, they did. But if I remember right, 
SUMA alone also called for an extra $20 million this year to 
hold the status quo. 
 
We saw the struggle in the city of Regina. And I have to 
commend the new mayor and the council at present in the city 
of Regina for finding ways of holding the line. They did just a 
magical job of finding ways of holding the line. 
 
But many communities in this province had no way of doing 
that because they had been trying to do that for a number of 
years, Mr. Minister. They had no choice but to take in more tax 
dollars. 
 
I know in question period and times like that we hear from the 
Education minister — I think we’ve heard from yourself — that 
mill rates are dropping in the province. But that’s a 
misconception. You know that as well as I do, that mill rates 
may drop but if the assessment goes a way up, the amount of 
tax dollars taken in have increased. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, my question probably to do with this, 
does your department follow what’s happening out there when 
mill rates are set according to the assessment? Do you follow 



May 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1295 

 

. . . are you getting the same message we are? Do you follow 
out there as municipalities of all kinds set their mill rate? Are 
you getting the same trend out there that we are — that in most 
cases taxes are actually increasing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for that 
question. There is a survey of mill rates that is carried out, in 
response to that last question. But those results we do not have 
yet. I’m told we do not have those results as yet. But there is a 
survey carried out. 
 
The question that the member started out with, with respect to 
education, with all due respect, that’s an area that the Minister 
of Education may perhaps be able to better address than I. 
 
When you talk about the revenue sharing and the direct funding, 
the city of Regina — and I can very much appreciate the 
comments from the member — but they perhaps are in an 
enviable position as well, Mr. Chair, that with all the . . . with 
the revenue sharing, the grants in lieu, which includes the 
money for school boards and Canada infrastructure, 
provincial/municipal infrastructure, transit for disabled, 
Centenary Fund for this coming year, are in an enviable 
position for receiving or expecting to receive $17.2 million. So 
that will ease some of their concerns. 
 
But with respect to the communities that the member has 
alluded to, and the municipalities and small villages and 
communities, yes, I hear from them. And again, I want to just 
underline that I’m very anxious to continue to speak with the 
people in those communities, with SUMA, with SARM, and 
consider what we might be able to do differently in the future 
that will address some of those issues that are recognized as 
being situations that had been dealt with as a result of perhaps 
the programs not being in place or emergencies occurring and 
the funding not being available because the programs have 
already come to their end. 
 
So these are very important issues that will need to be addressed 
and discussed, and I plan on doing that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I 
understand, you’re right that you aren’t responsible for the 
education tax portion of that. I understand that. 
 
I think why we’re relating that along with the municipal tax is 
that, as you know, they’re so closely related. Number one, it’s 
the same taxpayer paying both. In most cases the municipalities 
are the collection agency for those taxes, and I think quite often 
the burden falls on those administrators who feel the heat for 
this because the taxpayer has nowhere to turn. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have so much stuff to go through here, but I 
have some of my colleagues that would also like to get in today, 
so I want to thank you for your answers to this point, and I’ll 
pass off to the member from Shellbrook-Spiritwood. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials. A while ago I asked some questions, 
some written questions to SERM (Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management) minister regarding forest fringe 
land. And I asked another question regarding — to the Minister 
of Finance — regarding forest fringe land in regarding taxation. 

And it came back to me that these questions have to be 
addressed to the Minister of Municipal Affairs, so I would like 
to address the question to you. 
 
How are municipal and education taxes on forest fringe land 
determined? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that there is an 
assessment of the land by SAMA and then the assessment of tax 
by local governments on that land. Now if I understand the 
question correctly, that’s the process that SAMA would use to 
determine the value of the land, and then the local governments 
would apply its levies. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. As you know, 
forest fringe land is government owned by SERM, the 
government itself. So one of my questions was, how come the 
RMs have the right to tax another jurisdiction, which is forest 
fringe land which SERM owns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I understand that it’s mostly 
leased out for grazing, and when it is in someone’s hands, 
leased out in that fashion, then it’s subject to taxation. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — You’re right, Mr. Minister. The taxes on 
that land are taxed to cattle-grazing operations only. But there’s 
many other operations of that said land, they utilize that land, 
that are not taxed. Why is the RM allowed to tax forest fringe 
land for cattle operations, which SERM owns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, that can be a technical issue. 
What I’d like to do, with the member’s concurrence, is on that 
particular issue give him a specific response to this whole issue 
surrounding that question, if the member would concur to that. 
And I’ll supply that to you in writing, rather than perhaps my 
being confused with the questions and not giving you the proper 
answers. I’d much rather give you the proper answer to your 
questions. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I would 
appreciate that. I think we need some clarification on SERM 
land, forest fringe land which is owned by SERM, and the role 
that municipal government play regarding that in allowing RMs 
to tax that portion of land. 
 
I have a couple of more questions though. In regards to the 
forest fringe land which is owned by SERM, which the 
municipality or RMs have the right to tax that, who was 
responsible for collecting the said taxes and who did they make 
them payable to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, it’s the rural municipality that 
collects the taxes and that’s who the taxes are paid to. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Okay. One more question, Mr. Minister. 
What happens if the taxes are not paid on that land in that year? 
Can they still obtain a permit from the SERM department for 
that land to be used for cattle grazing operations? Can they still 
get a permit? 
 
And if the taxes aren’t paid, can the permit holder be taken to 
court for not paying his original taxes on SERM grazing land? 
 



1296 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2001 

 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, the RM can 
enforce the payment of those taxes. 
 
However, the question with respect to the permits, to 
continuance of a permit or the issuance of a permit, with all due 
respect, that’s not something I’m familiar with, and that 
officials from SERM or the Minister of SERM may be able to 
respond to that more directly. And perhaps I can include that in 
the letter of response to you for your previous question as well. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The second part 
of my question that you failed to answer, which I wouldn’t 
mind getting an answer if you don’t mind, can the permit holder 
of that grazing permit be taken to court for not paying his 
education and municipal tax on cattle-grazing operations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, we’re talking . . . and I know 
where the member’s asking. Here is Crown land that is being 
leased, the person has a permit, and he doesn’t pay the taxes 
that the RM has assessed. Where do we go from there? Do we 
throw him in jail or not? 
 
I must apologize again. I don’t have the definitive answer, Mr. 
Chair, for the member, but I will include it in the response. I’ll 
determine exactly what the situation might be. And it sounds 
like it could be quite complicated. Here’s a permit holder, 
doesn’t own the land but he has the rights to the land that’s 
assessed taxes, refuses to pay them. I’m really not certain at this 
point, but I will determine what the outcome of such a situation 
might be if that sort of thing happened. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I won’t ask the 
question. I will just end off in regards to with the amount of 
education tax and municipal tax that’s being charged to the 
cattle-grazer owners of that permit. By the time they pay their 
permit fees, their education tax portion, their municipal tax 
portion, it’s more than actually if they take the cattle and put 
them in the community pastures. And that’s why they have 
concerns. And that’s why I’ve been raising questions regarding 
SERM land, which is forest fringe land. 
 
So I welcome the fact that you and the minister from SERM 
and I can sit down and come up with some solution to this 
because one operation in forest-fringed land, which is a cattle 
operation, are being taxed year round for the use of the land for 
a maximum of 145 days. They’re paying taxes on the whole 
thing for a whole year, and yet there’s many users of that land 
that don’t get taxed at all. 
 
So we have to address this problem. And I welcome the fact 
that we can sit down together and come up with a solution to 
this. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate that that appears 
that it might be a complex situation, and an individual situation 
that we certainly, very definitely, should address. 
 
If the member would have those specifics that we’ve discussed 
back and forth this afternoon, if I could receive those in some 
detail by way of a question form, I will ensure and I give my 
assurance that there will be a response in the very near future to 
those very concerns that the member has raised. Thank you. 
 

(16:00) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and to 
your officials, welcome. I have a number of questions to ask. 
I’m not sure how far I’ll get this afternoon, but I’d like to ask 
questions first of all on the infrastructure funding and then the 
centenary funding. 
 
A number of times you’ve mentioned about all the money that’s 
been given to the small localities from these funds. And can you 
give me a list? Is there a list that can be provided to us for the 
money that was spent from the infrastructure program and from 
the Centenary Fund to allow us to know who got the money this 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I welcome the question. 
The final list for some of those projects will not be in place until 
July. But for those projects that have already been approved, 
yes, we can certainly supply a list of those. But please 
understand that there are some that are still in the approval 
process or will not be finalized until probably the end of June or 
beginning of July. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you. We’d 
appreciate the information that you have to date. And also at the 
same time, maybe you could let us know how much money has 
been spent to date so that we would have an idea of how much 
money has yet to be allocated. There might be some hope for 
some of our communities yet. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that Porcupine Plain, the town of 
Porcupine Plain had applied for funding under the infrastructure 
program for this water treatment plant. And they were 
concerned because of the ongoing problems with water in this 
province, that their treatment plant was maybe not up to 
standards or that it would maybe be falling behind. 
 
I know that they’ve told me they were denied, but they would 
like to know when they could expect to get assistance for this 
project. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member. The 
Porcupine Plain, I . . . we can’t just locate their application or 
any particulars with respect to their application at this point. 
 
What I can say though is that there are communities that may 
have applied, and if they received a letter of denial, have 
contacted us and asked why or asked for a reason. The 
individual ones, we’re pleased to respond to and explain where 
they might be, at what point of their application. 
 
But at this point I’ll continue to see if we can determine exactly 
what the situation is with Porcupine Plain. And that was for 
water treatment? Water treatment? Okay. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I’d appreciate that, 
and I’m sure that if you don’t have the application I can get a 
copy of it for you from our town administrator. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that we had discussed one day the town of 
St. Gregor and their project which was denied. Maybe you 
could give me some further information on that as to where its 
status may be for next year. I understand that we have to apply 



May 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1297 

 

every year, but is there some kind of priority list where they 
could feel that they would be looked at? And again, the town of 
Annaheim the same thing. So that’s St. Gregor, Porcupine, and 
Annaheim. 
 
Mr. Minister, I also would like to talk to you about the town of 
Wadena. I know that you received a copy of a letter from April 
17 from the town of Wadena, where they discussed their 
concerns about their site, their landfill site. It cost them 
$263,000 and they didn’t receive one penny of grant money for 
it. 
 
At the same time they talked about their revenue sharing. If 
they would have been allowed or if they would have been given 
the same amount of money in revenue sharing every year that 
they did in 1990, they would have received $1,176,000. 
Because of the cutbacks in funding, they actually received less 
. . . received $615,000 less. So a small town of 1,300 . . . or 
1,480 people has seen a decrease of just about 50 per cent in the 
funding that they required. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, this concern is something that has to be 
addressed not only when it comes to providing the needed 
services, but also the capital projects as well. 
 
And one of the problems they’re having right now, even though 
they have the new landfill site, is they have to decommission 
the other site and there’s not one penny of funding for that. 
There’s some very stringent rules and regulations on 
decommissioning, and yet there is . . . So there is input from the 
government on how you’re supposed to do the 
decommissioning but no money to actually do the work. 
 
So I’m wondering if you look at this, if your department is 
concerned about the work that these small towns have to go 
through, and if there’s any thoughts towards helping them to 
meet the rules and regulations your government has put in 
place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, again I appreciate those 
concerns. And I just want to point out that dealing with 
landfills, they are eligible under infrastructure for some 
assistance under infrastructure programs, however, not given as 
high a priority as sewage and water at this point. 
 
So I guess I’d encourage Wadena to apply once again for help 
under that program, as I would encourage other communities 
that perhaps find themselves in similar situations. As well as 
have those communities that perhaps felt that they’ve been 
turned down and encourage them to reapply specifically if it has 
to do with sewage and water treatment, landfill sites. I’m told 
that those do fall into category of being eligible under the 
infrastructure programs. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I do understand that 
they are eligible, but when the towns that have applied for 
funding through the infrastructure for water and sewage can’t 
even get their applications approved because there isn’t enough 
money, the chances of getting it approved for a landfill site is 
probably zero to nil. So I don’t think they have very much hope 
at all. 
 
I just have one other short question I want to ask you about 

today and that is under Sask Housing. There’s a concern also 
about the placement of people, how the determination is made 
as to who will receive a position in Sask Housing. 
 
In one of my areas, the local authority told a resident that they 
don’t have the authority to place people — it’s the region that 
has that authority. And they went to the region. The region said 
no, no, it’s not us; it’s the local authority. Can you give me 
some clarification on this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: —Mr. Chair, the local boards make the 
decisions based on a point rating system. The applications go to 
the boards and they have apparently a point rating system that 
they use to determine the eligibility of applicants for those 
units. 
 
Ms. Draude: — My question was, is this the local boards or the 
regional boards that make the decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, it’s the local boards. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee report progress on Municipal Affairs and Housing. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
 

(Subvote EC01) 
 
The Chair: — This is the fourth time the minister has been 
before the committee for a total of 2 hours and 37 minutes. I 
recognize the minister and invite him to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my 
right is deputy minister of Economic and Co-operative 
Development, Larry Spannier; to his right is Denise Haas, 
executive director of investments and corporate services. 
 
To my left is Bryon Burnett, assistant deputy minister of 
community economic and business development. Directly 
behind me is Cam Pelzer, director of policy and strategic 
planning. To his right is Lynn Oliver, the chief information 
officer for the IT office. And to her right is Robert Hersche, 
executive director of policy planning and telecommunications 
information technology office. And that is quite a title. 
Welcome. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. And 
to the minister and his officials, welcome this afternoon. I 
guess, as the Chair mentioned, I think this will be fourth time 
. . . is it the third or fourth time? 
 
We’ve covered quite a bit of territory already, and up until this 
point we’ve kind of talked about the vision and the objectives of 
your department, Mr. Minister. And there are times when we 
agreed and disagreed on some of the direction of the items 
there. 
 
I’d like to proceed a little bit further down that road before we 
move into some of the other things like the investment 
opportunities and so on. 
 



1298 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2001 

 

The question I would have leading off, Mr. Minister, would be 
. . . and I’m reading from the annual report, Saskatchewan 
Economic and Co-operative Development annual report, 1998 
. . . I’m sorry, 1999-2000. And I think that is the . . . is that the 
most current annual report that we have? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Reading from that document, I wanted to just review the 
objectives again that are listed on page 3 of that document, the 
2000-2001 objectives. Of course that’s what we’re in now. And 
one of the objectives that was declared then, and in fact the very 
first one is: 
 

Advance a new economic development strategy for the 
province. 

 
Can you give me an outline as to what the new economic 
development strategy for the province was and how it’s being 
displayed in this particular year that we’re in now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to 
the member opposite, we’ve gone through extensive 
consultations with the business community in the province. 
That process has been completed. 
 
We’ve done a couple of drafts and we’re doing just some small 
amendments to what we hope will be the final draft. The 
document should be going to cabinet shortly and hopefully 
we’ll be releasing the document within the next short while. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ll be 
anxiously awaiting that particular strategy because I think the 
strategy is going to be very key in the signal that is being sent 
out to Saskatchewan people, and also people outside of 
Saskatchewan, in terms of where we want to go from your 
perspective in this province. 
 
But on that vein of economic development strategy, from the 
year earlier, there was an objective in your annual report earlier 
that said to begin work on a new economic development 
strategy building on the successes of . . . Partnership for 
Renewal is one document and the other one was Partnership for 
Growth Those two documents that were published and 
circulated much earlier both talked about economic strategy. So 
this has been in place for a long time and I’m not sure what the 
results of those two particular initiatives were. 
 
From my recollection and my brief reading, I can’t see anything 
that has evolved directly out of those two publications. Can you 
direct me as to what was a direct result from those two 
publications that were circulated earlier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Sure, I’d be pleased to. I think year 
after year of economic growth in this province is a pretty strong 
indication that the documents work. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, I guess that leads me then to 
where I wanted to go and that was the document that was 
published just in last year or a year ago called the Partnership 
for Prosperity. That was brought forward in a gala manner in 
Saskatoon with a press release. Partnership and prosperity 
talked about what was going to be happening in terms of this 

province; very few details though in terms of how prosperity or 
economic development was going to occur. It was a very glossy 
publication but short on detail, if I remember. 
 
Can you tell me what has happened to that particular document? 
This is kind of the third in a series now. What has happened to 
that document, where you’ve gone with it, and is there anything 
concrete at all that has come out of that publication? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, and to the member 
opposite, I would just want to say that the documents that were 
released — the two previous ones — hopefully this document 
will build on what we have done in the past. The documents 
have, and this one that we’re about to release will as well 
include targets and objectives and actions that will help us to 
achieve our targets and our objectives. But one document builds 
on the other. As economies grow and as the business 
community works in partnership with government to achieve 
the targets and the objectives, it would be hoped that one would 
build on the success of the previous one. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, part of the program for 
partnership and prosperity was a consultation process. The 
details were kind of left vague, if I remember correctly, with the 
response from the then minister that consultation was going to 
occur, the details were going to be filled in by the industry, and 
because of that you should be able to build on it. 
 
Can you tell me if consultation that you referred to earlier in 
that strategy was part of this consultation or is there another 
consultation? Where are we with consultation? It seems like 
consultation kind of gets kind of a broad-brush approach. Has it 
been achieving what you need it to? In other words, getting the 
specific details for developing the economy under this program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to 
say that the member opposite is questioning the consultation 
document that was released in September of 2000. I think that 
would be the document that you were referring to. 
 
And with respect to that document, what it was was a document 
that was put before the people of Saskatchewan to stimulate 
discussion, to stimulate ideas and thoughts with respect to the 
development of the document . . . the final document that we 
will be releasing that stems as a result of that. 
 
I mean we were talking about targets, economic indicators. Are 
they ambitious; but are they achievable? What those targets 
should be, what they might be, what areas we could be working 
on, and targets for economic performance. You know and it 
says, I’ll just quote from the document. On page 1 it says: 
 

Partnership for Prosperity is a consultation document, not a 
final document. The final document will be written once we 
receive input from the people of this province. 

 
Now with respect to input from the people of this province, 
there were 7,200 copies of Partnership for Prosperity 
distributed. There was a Web site. It had approximately 3,600 
hits. There were about 400,000 newspaper inserts with a 
summary of the strategy and targets that were in newspapers all 
through the province. There were seven public meetings held 
with approximately 500 people in attendance. There were 30 



May 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1299 

 

stakeholders’ meetings with approximately 1,400 people, and 
almost 5,000 surveys were completed. Seven briefs, 
representing several thousand people, were received. Eighty 
people participated in focus groups. Economic development 
questions were included in a November omnibus poll of 
approximately 1,000 residents. 
 
So I guess what I’m saying to you is the consultation was broad, 
it was wide, it was meant to be because the document that we’re 
crafting is based on the input from the business community of 
the province. 
 
I would like to say as well that I was quite interested to see the 
chamber of commerce’s document that was released just 
recently, and I think you and I have had some discussion about 
that. 
 
What you will find in the document that will be put before the 
people of Saskatchewan will have very many similarities — 
very many goals, targets, objectives — so I’m saying that the 
government strategy that we’ll be producing will be very much 
in sync with what the business community themselves, through 
their chamber of commerce, has produced and what we heard 
during the consultations in the past year. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What has been 
the cost of that process so far? I think that’s a real concern of 
the taxpayer. I know if we’re going to get adequate consultation 
to get the appropriate responses, there is a cost factor. Could 
you let me know how the cost thing has gone so far in this 
particular Partnership for Prosperity, and what do you anticipate 
the total cost will be of this economic strategy that was 
envisioned a year ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chair, I want to say that while 
my officials are looking up the approximate cost numbers for 
the document, I think that the people of Saskatchewan are really 
very much less interested in the cost of consultation than they 
are in the fact that consultation will happen. 
 
This process cost about $250,000. Now that’s an awful lot of 
money but I think if you will recall the number of meetings that 
took place, the number of documents that were presented to the 
people of Saskatchewan, $250,000 is not a lot of . . . it’s a lot of 
money, but in terms of what this document and what the people 
of Saskatchewan are wanting to do with respect to working with 
their government to achieve, it isn’t an awful lot of money. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that as the minister now 
responsible for Economic and Co-operative Development, I will 
make no apologies for consulting and listening to the people 
with respect to developing a five-year economic development 
strategy or longer, any less than I will apologize for consulting 
the people of Saskatchewan with respect to their desire to have 
input on the Fyke report, which is a document that was 
commissioned by the government to determine the future of 
health care in the province. 
 
So one can argue that consultation may be a waste of money. I 
tend to believe that the people of Saskatchewan want to be 
consulted. More than want to be consulted, I would suggest, 
Mr. Chairman, that they need to be consulted because it’s their 
ideas and their thoughts that will help build a healthy future for 

the province of Saskatchewan and help to give government 
direction to ensure that that happens. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I maybe disagree 
a little bit about the importance of the dollar figure, the 
approximately quarter of a million dollars involved in this 
particular process and consultation. I think people are interested 
in that and certainly here, under the Committee of Finance, we 
are interested in knowing what it’s costing out of taxpayers’ 
dollars. And I would agree that 250 or a quarter of a million 
dollars is in fact a fairly significant amount. That’s why the 
question and I’m looking forward to what you’re expecting out 
of this. 
 
Has the view, as the new minister of the department, changed a 
great deal from earlier commitments, from what you’ve heard in 
this process so far? I guess what I’m referring to here, Mr. 
Minister, is one of the objectives in 2000-2001 was, and I 
quote: 
 

Continue strong support to Saskatchewan’s co-operative 
sector and in particular promote new generation 
co-operatives . . . 

 
I’m wondering if that is a continuing strategy, if that is part of 
your focus in developing the economic strategy of this 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the history of this 
province is one that is rich with the co-operative movement and 
economic development through our co-operative sector. We’ve 
got the strongest co-operative sector, I would argue, anywhere 
in Canada. 
 
We’ve the headquarters of The Co-operators which is a very 
large insurance company. We have a strong retail sector. And I 
want to say that our grain transportation system has been well 
served over the past decades by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 
 
So will the focus and will the support for the co-operative sector 
continue? The answer is yes. 
 
With respect to new generation co-ops, one can only point to 
the successes that have happened — $40 million of investment, 
part of it a new generation co-op in the Leroy area with respect 
to hog production. One could only assume that it would be 
prudent, indeed it would make some sense to have neighbours 
band together, work with the credit union — by the way who, 
as I understand, financed part of that operation — to build an 
economic development opportunity in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So with respect to support for the co-operative movement, and 
in particular new generation co-ops, the answer is we very 
much support that initiative as it’s been outlined on page 3 of 
that document. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Chairman, I guess it’s fair to say that the economy of this 
province has been hinged very much on a number of different 
cylinders in the engine of operating and building this economy. 
The public sector, through our Crown corporations, has played 
a major role historically. The co-operative sector has played a 



1300 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2001 

 

very important role. 
 
But I think even more important than that is that there’s a 
recognition that the private sector is, I would argue, as 
important an engine of growth as any of the sectors that we 
have used in this province over the years to build our economy. 
 
Private sector are very much supporters of co-operatives. And 
when I look at rural Saskatchewan I would want to say that the 
role that is being played by the co-operative sector . . . and I’m 
speaking now the credit unions. 
 
As you will know, the chartered banks, the large banks are 
consolidating their operations. They’re leaving the small 
communities all over this province, indeed all over this country. 
What we are seeing, in no small way, is the credit union 
stepping in and backfilling in areas where the banks have 
chosen not to deliver service. 
 
Now if one goes back through history, you see it repeating itself 
because there were times when neighbours and communities 
banded together to ensure that there was capital and to ensure 
that they shared the capital so that there can be investment 
opportunities for individuals and small businesses in those 
communities. They competed over the years with the banks. 
 
The banks have chosen to move from those small communities, 
but still our co-operative sector, through the credit unions, is 
playing a very, very major role in terms of economic 
development and support for Saskatchewan’s rural 
communities. 
 
That’s why when you ask if under my stewardship will this 
department continue its support for the co-operative sector, that 
answer is unequivocal and it’s absolute. The answer is very, 
very much so; they mean so very much to our province. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, the focus that you’ve just 
outlined on the co-ops and the co-operative movement and so 
on, how would you rate your department’s support for that part 
of our sector as opposed to private sector? Would you be 
equally encouraging private and the co-operative sector to 
develop together, work together, or is your focus more on one 
or the other? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Oh I think with any department, 
under the mandate of the department, the officials within that 
administration will be charged with doing the best that they can 
to forward the groups that they’re responsible for working with. 
 
I would want to say that it’s not a matter of private sector or 
co-operative sector, and it’s not a matter of balance on one side 
or on the other. A job is a job, whether it’s in the co-operative 
sector or whether it’s in the private sector. 
 
A dividend or a profit, a share profit, means money back into 
the community and it means money back into the Saskatchewan 
economy. So to be choosing one over the other wouldn’t make 
much sense. Because ultimately the responsibility of this 
department is to work with businesses, whether they’re the 
co-operative sector or whether they’re the private sector, to 
create jobs and create wealth. 
 

So to . . . I guess to say we would want to have a fair balance in 
terms of the activity within the department, would be what we 
would be striving for. 
 
Now sometime there will be activities in the co-operative sector 
that will demand more person-power, and certainly we try to 
adjust to that. There may be times when the forestry sector — 
which is a private sector and I don’t know of any co-operatives 
to speak of in that sector at this point — but that the private 
sector would command more of the department’s attention. 
 
Our job is to facilitate wealth; it’s to facilitate job creation; it’s 
to facilitate and to work with the private sector and the public 
sector and the co-operative sector to develop a stronger 
economy. 
 
So we’re looking for a balance and we’ll put our resources 
where the need is. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, when we talk about wealth 
creation and maybe what is needed in this province, again I go 
back to an earlier comment that we talked about and that was 
the signals put forward to try to develop what our objectives are 
here. And the objectives, in my view and I believe you would 
agree, is to create jobs so that we can in fact have more people 
here, not the same amount of people reorganized in a different 
way. 
 
We’ve got to attract new people. To do that we need to have the 
right signals. We have to get new businesses. And I’m not sure 
developing different kinds of co-operatives, which are really 
based on the people that are here . . . We have to try and signal 
to get the new people. 
 
So if we want new businesses to create those new jobs, we’ve 
also got to have the signals. We’ve also got to have . . . we also 
have to have the confidence that the plan is in place and the 
objectives of the economic development are in fact real, so that 
they will come with confidence to invest, to create the 
businesses to create the jobs. To me that’s the idea of what your 
department should be doing. 
 
And somehow I see that that’s failing because I don’t see an 
increase in businesses. In fact businesses by recent surveys are 
certainly stagnant at the best, in terms of numbers. Some 
indications are up but others are down. It’s certainly not a 
booming part of our economy. Jobs are not here in the province 
as they are in other provinces; stagnant at the best, again. And 
investment is the same story. 
 
What we need is something to re-trigger the direction for 
investment and economic development. And somehow I’m 
missing that part of where your department is going to go with 
this new vision and new signals. Could you comment on that, 
please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I’d be more than pleased to 
comment. But I want to begin by talking a little bit about the 
history of economic development in the last decade. We’ve had 
GDP growth year over year since 1991. It’s been far above the 
national average. And I think GDP is what you measure growth, 
it’s the real measurement of growth. So you and I may agree to 
disagree that that has taken place. 



May 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1301 

 

When you do a survey of the business community, you’ll find 
that they’re very optimistic about the future. They’re talking 
about employing more people. As a matter of fact, the trends 
with respect to businesses seeking employees will show you 
that Saskatchewan leads in terms of the number of job 
requirements that businesses are seeking and applicants that 
they’re seeking to support their businesses, which have been 
growing. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite, and I, with all due respect 
— you are one of the members of the opposition who I do have 
a lot of respect for, because you are someone who has a lot of 
experience not only in Saskatchewan but in Canada — but I 
can’t agree with your analysis of the province. I think it’s 
perhaps a little more politically biased than the reality of the 
numbers would indicate. 
 
This province has some very difficult challenges. And you 
know that and I know that. You and your caucus represent rural 
ridings; rural ridings in which jobs in agriculture have been 
decreasing because of the change of agriculture, because of the 
international subsidies that we can’t as a province compete 
against with no support from the federal government. 
 
But in spite of that, the economy continues to grow in other 
areas. And in spite of that, our GDP grows. And in spite of that, 
business people across this province are creating jobs and job 
opportunities for Saskatchewan’s young people. 
 
And I want to quote from a newspaper article for you, because I 
think it’s instructive of what people other than the official 
opposition are saying about this province. And the headline 
says, “Youth gaining in job market; prospects improve for third 
straight year.” 
 
And I’ll just do a little quote because I think it’s instructive: 
 

Saskatchewan moved up one place to third in the ranking 
system that considers 10 indicators. For example, the 
employment rate here grew by 3.4 per cent, and the 
unemployment rate for Saskatchewan’s youth is 10.2 per 
cent, the second lowest in Canada. 

 
Goes on to say: 
 

Saskatchewan showed some positive growth for jobs. It’s a 
lot better place for youth than a lot of people make it out to 
be. 

 
You have the agricultural statistics which hide what’s really 
happening. Saskatchewan has had to create some 30,000 
jobs elsewhere in the economy just to make up for the 
losses that many in . . . of that in agriculture. The province 
has managed to do that and more. 

 
And this is from Mr. Sauvé, Roger Sauvé, from People Patterns, 
who monitors what happens in this province in an ongoing 
basis. 
 
Now I want to say, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite talks 
about the number of businesses that are closing and leaving and 
not opening. New business incorporations in January of 2001 
total 247. And that’s an increase of 6.9 per cent over the same 

month last year. 
 
Now we can sit here and we can banter figures back and forth, 
and maybe that’s what we need to do. You and I will have a, 
maybe, perhaps a philosophical disagreement as to how you 
grow an economy and how you make a stronger Saskatchewan. 
But I want to say that this government, and I as part of this 
government, will stand on the record of development since our 
election in 1991. 
 
I want to remind you that we took over an annual deficit in the 
neighbourhood of 1.2 billion. It was growing every year by 
about a billion two. The total provincial debt was $16 billion, 
the highest per capita debt anywhere in Canada. 
 
And what we’ve been able to do is whittle down that debt, 
which was part of the economic strategy we started with in 
1991, and we were able to balance eight consecutive balanced 
budgets, which was part of our economic strategy so that we 
could spend more money on programs, which we did this year 
on highways and on health care and on education. So that we 
weren’t serving the needs of the international banking 
community but serving the needs of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the business community have picked up on that. They said 
that this government has been very adept in managing our 
financial circumstances in the province. They’re comfortable 
with the fact that we balance the budgets. They’re comfortable 
with the fact that we’ve been paying the debt down. 
 
But I think what’s even more important, they understand what 
we’re trying to achieve on behalf of competitiveness with other 
jurisdictions across North America. We’ve introduced the 
largest tax decreases that this province has ever seen, part of 
which took effect this year. Some more will take effect next 
year, which ultimately gives the average family in 
Saskatchewan a thousand dollars more in their pockets. 
 
In this budget, we decreased the small-business income tax rate 
by 25 per cent — 25 per cent. We increased the threshold which 
will allow a small business to claim small-business status from 
200,000 to $300,000. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Chairman, I want to say that these 
are not small challenges this province faces. This has been done 
at a time when the agricultural community and the agricultural 
industry is under unprecedented pressure. But in spite of that, 
we’ve seen growth in other areas. We compensated for 30,000 
job losses and we’ve made . . . created more. 
 
This year you’ve got a 6 per cent increase in January, 6.9 per 
cent increase in terms of the number of business that have 
incorporated in the province — not zero, not three, not one. 
 
If it was only inflation, maybe two and a half, 3 per cent. But 
we’ve had just under 10 per cent growth. 
 
You look at the economic forecast. The Toronto Dominion 
Bank, the Conference Board of Canada, the Royal Bank, all 
indicate that the strength and the diversity of the economy will 
result in continued expansion. 
 



1302 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2001 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said, we can go through numbers and 
we can talk about the quotes by the people who deal with 
statistics and economic indicators and look at our province and 
other jurisdictions. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Chairman, we can as well compare 
ourselves to Alberta. But you know, we aren’t Alberta. We 
aren’t ever going to be Alberta. And we didn’t put the border 
between Alberta and Saskatchewan where it was, not the people 
of Saskatchewan. We didn’t put it here this year. It was put 
there a long time. 
 
And I tell you what’s more. We didn’t put the fossil fuel that 
Alberta is blessed with — and good for them — we didn’t put 
the fossil fuel that is there, the natural gas and the oil, we didn’t 
put it on that side of the border. That was something that was 
decided a long time ago when Confederation happened. 
 
(16:45) 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Chairman, in spite of that, Saskatchewan has 
been able to develop a strong economy. We’ve got a bright 
future in terms of developing this economy for our young 
people. The only thing that we don’t have, I would argue, is a 
positive attitude about the strength of this economy and the 
strength of Saskatchewan’s people and the strength of the future 
of this province. 
 
And I would suggest, Mr. Chairman, that members opposite 
could serve this economy well by turning up a little positive 
attitude just once in a while and speaking highly about the good 
things. 
 
The member from Swift Current banters. I was in his 
community last night — too bad he wasn’t there — at their 
small-business awards. And do you know what they’re saying 
out there? I’ll tell you what they’re saying out there, Mr. 
Chairman. I’ll tell you exactly what they’re saying out there — 
that things are good, we need a little rain, but things are well in 
my community. That’s what they’re saying. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would . . . Mr. Chairman, I would only say 
that just a little dose of attitude, turn up that attitude just a little 
bit, will build more faith in this economy, more faith by the 
business community, and more faith in our young people who 
want to stay here and create businesses, create job 
opportunities, and raise their families. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, and Mr. Minister. I’d 
like to talk a little bit about this attitude thing that you have 
brought up, because I think we will probably agree on the fact 
that you and I both want to see this government . . . or this 
province move ahead and this province prosper. To do that you 
have to send the right signals and here’s where we’re having 
some problem. 
 
You said we could never be competitive with Alberta because 
of you think they’re . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We’ll see 
that. And the fact is that we will and we can be very much 
competitive with places like Alberta, and I’ll tell you why. 
Because when we want to, when we want to move this province 
ahead, we want to make sure that we can be positive, but for the 
reasons . . . for positive reasons. 

All I’ve heard from this government is to say things like this: 
you should have a Saskatchewan dream. And I know that 
Saskatchewan dream was just rolled out recently. In other 
words, feel good about ourselves and maybe things will turn 
around. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, when we talk about the Saskatchewan 
dream — Saskatchewan ever since we had people settle this 
province — they’ve had a dream. But they’ve had reasons and 
they’ve been able to work those reasons to develop the 
opportunities and make their dreams come true. 
 
You haven’t given us anything, Mr. Minister, in way of please, 
be happy, things will get better if you have a better attitude. 
Well let’s put things in place that will give the province a better 
attitude so that we can, in fact, achieve a better province. 
 
Now you talked about the glowing reports that you’ve read in 
different quotations. Well you’re right, maybe you can read 
some and I could read some. But very recently it was reported 
by Canada West that our young people, in fact, are leaving this 
province and particularly that young group of people between 
18 and 24 that we need to keep in this province and attract. 
What are the signals that they’re getting to stay here? I’m afraid 
that that report is showing that they’re not staying. 
 
StatsCan just recently has come out with their reports and again, 
for the second year in a row, the numbers of businesses are 
down, not up. Now what is the reason for that? The reason is 
that there is no confidence from the signals that you’ve been 
putting forward. That’s the problem. 
 
And when you come out and talk about the long-term debt that 
we’ve had, I can agree that something has to be done about our 
long-term debt. And moving it in the direction that your 
government has is a positive thing. But you got to remember 
that when you’re talking about debt, you got to think of it in 
terms of what the Provincial Auditor is talking about. 
 
The Provincial Auditor is talking about not just the General 
Revenue Fund debt; he’s talking about that plus the Crown 
corporation debt, which is increasing, and also the unfunded 
pension funds. When you look at all that, the total debt is higher 
now than it was in 1991. 
 
And the budget that was put forward this time is actually 
showing a lower income, higher spending, and the debt is 
higher, the gross debt is higher this year than before. 
 
Those are the signals that are not creating the positive attitude 
that we need in this province, even though you think that we 
should be putting forward a positive spin. That is the problem 
that I have with what your proposal is about turning up the 
positives a little bit. 
 
When you talk about reduction in taxes, and I agree we’re going 
in the right direction and I commended the Minister of Finance 
in his budget last year and I commend him again this year for 
the reduction in taxes. 
 
But I didn’t commend him for expanding the PST (provincial 
sales tax) last year. I criticized him for that. And this year when 
he talked about reducing the small business corporate tax, I 



May 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1303 

 

commended him for that. 
 
But the fact is that we’re still a follower; we’re not a leader in 
that. Why not eliminate the small business corporate tax, 
because corporations will have to recover that from the people 
anyway and it’s not a major factor to overcome. 
 
Again it’s signals and attitude that people see from the action of 
the government and not from some program called 
Saskatchewan dream that’s supposed to be, let’s be happy, and 
everything will be fine. 
 
I would like to ask this question now, Mr. Minister. This 
question in terms of Strategic Investment Fund, Innovation and 
Science Fund. Can you tell me what those particular funds are? 
And I’m really looking in your subvote (EC07) on page 39 of 
the budget this year. These are the sub-programs: the Strategic 
Investment Fund, Innovation and Science Fund, Economic 
Partnership Agreements, Small Business Loan Associations. 
That’s on page 39. 
 
Aren’t those redundant from other programs that are in place? 
Can you tell me what specifically those are for, if we’re trying 
to invest . . . trying to attract new people into this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all I 
want to speak to the member’s comments with respect to the 
signals that we’re sending the people of Saskatchewan, the 
business community, and our young people. 
 
And it was all in this budget: personal income tax reductions; 
corporate taxes down; a focus on research and development; a 
focus on information technology; developing high-speed 
Internet, moving it out into rural Saskatchewan so that 
economic development can happen there; manufacturing and 
processing tax credit; an R&D (research and development) tax 
credit; labour-sponsored venture capital corporation tax credit; 
support for REDAs (regional economic development authority); 
support for co-operatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can go through the list of what this budget 
delivered, but I want to tell you what it also delivered was 
balance. No debts. 
 
Now yesterday the Leader of the Opposition spent $170 million 
in one speech. One speech. Today you eliminated the 
small-business tax, in one speech. 
 
You add up what you’re talking about and it takes you back to 
the people who sat on this side of the House in the 1980s. And 
I’ll tell you who they were. They were a group of men and 
women who belonged to a political party that now hides its 
name. And it was deficit budgeting year after year after year 
because they had ideas just like you and your Leader of the 
Opposition have — spend, spend, spend. Never mind where the 
revenue is going to come from to pay the bills — just spend. He 
spends a 170 million in Saskatoon last night and how much do 
you spend? What’s six points on the small-business tax worth? 
How much is that worth this year? What is that worth? Must be 
50, 60 million but it doesn’t matter, it’s only money. It’ll fall 
from the sky and good ideas will happen. 
 
And get rid of all the taxes and everything will be fine in this 

province. And you can spend hundreds of millions of dollars in 
universities, you can spend hundreds of millions of dollars on 
the school system. You can spend hundreds of more millions on 
the highway system, and it doesn’t matter. It doesn’t matter. 
Leave it for someone else to pay, leave it for some other 
generation to pay. 
 
And I want to say to you and every one of your colleagues that 
people see through you, they know your history, they know 
who you are, they know who you’re affiliated with. They know 
who you worked for in the 1980s, and that’s why they don’t 
trust you. And that’s why this Premier, this opposition member, 
this Leader of the Opposition has taken a 10 percentage point 
drop in the polls in the last little while. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order, order. Order. I’m very interested in 
all of the debates that are going on in the House. Unfortunately 
I cannot hear the one that we are supposed to be listening to. So 
would the House please come to order. Thank you very much. 
Would the member from Kindersley please come to order. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I want to get back to 
the question that the member asked today, the same one that he 
asked the last time we stood in estimates here, about the 
strategics on page 39 of the budget document — strategic 
initiative fund, the Innovation and Science Fund, the Economic 
Partnership Agreements, and the Small Business Loans 
Associations. Well the Strategic Investment Fund is for 
economic development initiatives. The Innovation and Science 
Fund is to match the federal CFI (Canadian Foundation for 
Innovation) funding with respect to R&D. The Economic 
Partnership Agreement is part of the WEPA agreement, a $40 
million shared agreement with the federal government. And the 
Small Business Loans Associations is to provide loans to small 
business in the province. But it’s the same answer that I gave 
him the last time we were here. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Okay, Mr. Minister. I appreciate it. Those 
particular, those particular investments, I think, are running in a 
redundant, in a redundant way to some of the other . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Thank you. I recognize the 
member for Kindersley . . . I recognize the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for the response 
on those particular funds. The reason that I was asking for a 
repeat of that because those are, those are funds that I think can 
be targeted for probably the right reasons to give the right 
signals. And I want to get into some of the funding that I, that I 
really have some trouble with, and that is involved in some of 
the Saskatchewan Government Growth Funds — I think that’s 
under your department — and some of the ones in 
Saskatchewan Opportunities. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, would that be better to delay those kinds 
of questions for another day or are we prepared to move later on 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, I would agree. I think, I 
think we will move into that area at another time. 
 
And I would like to take this opportunity to thank you and your 
officials for being here to be part of the exchange. Because I 



1304 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2001 

 

think that’s the kind of exchange that we need to have to, to 
make sure that everybody understands clearly our view and 
your view and where the differences are. Because I think it’s 
important for people to understand that. Certainly it helps me. 
Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the 
member for the exchange today too. I think it’s important as 
well. 
 
And I would want to suggest, Mr. Chairman, that the hour being 
near 5 o’clock that the committee rise and report progress and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:01. 
 
 


