















































Hansard: May 28, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1369 
 May 28, 2001 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Referral of Fyke Report to Standing 
Committee on Health Care 

 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
before, before the break I was identifying some of my concerns 
and concerns of constituents with reference to the proposed 
Standing Committee on Health. And where my concerns stem 
from is the lack of this government and actually the Fyke 
Commission of listening to the people. And that is a huge 
concern of my own, I believe on this side of the House, and of 
the people of the constituency. 
 
And I’ve identified some examples of where this government 
has not listened to the people of Wood River and I think that’s 
very important when we enter the debate about the standing 
committee because if they have not listened before, when will 
they start listening? And we can do a study and we can have an 
all-party forum but if it’s all preordained, then how much is this 
government and this committee going to listen to people from 
the Wood River constituency? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that being said, I would just like to close my 
comments with expressing my concerns about the committee 
and lacking the committee and the government not listening to 
the people of Wood River and to people of Saskatchewan with 
reference to the health system. So I will be supporting the 
amendment but I will not be supporting the motion. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, health 
care is certainly one of, if not the most, critical issues of our 
time. Medicare is in a shambles in Saskatchewan with health 
boards not able to balance their books, nurses and doctors 
leaving the province in droves, the longest surgical waiting lists 
in the country, and rural hospitals under constant fear of closure 
or conversion while capacity to handle additional patients 
simply does not exist in the major centres of this province. 
 
Surely in a time of crisis like this in health care, one would 
expect the government of this province to take a consultative 
approach to solving the many problems that afflict our health 
care system. 
 
Instead, this government, Mr. Speaker, chose to hire a 
politically sympathetic former civil servant to conduct a review 
of health care in this province — a review that was conducted, 
Mr. Speaker, with precious little consultation with the public or 
health care professionals, and a review that was conducted at 
great cost to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had Mr. Fyke, the author of this report, in this 
Assembly with the assurance from the Government House 
Leader that all members of the opposition would have sufficient 
opportunity to ask all of the questions that we wanted to ask. 
 

Mr. Speaker, 18 of us on this side of the House had questions 
that we wanted to ask Mr. Fyke, and after only six of our 
members had the opportunity to ask questions, the government 
ceased debate and Mr. Fyke went home. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this government, as out of touch as they are 
with the people of Saskatchewan, have realized just how 
unpopular Fyke’s recommendations are in both rural and urban 
Saskatchewan. All of a sudden they want members of the 
opposition to be involved in a committee to discuss Fyke’s 
recommendation — an obvious attempt, Mr. Speaker, by this 
government to share the blame for the lack of any substantial 
health care policy. 
 
It is this lack of any policy or direction in health care that makes 
this government, this government in decline and disarray, so 
vulnerable to the outrageous proposals set out in the Fyke 
Commission. A total lack of any policies or principles in health 
care whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This same government that has run election after election in this 
province as the saviours of medicare; this government that 
claims to be the authors of medicare in Canada; this 
government that has systematically destroyed health care in 
Saskatchewan since 1991: this government that hired the former 
deputy minister from the 1970s to produce a health care report 
in lieu of any real plan or health care policies or principles or 
directions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they intend to force members of the 
opposition on to their committee arbitrarily in an attempt to fool 
the people of Saskatchewan into believing that we somehow 
endorsed the deliberations of the Fyke report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province won’t buy it. This is a 
crass abuse of the rules and convention of this Assembly. Yes, 
Mr. Speaker, it is within the law, but is unprecedented in the 
history of this Assembly, and whatever else can be said about it, 
no one can say that it is in keeping with the democratic history 
and tradition of this honourable Assembly. 
 
In the amendment proposed by the member from Melfort, it is 
suggested that this standing committee conduct hearings in any 
community where conversion or closure of health care facilities 
is recommended. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
dominated standing committee will avoid holding hearings in 
those communities at any cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the criteria for hospital closures as spelled 
out by the Fyke report, the Herbert hospital, the Gravelbourg 
hospital in my constituency and even the Union Hospital in 
Moose Jaw are all in jeopardy. These are some of the things I 
would have liked to ask Mr. Fyke about in this Assembly but 
was denied the opportunity. Denied the opportunity by this 
government, this so-called open and accountable government 
that assured us that all of our questions would be answered by 
Mr. Fyke. 
 
This government now wants to force opposition members on to 
a standing committee of this House in unprecedented fashion so 
as to share the blame for the health care disaster that will surely 
follow implementation of the recommendations of this report. 



1370 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting in favour of the 
amendment and against the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to enter into the debate regarding the Fyke report. 
And as my constituency and my constituents are asking me to 
present some of their opinions and their questions, I feel it’s my 
privilege now, or my time to explain some of them and ask 
some of them. 
 
I’ll have to give credit to the Parkland Health District and their 
board at this time because when they first got the Fyke report, 
they decided the best thing for them to do was to hold some 
public meetings and get the opinion from the people there as to 
what they should do with the Fyke report and what they feel is 
good about the Fyke report. 
 
And I’m not going to stand here and say that it’s all bad. There 
is some good. But I’ll tell you one thing: to rural Saskatchewan, 
the people in rural Saskatchewan and in my constituency feel 
it’s a kick in the face for what rural Saskatchewan is facing in 
regards to what this government is bringing down in the health 
care field. 
 
The members of that board, the Parkland Health District Board, 
Mr. Speaker, had the opportunity to hold a brief review of the 
recommendations of the Fyke report. Also, Mr. Speaker, SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) requested 
the board’s position on the recommendation by April 30. And 
members indicated this would not be communicated until they 
had the proper time to consult with their stakeholders, which is 
the members from the Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency. 
 
The board determined that they would hold four public 
meetings. The public meetings would be advertised in the local 
media, with letters going to our local governments, encouraging 
their attendance. The meeting dates were established: May 1 
there was one held in Shellbrook; May 3 there was one held in 
Big River; and May 7 there was one held in Hafford. 
 
The board members agreed to a half-day meeting on April 26 
before they went to these public meetings so that the board 
could understand and read more about the Fyke report. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have a whole list of questions from the 
board members from . . . or the members from my constituency 
from the meetings held at Shellbrook, the one held at Big River, 
and also the one held in Spiritwood. And I would like at this 
time, Mr. Speaker, just to read a few of the concerns that some 
of these members have brought out at that meeting. 
 
In specialty care. The tertiary service in Saskatoon, Regina, and 
Prince Albert — will beds be available in these three centres? 
As it is now, we hear otherwise. And will the three centres have 
similar services? Concerns. There is no direct route, no 
highways that are suitable for highway traffic with the 
ambulances to actually get to any one of these tertiary centres. 
There should be more air ambulances, and helipads should be 
constructed at the tertiary sites to move people from the airport 
to the hospital. These are some of the concerns that the people 
from Shellbrook brought out at that time. 

In regional hospitals. This will require a need for increased 
ambulance services, with paramedics available at all rural 
settings. Contracting with specialists. Are the doctors going to 
stay? And we’ve had many consultations and meetings 
regarding doctors in rural Saskatchewan and they’re not 
staying. And what is this government doing to help the doctors 
stay and survive in the small urban or rural communities? Can 
we provide incentives to keep specialists in our province? 
 
In the utilization of beds. Quality council standards; concern 
about a lower standard versus a higher standard. Is money going 
to be a contributing factor? 
 
Also they went on to make assumptions about making things 
fair, Mr. Speaker — something this government doesn’t know a 
whole lot about. Will there be fairness until we are not so 
territorial in all levels? People are protecting their turf; this has 
to quit. Government has to be more accountable also. 
 
We need to be careful about using statistics, performance 
indicators to prove efficiency. Figures can lie and liars can 
figure. We need to do what makes sense in the whole picture as 
opposed only from district to district. 
 
And also some reports from the public — a must to open 
everyone’s eyes. We have to start taking responsibility for 
ourselves. 
 
The annual reports. Emphases are on goals, outcomes, and 
performance indicators. What about reflection of outcomes and 
indicators in an area that reflects poverty, poor primary health 
provisions, i.e., our reserves. Concerns that a district would be 
penalized for a poor result in a performance indicator when an 
area has a high risk of poor health due to underlying health 
determinants. They also went on to make reports . . . (inaudible) 
. . . supporting of change. And the district there went on to say, 
making larger districts cannot only necessarily mean a saving. 
Concerns with a bigger group of bureaucracy, too much money 
is for administration. With bigger districts, local input would be 
less. The proposed boundaries for health districts simply lump 
adjoining districts together and did not apparently consider 
servicing areas. 
 
In regards to Aboriginal peoples of my area, people have 
concerns, are saying, why should the delivery of health care 
services be any different for Aboriginals than they are for 
everyone else? Need to be discussed with tribal councils, chiefs, 
and etc. 
 
When it comes to paying the bills, Mr. Speaker, the board 
reported that home care can be better communicated from 
district to district. Duplication of assessments, tests, lab work is 
too costly and will not work. There has to be major changes to 
the home care system in order to work functionally. 
 
Also people who have read the report have found it to be very 
vague, not enough information to determine what the 
implementations are. It needs definitions. What is included in 
convalescent and acute care? What fits into each category? 
What cases stay in 24-hour community care beds and what goes 
to regional hospitals? 
 
Shellbrook is actually wondering what is the state of their 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1371 

 

hospital. Right now they are raising money to add to the 
hospital. Is the money that they’re raising all in vain? The Fyke 
report shows that the rural hospitals are going to be eliminated, 
so to Shellbrook, are they raising money for a white elephant? 
 
There is another report that was done in Big River and the 
concerns of the Big River people are much the same as in 
Shellbrook. They have concerns about the health care system 
there and the Fyke report. It was also mentioned in the Fyke 
report that the tertiary centres were looking at roughly 60 miles 
as a radius. Well if you look at Big River, Mr. Speaker . . . and 
you know exactly where Big River is, that’s about 85 to 90 
miles from Prince Albert. So if that’s the case, then what 
happens to the centre like Big River? What happens to their 
health facility that they have now? 
 
(19:15) 
 
The government, last year, decided to build on to Big River and 
the people of Big River were happy. They got a health care 
system or a health care facility that would give longevity to 
their health system for all the people there. But now with this 
Fyke report coming out, what is going to happen with Big 
River? The people there are very, very concerned. Is their 
facility that’s just been built last year going to be closed or will 
it stay open? 
 
One of their major concerns from Big River is the use of the 
traffic flow of people should be used, not for the direction of the 
government, but for what the people use. In other words, the 
highways that they use, the transportation system they use, and 
where they get their needs from, that’s where health should be 
looked at. And proposing that, they feel that they should not be 
going into the west side of the district. They should be closely 
linked with Prince Albert because that’s their mainstay. 
 
As for the town of Spiritwood, my hometown, they’re in the 
process right now of getting a new addition to their hospital. 
And many of them are asking, is this going to be a white 
elephant? What’s going to happen with the Spirit hospital? To 
us and many people around it, because of our locality which is 
80 miles from Prince Albert and 80 miles from North 
Battleford, there’s a good chance it probably will stay. But with 
the Fyke report coming out, what is the nature of the plan for 
our hospital in Spiritwood? 
 
People do not seem to be against change but strongly emphasize 
the need to have enhanced primary health care delivery and 
emergency systems in place prior to making changes to existing 
structures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s just some of the report that came out of the 
three public meetings that the Parkland Health District held. I 
know there’s many people that would like to be at these 
meetings to express their views, but according to the Fyke 
report it will not happen. As my member said before, when 
Fyke did his report, very few of the rural areas got to voice their 
opinion regarding health care in this province, and therefore 
when the Fyke report study comes out now, they will still not be 
given a chance to voice their opinions. That’s why members on 
this side, all the MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
on this side here, have been asked by their people to bring their 
concerns to a health care system. But the way the government is 

implementing this process for the Fyke report, they will not get 
their concerns heard. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am in favour of the 
amendment put forth by our side but I will not be voting in 
favour of the motion. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter into the debate on the motion put forward by 
the government and also the amendment put forward by our 
critic, the member from Melfort-Tisdale, regarding the Standing 
Committee on Health Care. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked . . . a lot of our members have 
talked on different issues, perhaps in their constituency, and the 
whole issue of a standing committee and what is being 
referenced to the standing committee which is just the Fyke 
recommendations, according to the government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think there has been not one of us on this 
side that hasn’t talked about the need to look into health care, to 
strike a standing committee, and how important this issue is. 
 
As a lot of our members have said and I will agree too, and 
touring through my constituency through the winter months, 
that health care is probably one of the largest concerns in the 
constituency. I’d say it’s probably, if not the most important 
issue, it would be right amongst the top two or three. And, Mr. 
Speaker, health care isn’t just one report. Health care is the 
whole issue — whether it’s emergency medical services or 
whether it’s hospital closures or whether it’s senior care, and 
the whole issue. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after looking at the Fyke report and 
not unfortunately being able to ask questions of Mr. Fyke 
himself due to time constraints which . . . you know, we always 
hear the moaning and groaning from the side opposite on how 
this, how we are, you know, stretching this. But, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there was some legitimate concerns that we had, some 
very legitimate concerns that we couldn’t raise. And just the 
way the timing went — the government got so many minutes 
and we got so many minutes, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but it 
certainly was not enough time to cover the issues that needed to 
be covered with Mr. Fyke. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know in my constituency a number 
of issues that I wanted to raise. I had talked to a number of the 
health care providers. I talked to a number of the health districts 
which are, I believe, four different health districts, bits of health 
districts that are in my constituency, and certainly not enough 
time to raise those concerns. 
 
I never had a chance to stand and question Mr. Fyke on what he 
felt about the three health districts in the North and his whole 
plan for that. And why that would be when they’re cutting 
down the health districts in the South. And what his vision was 
as far as how many hospitals there would be in a health district, 
how many primary care hospitals. 
 
So there was a lot of questions that were unanswered, I guess, 
after Mr. Fyke presented himself before the legislature here. 
 
But I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things that I found 



1372 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

most interesting with this whole process is that we on this side 
of the House have put forward a vision and a plan for what we 
would like to see in health care. Our member, our Health critic, 
the member from Melfort-Tisdale, made a presentation to the 
Fyke committee and said, this is what we would like to see, 
these are some of the issues that we think need to be dealt with. 
And we put that forward in our submission to the Fyke 
Commission. 
 
After that, of course, we had the Fyke Commission report and 
so that was Kenneth Fyke’s vision of what health care should 
be. But you know, as I go through this there’s only one group 
that hasn’t put forward any vision for health care, and, you 
know, it would be the members sitting opposite. They talk 
about the keepers of medicare and they are the creators of 
medicare, but I haven’t heard one thing other than . . . I guess 
there was a couple of things I heard from the members opposite 
and that was during the election. 
 
During the election they talked about, talked about hiring 500 
new health care professionals. Now it was maybe, I think, 
misunderstood by some when they said they were going to hire 
500 more health care professionals. A lot of us assumed that it 
was going to be nurses and we found out after that that wasn’t 
the case. Now I realize that there is requirements in all different 
areas, but just the whole way they framed that, I think most of 
the general public — and perhaps it was a play on words that 
they were hoping that people wouldn’t catch on to — but I 
really do believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, most people thought the 
government at that time during the campaign was talking about 
nurses. But that just wasn’t the case. 
 
They also talked about a number of other issues such as 
decreasing the waiting lists. And that was their vision for health 
care, is they were going to decrease their waiting lists, and they 
talked about that during the campaign. But, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if that was their vision, they’ve missed their vision 
completely because the government hasn’t come anywhere 
close to those targets. 
 
So you know, we’ve heard from our side of the House what we 
as the Sask Party would like to see in health care. We’ve heard 
from the Fyke Commission and what they wanted to see in 
health care. And we haven’t heard a word from the government 
on what they’re going to do with health care. 
 
They wanted to, first of all, start up the Fyke Commission and 
that was great — see what they had to report. Now let’s have a 
standing committee and let’s extend it and extend it and expand 
it and not really come up with any decisions or any concrete 
plan from their side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You know, it would be very interesting that if we’ve got our 
position and the Fyke committee has their position, and then we 
could have the government state a position that they would like 
to see, how they want to see health care handled. Then, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we could go out and see what the public 
thought of their idea, what they thought of the Fyke committee, 
and what they thought of our ideas put forward by the 
Saskatchewan Party. But oh no, you know, the government 
hasn’t come up with any vision whatsoever on health care, on a 
number of other areas, and a number of other areas. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I want to try and keep my comments just to 
health care because if I started off on some of the other issues in 
other areas such as agriculture and highways and education, and 
we’ll name all the other areas that they have absolutely no 
vision on, they seem to be floundering in the wilderness, Mr. 
Speaker. But at least we can kind of gauge this one and have an 
area that they’re talking on and that would be health care and 
that’s what I want to address today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve gone and I’ve asked a lot of 
constituents, a number of constituents, first of all, should we 
even be a part of the process? Should we even buy into this fact 
that we’re going to be a standing committee, join in with a 
standing committee? I’ve asked a lot of constituents, and I’ve 
also in the city here asked a number of friends that I have in the 
city. 
 
And I was amazed, you know. I really kind of at first thought 
that a lot of the people would be saying that we should join into 
the Fyke committee or join in to the standing committee. I 
asked them all and they said . . . many, many of them said — 
and I was surprised at this — don’t have anything to do with it. 
Have absolutely nothing to do with it. You know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and they said have absolutely nothing to do with it 
because we followed this government and they know what type 
of input we would be able to have in the standing committee. 
And I was quite interested in that very fact. 
 
But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I got a number of letters 
also, as I’m sure every member on this side and that side 
received, a number of letters regarding whether we should be 
involved or not involved. And one of the letters here talks about 
how they’re really not political, they’re not involved in politics, 
they don’t want to be involved in politics. But they talk about 
the wellness model that was started up in the early ’90s and 
how it was absolutely lack of substance. I mean it was a great 
catchword, it was a great catchword that . . . you know, the 
wellness model was a great catchword. It all sounded very 
good. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I heard Mr. Fyke speak in 
front of the legislature committee here, I found out that what he 
was talking about was, we don’t need quantity as much as we 
need quality. That was one of the major phrases that he said. 
We need quality care, not quantity. And I thought, you know, 
that’s a great catchphrase too. We had wellness in 1991; now 
we’ll say just we need quality — forget the quantity — and 
that’s going to solve things. Very, very I find . . . I found from 
going through the Fyke submission that it was really, really lack 
of any strong substance. 
 
Was any of the ideas that he came forward with costed out? 
Well, of course they weren’t. None of them were costed out, 
you know. And so it was really . . . I was very disappointed. I 
mean he had some good ideas perhaps, but a lot of it was just 
lack of substance and it wasn’t costed out. 
 
But this letter goes on to say that, you know, they really would 
not want to see politics played with this committee. And that’s 
what they have said. They don’t want to see politics played with 
this committee. 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1373 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nothing I would like more than to 
have that very issue, the health care, and the standing 
committee look at the Fyke Commission without any politics 
played. And the standing committee is supposed to be looking 
at health care. So why do we want to, why do we want to just 
box it in on only looking at the Fyke Commission, Fyke study? 
 
I think, and then put forward by the . . . the amendment put 
forward by our members is exactly that. We want to look at 
health care, but we want to look at it as a whole — globally — 
not just around the Fyke Commission, but the whole issue. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s one area that we’re having trouble 
with. 
 
And if you want to say who’s playing politics, I would say that 
the government is definitely playing politics and that they only 
want to . . . they don’t want to open themselves up too much. 
They don’t want to have their own ideas of the wellness model 
and everything else looked at. Let’s just try and keep it around 
the Fyke Commission and not open themselves up to too much 
criticism, because believe me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if a 
standing committee was to go from community to community 
on how they’ve handled — this government opposite — how 
they’ve handled health care in the last 10 years, I’m sure they’d 
open themselves up to an awful lot of criticism. 
 
And I think that’s why you’re seeing politics played in this very 
issue, that they only want to look at the Fyke Commission and 
they only want to do it here in Regina. And they’ll try and limit 
their losses to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the concerns that we have, and after looking at Hansard, 
listening to the speeches opposite on Friday by the seconder, I 
believe — I’m not sure — but looking through Hansard and 
listening to him, how really it seemed like the mind was made 
up on what they wanted to do with this standing committee 
anyway. And it was really just going to be an exercise of 
putting in time and delaying it a little bit so that they had time 
to implement the study. And I just really question that whole 
thing, why we’d even enter into that in the first place. 
 
But that’s why we wanted to see it broadened. So it’s not just 
one issue but the whole issue on health care. 
 
(19:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just briefly want to talk a little bit about my own 
constituency and some of the health care concerns that we see 
in the Indian Head-Milestone constituency. 
 
I had the opportunity of meeting with a local group that were 
concerned with the Indian Head Hospital and they sure don’t 
want to lose that hospital. They’re right on No. 1 Highway. It’s 
really key to their community. And as the member from 
Kindersley, I believe, was talking about last Friday how when 
you take one of those facilities out of a community, how it just 
about rips the heart out of their community. They feel like 
they’ve really lost something, and as if rural communities 
haven’t lost enough. And this is one other thing that they are 
going to fight for to keep. 
 
And they were saying how, you know, that one of their 
concerns is that they’re so close to the city, so close to Regina 

and that was a concern. And I thought to myself, I said now 
should that be a concern that they’re so close to Regina that 
they’ll lose their hospital or could that be an asset. I really think 
it’s an asset. I think that knowing the way the situation is in 
Regina with some of the hospital beds and definite shortages of 
hospital beds, being that close, instead of . . . I forget which 
member on our side was talking about where they had to put 
them up in a motel in Swift Current in order to get into the 
hospital. It was kind of like a holding pen, I guess, is what you 
could almost say, the way they’ve got this set up. 
 
And I thought now there would be an excellent example for the 
Indian Head Hospital, 30 minutes away from the city. They 
don’t have to build any structure. There’s no capital cost. The 
community is more than willing to put in a lot of the equipment. 
They just went forward and, I think, paid something like 3 to 
$400,000 for a new X-ray machine that the community raised. 
They’re looking at their facility and they’re saying, what are the 
possible reasons they could come in and close this hospital? 
One of them was they felt they didn’t have a strong enough 
X-ray machine, so they went out and they raised the money and 
put that in. 
 
And I really think that, you know, when you look at the Fyke 
report is that he really, really looked at consolidating and 
centralizing services. And I guess if that’s all you’re going to 
look at, communities like Indian Head may not have that great 
of a future. 
 
I would like to see it go the other way, though. Instead of 
worried about how much more money you have to put into 
capital for buildings in Regina, you could use the outlying 
facilities that are only 30 minutes away. It makes real good 
sense to me. 
 
The other area, Mr. Speaker, that I just want to touch on even 
briefer than the last one is the Fort Qu’Appelle area. Fort 
Qu’Appelle has had a hospital in it for 70 years. And it has the 
Fort Qu’Appelle Indian Hospital and that was put up through 
the federal government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they’re talking about building a new 
hospital in Fort Qu’Appelle, a beautiful facility in Fort 
Qu’Appelle. They’ve got most of the plans. They have a rough 
idea about how much it’s going to cost. I was out there on 
Friday, Mr. Speaker, and I was talking to one of the fellows 
involved with this and they said it’s really been put on hold 
right now because they can’t guarantee any funding from the 
provincial government. 
 
They’ve got a lot of federal money in place. I believe the 
federal government has come into Saskatchewan for a couple of 
facilities and they have put in around $13 million in place that 
will then go towards that hospital. But they can’t go towards 
that hospital right now because they’re not sure where the 
provincial government is on this issue. And they can’t go ahead 
with just the amount that the federal government has given. It 
needs to be a partnership with the provincial government. 
 
They can’t go ahead with it and they’re quite frustrated and I 
believe they’re having a meeting with the Minister of Health to 
try and figure out where they’re going. But if you look at what 
the Fyke report talks about, that hospital would never get built. 



1374 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

You know, you’re looking at probably 50-cent dollars to build 
that facility in Fort Qu’Appelle. You’re looking at the federal 
government probably putting half of the money in to build a 
$10 million structure in Fort Qu’Appelle and right now it’s put 
on hold because the government is not sure where they’re going 
or what direction they’re going. And all it takes is the okay 
from this government — this government — to put some 
money forward and that facility would be built. It would be a 
beautiful structure and the cost to the province would be 50 
cents on the dollar, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I really think that when I started out by saying that I don’t 
believe this provincial government has any direction or any idea 
of where they’re going in health care and that’s all part of it, is 
that they get into a situation like this where, where we’re not 
sure what the future of that facility is even though there’s a lot 
of federal money to go into it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I think that when we look at this Standing Committee on 
Health Care I wish we could say that it was a standing 
committee to look at all of health care and not just at one report 
which I think . . . and I would be very interested to hear the 
honest thoughts of the members opposite because I think most 
of us on our side — in fact all of us on our side — have come 
up with opinions that have been phoned into us, that have been 
written into us, that the Fyke study and the Fyke Commission 
really didn’t touch all the bases. 
 
It didn’t go out into rural Saskatchewan and listen to what the 
effect of closing the Indian Head Hospital would be. It didn’t go 
to Fort Qu’Appelle and say, what is the effect if we don’t put 
provincial money in? Are you going to lose the federal money? 
It didn’t look at so many issues and that’s why I really question 
that a standing committee can be so closed on just the Fyke 
Commission when the issue is as big as it is. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I went to one meeting . . . I was at a health 
district and they were having a public meeting about long-term 
care and I was sitting and talking to one of the board members 
who was definitely a strong proponent of the government in 
power at this time and you know he said, you know, there was 
never any problem, I didn’t think, with health care until the last 
provincial election. And then all of a sudden there seems to be a 
lot of problems with health care. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s because there was an opposition 
that was getting stories from 26 different constituencies on the 
problems in health care. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that 
was one of the first things that Kenneth Fyke said about this 
government’s health care plan is that medicare right now in this 
province is in the breaking point — it’s to the breaking point. 
So let’s not just look at the Fyke Commission, let’s look at all 
of health care to make the proper recommendations so that we 
have a strong health care system into the future. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll be supporting the amendment put 
forward by the member for Melfort-Tisdale on this issue. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I consider it 
a privilege to enter this debate on that particular topic, and 
basically discuss some of the ideas and concerns that come 
from my particular constituency. 

I think some of the philosophical background was very well 
presented by the previous speaker, my colleague, and I’d like to 
deal with some of the things that are unique to my constituency. 
 
But before I do that, I want to say one or two things about the 
Fyke committee and the way this has been set up and the way 
government intends to go on this one. And I think we have to 
look very carefully at what happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
when we went through the Channel Lake affair. 
 
Because the government here is repeating a process, and very 
often when we ask questions they talk about process, we should 
be aware of process. Well let’s just see how they operate these 
sorts of things and I think if we look at how they’ve done it, we 
have no reason to expect anything different but that they will, to 
some extent and maybe a large extent, repeat what happened in 
the past. 
 
And without going into the details on the Channel Lake 
situation and what brought that all about and the fiasco and the 
money that was lost, let’s look at how that committee operated. 
They set up a major committee. We met downstairs in room 10 
day after day after day. And I hear one of the members from 
Saskatoon talking about being tired. Well, if she’d been there, 
she’d have got tired of some of the answers and the runaround 
that we got there as well. But that went on, as I said, day after 
day. The media was there; it was a show for the whole 
province. We tried to get answers; we couldn’t. There’s still a 
whole lot of money missing. 
 
However, the frightening part at the end of that all wasn’t that 
much the answers that were given and weren’t given, but when 
this committee was supposed to come up with a conclusion and 
a report and to be able to tell the province we’ve done this 
amount of work, and here’s what we discovered. 
 
So you would think, Mr. Speaker, that all the people that were 
involved around that committee from, I believe, three different 
political parties would have had some input into that. And then 
when the thing comes to a conclusion, we find, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that a report had been written in the premier’s office 
by one of the premier’s henchmen while this committee 
meeting’s going on and the committee . . . the report shows up. 
Had nothing to do with what happened in that committee 
meeting, and the meetings because it lasted for weeks. 
 
It had nothing to do with what the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) said and what they asked. It had nothing to do with what 
the opposition asked and the answers they got or didn’t get. It 
had everything to do with a political decision made by the 
premier and his henchmen to say, okay we’ll let these people 
ask all the questions, spend all the time they want, and here’s 
the report. Politically this is what we think should be 
happening. 
 
And I’m very afraid, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that is exactly 
what’s going to happen with this committee that the 
government wants to set up at this particular point. And fact is I 
wouldn’t be the least surprised, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if 
somewhere in this building there were two or three people right 
now huddled around a typewriter or whatever these people use 
— they’re sort of back in the dark ages. Tommy Douglas was 
typewriter time and the way they revere him they probably had 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1375 

 

Tommy Douglas’ original typewriter and they’re still clicking 
away at it. 
 
So I have very little doubt, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that already 
this government has made up its mind about where that 
committee’s going to go and what its findings are going to be. 
And about the time the committee starts to sit, it may already be 
in print. And so we’re going to be wasting our time, spinning 
our wheels — whatever metaphor you want to use — but this 
government will do it. They did it on Channel Lake; they will 
do it again over here. And that’s why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 
becomes very obvious that they really are totally insincere 
about this whole committee process. 
 
And let’s look at one other thing to underline the fact that there 
is no sincerity on this committee process. We had, as you know, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Fyke sitting in these chambers, and 
we asked him questions. And yes, it went on for hour after hour. 
But remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s 58-some of us, 
there’s some 58 of us, every one of us with the right to ask 
some questions. The Fyke Commission had cost hundreds of 
thousands of dollars. And again we have the member from 
Saskatoon complaining about the same sorts of questions. They 
weren’t the same sorts of questions because the questions 
related to different hospitals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and are in 
different areas. That’s important to the people of Saskatchewan. 
That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why we’re here, is to represent 
those people. 
 
Then in the process of this whole thing, the NDP call a recess 
for about 20, 30 minutes, come back after the recess and say, 
we decided to go home. Now why, if they had decided to go 
home, didn’t we go home before the recess? It was just part of 
the little games they were playing. And they sat down during 
those 20 minutes and said, well I think we’re running into 
trouble on this; let’s just shut down the opposition. So they 
jumped up and shut us down. And there were a lot people on 
this side of the House that never had a chance to ask a question 
on behalf of their constituencies. 
 
And I’m one of those, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was shut out by 
the NDP government. My constituency, every single person in 
my constituency that I represent was essentially shut out, were 
not given the opportunity to speak and to ask questions in this 
House, by that NDP group, by those socialists over on that side. 
That’s the way they operated in Channel Lake, that’s the way 
they operated when we had Mr. Fyke in here, and that’s the way 
they’re going to operate on this particular committee. That’s 
their process, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They follow process, and 
that’s the process that they follow. 
 
Now I want to say a few things about my particular 
constituency because it is totally different and very unique from 
every other constituency. Number one, it’s different from the 
urban ones because it’s a rural constituency. The other part that 
makes it unique, it is the only rural constituency in 
Saskatchewan that is growing in population. If, unfortunately, 
these people ever get a chance to, you know, do a bit of 
gerrymandering, the size of my constituency will be smaller 
because the population is growing. 
 
Now why is that important, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It’s important 
that as they’ve gone ahead and destroyed their dream that 

Tommy Douglas had about hospitals and lights throughout the 
province, and all those kinds of quaint things that he used to be 
so proud of, they shut down 50-some hospitals. And the Deputy 
Premier over there grins right now. He’s proud of the fact that 
he was probably the instigator of closing down the first 
50-some hospitals. 
 
Now under the Fyke report . . . Now under the Fyke report 
there’s a strong hint that they want to close another 50-some. 
Now I have in my constituency, because it’s growing, we have 
growing needs for a hospital. It’s not like saying, well we have 
fewer people, do we need the same size hospital? In my 
constituency we have a growing population and every year we 
need a hospital more than we needed it the year before. But 
according to the criteria that was set up by Mr. Fyke, the 
hospital in Rosthern will probably go out the door. 
 
(19:45) 
 
The hospital district . . . and I have two that are in my 
constituency. One is Saskatoon; it will probably stay. The other 
one is Gabriel Springs which runs over into Humboldt and I’ll 
let the member from Humboldt speak for the hospitals in that 
area. But the hospital in Rosthern — very much a needed 
hospital for a couple of reasons. 
 
The communities, the towns in the area are growing. We used 
to, in that valley area as it is often called, basically have three 
health care centres. We had a hospital in Rosthern, we used to 
have a hospital in Waldheim, and we had health care that could 
be received in Warman. The Warman situation is gone. The 
Waldheim hospital is gone. We have only the one hospital left 
in Rosthern. But all the towns are growing, so the need for a 
hospital continues to increase. 
 
The other thing is in my area probably the number of farmers is 
actually increasing, if we include the hog operations and the 
stock operations as well as grain farming. And as we well 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is the area of industry in this 
province where we have the most accidents. So if we have more 
people involved in agriculture, the need for immediate care 
increases drastically. That’s happening in my constituency, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
However, Mr. Fyke has this idea that somehow if it takes an 
hour for the ambulance to get out and an hour to get back, that’s 
good enough. Well I’d like to see what happened if you went to 
an urban situation and said well as long as you can get to a 
hospital in 120 minutes, that’s fine — should they live that 
long. There’s no way anybody in an urban situation would stand 
for that. And yet Mr. Fyke is prepared to say sure, so you take 
an hour for the help to get out there, pick up the person, take 
him back in. That’s not good enough. 
 
And so in an area that is growing in population in the towns, 
growing in population in the rural areas, Rosthern needs its 
hospital. According to the Fyke criteria, it won’t be there. That 
government would not allow me to speak and ask Mr. Fyke the 
specific questions on that. They shut it down. 
 
I have another important factor that needs to be mentioned here, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have just adjacent to my constituency, 
Beardy’s & Okemasis reservation. It is probably one of the 



1376 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

fastest-growing reservations in Saskatchewan. It’s a very 
vibrant one. They’ve got a lot of industry, a lot of well-trained 
people. They have a good school. They’re probably about 8, 9 
miles out of the town; 8, 9 miles away from that hospital. They 
also need more health care than they needed 50 years ago 
because their population is growing. 
 
So we have three basic areas: what you could call the town area; 
the rural, agricultural area; and the First Nations area, all 
requiring more health care. And yet, Mr. Fyke recommends that 
that hospital not be there. 
 
And having seen that this government closed down 50 hospitals 
some years ago, and are prepared to sit there and smile about it 
now, and are prepared to shut down the discussion when we 
wanted to talk to Mr. Fyke about it, I’m very concerned where 
this is going to go. 
 
One more thing about Gabriel Springs. It’s one of those health 
districts that has managed to run in the black, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and that’s a rather rare sort of a thing in this province. 
But they’ve managed to run in the black, and then they’re 
punished. Their budget actually gets cut. 
 
Seems hard to believe, but that’s the kind of government we 
have, that if you overspend and run in the red they’ll throw you 
some money. If you’re fiscally responsible, as the people in my 
constituency are, and they run a hospital in such a way that it’s 
in the black, they’ll come back and say oh, we’ll take more 
money away from you because obviously you don’t need it. 
 
It sounds very much like the way this government works. And I 
hear some people back in the ’80s again. I would suggest that 
that person from Saskatoon check very carefully the front page 
on a recent StarPhoenix if they want to see people being 
charged. You’d better check that and see where they are right 
now before you squawk from your seat. 
 
Anyways, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve gone through the 
committees, why the Fyke Commission and the Fyke committee 
isn’t going to work, from the history that we’ve had. We’ve 
gone through the rural constituency that I mentioned, what’s 
happening in my particular constituency, and we’ve discussed 
Gabriel Springs. 
 
One more thing that I need to say about my constituency. We 
have some very major highways running through there, 
highways which are very accident prone, particularly Highway 
11. And I think my community, my town, has three different 
accesses on to the highway, Highway 11. I believe in total, in 
the last number of years, we’ve had between 10 to 20 people 
killed on those three intersections. So it’s sort of a morbid 
thought but because of the accidents caused on that particular 
highway, we need a hospital where people can come, get that 
emergency help so that we save lives. If you’re not going to do 
it on the highways, let’s at least do it in the hospitals. This 
government needs to recognize that. 
 
For those sorts of things, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 
amendment, and definitely not the motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
take a few moments tonight just to express my thoughts in 
regards to the committee that the government has been 
proposing to bring forward at this time, the reason why we are 
standing in this Assembly and debating this issue. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important. And certainly it’s 
important that the individual members who have taken the 
opportunity that is afforded them as members of this Assembly 
to stand and speak, it’s important for us to voice the concerns 
and . . . the concerns of our constituents, and also just raise 
these issues with the government, with the minister responsible, 
certainly with the Premier, and let the government members 
know that there are people living in this province who live 
outside of Regina and Saskatoon, the large urban centres. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to quote from a 
couple of articles that appeared most recently in one of my local 
papers — both of them actually in the Moosomin World 
Spectator. And one of the articles, the headline is, “Speak up in 
response to the Fyke Report.” It says: 
 

We are very fortunate to have a full staff of very capable 
doctors, but if we lose our hospital one cannot expect them 
to stay. The medical staff are the only ones who have raised 
their concerns, but we can’t expect them to always speak 
on our behalf. When our hospital is closed and the doctors 
have left, people will wonder, how could this ever happen? 
(And it says) So come on, Moosomin and area, let your 
voice be heard before it is too late. 

 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re hearing, 
beginning to hear from across this province. People are 
becoming very concerned. And as the impact of the potential of 
the Fyke report begins to sink in, more and more people are 
starting to sit back and give some thought to this whole process. 
And that’s why we have the debate this evening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another letter to the editor and the headline is, 
“Fyke ignorant of rural Saskatchewan.” It says: 
 

It seems to me that Mr. Fyke is completely ignorant of 
conditions in rural Saskatchewan. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the fact that actually Mr. Fyke came from 
the Moosomin area certainly says something as to what people 
in that area are beginning to think, and think of one of their own 
sons. This letter goes on to say: 
 

Anyone who is familiar with conditions in rural 
Saskatchewan knows that if the people of our rural areas 
are to receive the medical services that they deserve, there 
need to be many small hospitals across our rural areas. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I believe today, as well, the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons has also indicated in a letter that 
we’ve received that there is a place for many rural hospitals. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that we also need to acknowledge — 
and the member from Canora brought that up earlier today — 
that maybe not all the hospitals we had in the past were 
essential or we could afford to have them, but we cannot afford 
to move to 13 regional centres and leave so much, such a large 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1377 

 

area of the province out of our health care system. 
 
The letter, and I continue to quote from it, says: 
 

This reveals a complete lack of feeling for rural people 
when you consider what a 60 or 80 mile drive in a blizzard 
over poor roads would be like with a critically ill patient. 

 
And the writer says: 
 

When Mr. Fyke tells us that we’d be better served by fewer 
rural hospitals, even though we would have to drive for 60 
to 80 minutes to get to a regional hospital, the words are 
very familiar to most people. 

 
And he said: 
 

If they are not, they should be. It was that same line of talk 
that the experts at Saskatchewan Wheat Pool told the 
farmers, producers and others. They said they were going 
to tear down the local elevators, build a few big concrete 
terminals situated in choice locations across the province 
and that would give better service at less cost, even if we 
had to haul our grain 50 to 60 miles. 
 
As everyone knows, the exact opposite is true, plus it’s 
contributed to the destruction of our roads. 

 
And the writer goes on to say: 
 

If we allow the government to implement the Fyke report 
as it now stands, our medicare, as we now know it, will go 
the same way the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is going, 
completely finished. 

 
And he has more to say and it says: 
 

It’s time that people realize that there is no such a thing as a 
free lunch in health care. 

 
Mr. Speaker, health care is a vital component of delivery of 
services here in the province of Saskatchewan. In fact, our 
members . . . government members realize the cost to 
implement and to continue to maintain the level of health care 
we have in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re all familiar with the promise that the 
NDP made in 1991 when they went to the public asking for 
their support to be elected as the government of the province. 
And then after they were elected and they said we forgot, we 
didn’t take a close look at the books. We have to open the 
books and the money isn’t there, therefore we’ve got to change 
how we do things. 
 
And at that time the former minister of Health basically decided 
that we were going to change things dramatically in the health 
care field and we eliminated 53 hospitals. And I believe the 
minister of Health of the day said the reason we cut back the 
hospitals was to save money. And as a result of cutting 53 
hospitals it meant that there were fewer caregivers, it meant that 
there were fewer nurses in hospitals, and heavy care aides and 
LPNs (licensed practical nurse) working in our hospitals 
because we didn’t have 53 fewer hospitals to work in. 

However, Mr. Speaker, the government at the same time 
introduced 38 health districts. And what I have found in the 
constituency of Moosomin, and I think my colleagues have 
found the same thing, that people have been looking over for 
the last 10 years at what’s been happening to health care 
delivery and the expenditure of health care dollars, and what 
they’re seeing is less and less of the services that are needed in 
the acute care field and the heavy care field and the needs of 
patient services, but they’ve actually seen what appears to be a 
larger expenditure at the administrative level of health care 
delivery. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this whole debate that we’re entering into 
tonight is centred around the fact of how we deliver that 
service. And as I said earlier, the former minister of Health, 
when the wellness model came into place, said we needed to 
change how we deliver services and we needed to cut back on 
the number of facilities in order to save money. 
 
The minister of Health that followed that minister said after we 
looked at the books . . . and actually there was higher 
expenditures. While we cut 53 hospitals and while we cut a lot 
of health districts, Mr. Speaker, we actually noted that there was 
a higher level of expenditure in health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan as far as the provincial dollars. And the minister 
of Health said, well it wasn’t all about saving money, it was 
about how you were spending money and spending it well. 
And, Mr. Speaker, in the meantime more and more people 
found themselves on longer and longer waiting lists just waiting 
for some of the essential services in health care. 
 
And so what has this government done for the last 10 years? 
Mr. Speaker, this government was elected in ’91. They were 
supposed to have a vision for health care but yet they’re still 
living in the past. They’re living in the Tommy Douglas era of 
medicare and telling the people of Saskatchewan, you trust us 
because the NDP or the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) — now the NDP — are the only political party and 
the only people who know how to deliver health care services in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well what have we seen after 10 years, Mr. Speaker? I would 
suggest to you that there are fewer and fewer people believe any 
more that this group of individual MLAs have a clue as to how 
they deliver health care services. And, Mr. Speaker, how do we 
. . . how do we know that? The fact that every time they run into 
a problem they decide to set up another committee. 
 
(20:00) 
 
And what did they do? They brought in a former deputy 
minister of Health to sit down and study the delivery of health 
care in the province of Saskatchewan, a gentleman by the name 
of Mr. Fyke, to come up with a proposal and a plan for health 
care delivery services in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, after $2 million, what did we get? We got a 
plan that basically calls for fewer hospital facilities and fewer 
services and in some cases, Mr. Speaker, almost puts us back 
into the old days of where you provided your health care 
delivery right at home. And, Mr. Speaker, is that what people 
need? Is that what people are asking for? 
 



1378 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe people are asking for everything to 
be handed to them on a platter, but I believe people want to 
know that when they’re sick or in need of a health care facility 
or medical services or the need of a physician, that the services 
will be available and will be accessible — and, Mr. Speaker, in 
a facility that is as close to them as possible, not 60 or 80 miles 
away based on the recommendations or the suggestions that are 
coming out of the Fyke report. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, my colleagues today have raised a number of 
issues that have . . . a broad range of issues that have been 
brought to their attention from across this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And while we had Mr. Fyke in this Assembly and the 
opportunity to question and quiz Mr. Fyke about his 
recommendations in view of the concerns that our constituents 
had, Mr. Speaker, after about six and a half hours, as the 
government members have been chirping from their seats today, 
the debate was stymied, was called off, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they shut the debate down before all of the 
members in the opposition benches had an opportunity to 
actually rise and raise the questions. In fact, when some of my 
colleagues were speaking today, one of the . . . the member 
from Greystone for example, chirped from his seat, you had 
plenty of time to ask the right questions. Well what are the right 
questions, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I believe the questions that our constituents were looking for us 
to raise . . . They wanted us to ask Mr. Fyke exactly what he 
meant by this submission in his report, exactly what he meant 
by 13 regional centres, exactly what he meant about where 
these facilities would be. Because, Mr. Speaker, at the end of 
the day, the people who live in the Moosomin constituency are 
going to look at that map and determine where they should be 
settling at the end . . . when they retire, or even if they should 
move from the area. They’re going to be looking at what 
community has a health care facility because that’s where 
they’re going to desire to move closer to. And what does that 
do, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, it’s just another nail in rural . . . 
the coffin of rural Saskatchewan as services are taken out of 
communities and people leave those communities, leaving 
small businesses trying to struggle to stay alive because the 
services aren’t there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we look at the committee the government’s 
promising. Mr. Speaker, I thought Mr. Fyke was supposed to 
come up with a recommendation that as MLAs . . . and this 
government could certainly work with and build upon, and that 
would address the delivery of health care services so that all the 
people of Saskatchewan could believe they had access to 
quality health care. And that quality health care within the 
framework of a, of a financial situation that is achievable and is 
deliverable and, Mr. Speaker, addresses not only the concerns 
of the nursing staff or the doctors but all the health care workers 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, what we found — and I believe what’s 
happened again — is the government all of a sudden when Mr. 
Fyke presented his report, the report wasn’t exactly what the 
government was looking for. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Health and the Premier of this province and many of 
the members on that side of the Assembly all of a sudden found 
themselves at odds with people right across this province. 

Maybe, Mr. Speaker, and certainly for the members in the 
larger centres like Saskatoon and Regina, the general feeling 
might have been well, you know, that isn’t all that bad at all 
because they’re living in the two large delivery centres. And so 
of course they’re going to be close to health care services. 
 
But for the majority of the people of this province, they 
certainly wouldn’t have that access. And coming from a 
government and a Premier who just implemented or built 
another ministry — a ministry for rural development or to 
address the rural needs and trying to determine how this 
government is going to respond to the needs of rural residents 
of this province — Mr. Fyke’s report I believe did not provide 
the avenue that the government was looking for of reaching out 
to rural Saskatchewan. So rather than just trashing it 
completely, they’ve now determined that we should study it 
again. Mr. Speaker, what does that do by studying it again? 
 
What we’ve seen for the last 10 years, we’ve seen a government 
that has lacked a vision, that is floundering in the area of how 
it’s going to deliver health care. And every time they run into a 
crisis, they establish another committee to study the issue. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe people across rural Saskatchewan 
are becoming tired of studies — studies that basically don’t 
move us anywhere and really aren’t moving us into the 21st 
century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, communities like Moosomin are becoming very 
frustrated as well. For the last number of years the community 
of Moosomin has had a request in for a new hospital . . . health 
care facility. And for the last three or four years they’ve been 
stonewalled and they’ve been put off because well we’re just 
about . . . we’re very close to a provincial election and we don’t 
feel we should be making an announcement at this time. 
 
Well the election came and went. And the committee in 
Moosomin are waiting for the government to announce their 
new health care facility that they keep promising is on its way. 
And they said, well we’re not exactly sure that what you’re 
looking at in Moosomin will fit into health care delivery in the 
future, and we need to take a closer look at health care delivery 
services, and so we’re going to appoint Mr. Fyke to do a study. 
And while Mr. Fyke is doing the study we’re not going to 
announce any capital projects. 
 
So the committee in Moosomin said well fine, we’ll accept the 
fact that there’s a study being undertaken to determine how we 
can more effectively provide health care services, but when that 
study is complete we hope to have an answer as to whether our 
facility goes ahead. 
 
In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, the community and the health 
committee have been moving forward, raising funds, putting in 
place the dollars to work together with the provincial funds to 
build that health care facility. But here they still sit in limbo, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so what do we have now? Mr. Fyke has presented his 
report and then the government comes up with, well we’d better 
study that a little more, so we’re going to put a standing 
committee together and see if we can come up with . . . I don’t 
know if it’s a better idea or exactly what the idea is. My guess, 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1379 

 

Mr. Speaker, is the fact that what this government has basically 
said, we’re just going to stall a little while longer until we can 
get our heads around this whole area of health care services and 
delivery to determine whether or not we’re going in the right 
direction. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we have the standing committee on the 
Fyke report, another study which is just delaying the inevitable 
— a government finally putting its head around the issue and 
coming up with a plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Fyke Commission really didn’t give us an 
answer to health care delivery services. In fact one of the issues 
that my colleagues and I felt very strongly of when Mr. Fyke 
was actually doing his study, we believe Mr. Fyke should have 
been allowed the ability to do an overall view of health care 
delivery and take a look at how we’re expending the dollars 
right now, and see if he could have come up with even a better 
idea than what he supposedly brought forward that was the best 
idea for health care delivery in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you wonder why this opposition is concerned 
about another study and about a standing committee — a 
standing committee that we suggested to the government. If it 
just follows the rules of the Channel Lake Committee, at the 
end of the day the standing committee appears, Mr. Speaker . . . 
It’s just another way of the government because they don’t have 
an idea, because they don’t know where they’re going. They’re 
just flying . . . their standing committee is a way of basically 
blaming somebody else if it doesn’t work. And that’s the 
concern that has been raised on this side of the House by many 
of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, as the member for Moosomin I believe 
it’s important for me to stand up and speak, and speak on behalf 
of the constituents of Moosomin. The people of Moosomin 
have been working so diligently for health care services. And 
when I talk about how diligently they’ve been working, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the O.R. room, the operating room in the 
hospital of Moosomin, currently as it exists, is up and running. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not up and running because this 
government put the tools in place to provide the services. It’s up 
and running because the community had six active doctors who 
said enough was enough. There were services they could 
provide if they had the equipment available. And physicians in 
the area had actually gone to take extra training so they could be 
the anaesthetists and provide the medical services in the O.R. 
room. The community raised the funds to upgrade the operating 
room so that those services could be performed. 
 
And to this date the community is now waiting for the 
government to complete its study to see whether or not that 
O.R. room is fulfilling its role. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that, Mr. Speaker, that people 
who have had the privilege of receiving the services of the O.R. 
room in Moosomin have been very pleased that it has been in 
operation for over a year now, and that it is serving the purpose 
of not only Moosomin, Mr. Speaker, but even the chemotherapy 
that is being involved. 
 
People from Kamsack are coming to Moosomin for 

chemotherapy. People from close to Regina are coming to 
Moosomin for chemotherapy. And you would ask why, Mr. 
Speaker. Because in Moosomin they have quality caregivers 
providing the service and they’ve got access almost 
immediately versus coming into Regina or Saskatoon and 
waiting in line for your chemotherapy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as the college has indicated, there is a place 
for a lot of rural centres to provide a . . . to have an integral part 
into the delivery of health care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And I stand with my colleagues. I stand with my colleagues 
here this evening, Mr. Speaker, just to reiterate that fact: that we 
need to stand up, and we must stand up for our constituents. 
 
And my colleagues and I have certainly desire to work out a 
health care plan and delivery service that provides service to 
each and every resident of this province, be they a resident of 
the Southwest or the extreme North, to provide delivery in the 
most economical form and the most accessible form that is 
possible. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I see that some of my other colleagues 
would like to speak as well and it behooves me to begin to wrap 
up my speech. I think, as our pastor says, well about another 15 
minutes I’ll be done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, let me put it this way. The people of 
Moosomin are looking for this government to show some 
direction and to let them know where things stand in regards to 
the new facility. The people of Kipling want to know that that 
facility which is, Mr. Speaker, if you’re looking at it . . . Mr. 
Fyke was suggesting maybe 60 or 80 miles to the nearest 
regional centre. Well Kipling is sitting pretty well right 
in-between and it’s 90 miles away. So what does that say if 
there is an emergency shows up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are hospitals in this province and rural 
communities that are providing just a superb service to those 
communities and surrounding area. And if you wonder why we 
speak with such passion on this side of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, you can understand why. Come out and visit some of 
our communities. Come out and visit some of the hospitals. 
Come out and talk to some of the doctors and the caregivers in 
those communities and you’ll find out exactly how strongly 
they feel about the delivery of those services and why they are 
so concerned about the Fyke report, and why they agree with us 
and concerned about the direction this government continues to 
go by just putting off coming up with a plan that will provide 
health care services that is accessible and available to the 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I must say that I stand in support 
of the amendment as put forth by my colleague, the member 
from Melfort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
must say that I was enjoying the comments of the member from 
Moosomin and for my part he could have gone on for another 
15 minutes. It was excellent material and certainly well worth 
all members of the House listening to his remarks. 
 



1380 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are debating a motion to refer the contents of 
the Fyke report to a newly constructed Standing Committee on 
Health Care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us certainly recognize the importance of 
health care in Saskatchewan. I don’t believe there is a single 
member in this House that doesn’t recognize that health care is 
one of the most important deliveries of government. Mr. 
Speaker, most of us understand that because of first-hand 
experience. 
 
(20:15) 
 
I remember, Mr. Speaker, when I became the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party. I believe — and I stand to be corrected — 
but I believe the very first function that I responded to after 
becoming Leader of the Saskatchewan Party was to attend a 
rally. It was called Save the Plains hospital rally and it was east 
of Regina — I can’t remember if it was Indian Head or Fort 
Qu’Appelle, one of those communities. 
 
I believe the member from Moosomin was the health care critic 
for the newly minted Saskatchewan Party. And I remember that 
foremost in the minds of people, at least in the southern half of 
Saskatchewan, was maintaining quality health care and the 
importance of the Plains hospital in providing that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because I quickly recognized how important 
health care was at the provincial level after having been in 
federal politics for a number of years, I embarked on a tour of 
most of the health districts in Saskatchewan. I met with officials 
of most of the health districts in our province, met with health 
care providers in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they were very 
forthright and very willing to share their understanding and 
information pertinent to health care with me as the Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
I want to go on public record as thanking the very many 
dedicated people that deliver health care in Saskatchewan for 
their unselfish service to the province and also, Mr. Speaker, for 
sharing with me much of the knowledge and wisdom that they 
have about the health care system here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to show me up, my critic for health care, the 
member for Melfort-Tisdale, embarked on even a more 
extensive study and tour of health care in Saskatchewan. I 
believe that my colleague from Melfort-Tisdale has probably 
met with every health district in the province. He has toured 
most of the hospitals in Saskatchewan. He has met with every 
professional health care association in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I say to every member 
through you in the House that I believe the health care system 
knows that they have a friend that understands them in the 
member from Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party was the only political 
party that made a submission to the Fyke report. It was an 
extensive multi-page report, Mr. Speaker. It’s a public 
document; it’s been tabled in this Assembly. It is currently on 
our caucus Web site. 
 
We have staked our position, Mr. Speaker, and it deals with all 
aspects of health care. It deals with acute care. It deals with 

home care. It deals with long-term care. It deals with primary, 
secondary, tertiary, and special needs care, Mr. Speaker. It’s all 
there for the public to see. The Saskatchewan Party has not hid 
its position on health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do this because at least on this side of the 
House, and I believe on that side as well, we’ve all had personal 
experience that has given us impressions of health care in this 
province. 
 
And I think to my own father, who has passed away. He had 
Alzheimer’s for the last years of his life. Mr. Speaker, that was 
a difficult time for our family, and we came to realize some of 
the issues that health care providers grapple with as we deal 
with loved ones who see their health failing them and need a 
system that will deal with an issue and a disease like that one. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have a couple of uncles that are actually 
still living . . . one has left Saskatchewan. The one uncle was 
injured back in the ‘70s — this is in the Allan Blakeney health 
care era — and, Mr. Speaker, it was out in my part of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the doctor had to come to pick him 
up — and he was badly injured from a construction accident — 
had to come and pick him up with his own station wagon. 
 
Can you imagine? A very seriously injured man, and the doctor 
drove out with his own station wagon and we loaded my uncle 
into the station wagon, took him to the nearest hospital which 
was about 20 minutes away, got him stabilized, and then had to 
transfer him to an ambulance in the next town, and then had to 
get him into Saskatoon for emergency medical treatment. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m trying to remember exactly how many hours it 
was from the time he was injured until he actually received the 
medical care that he needed in Saskatoon, but it was a long 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of those kind of stories, communities 
embarked upon improving health care, and there is now an 
ambulance in my community. It was bought by my, it was 
bought by the people who lived . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
no, no, not thanks . . . some member across . . . This is serious 
stuff, I wish they’d listen. Some member across there . . . thanks 
to Roy Romanow. It was not thanks to Roy Romanow. It was 
thanks, Mr. Speaker, to concerned people, real people 
concerned about loved ones, who dug into their own pocket, 
pulled out money, wrote cheques, and funded an ambulance that 
would provide health care, Mr. Speaker. Roy Romanow had 
absolutely nothing to do with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, more recently, more 
recently, under the Roy Romanow health care era, I had an 
uncle that needed a hip replacement. And, Mr. Speaker, he had 
to go month after month after month being on a waiting list, and 
they kept postponing it. I believe it was close to two years 
before this loved one was able to get his care that he required. 
 
And I just want to relate one other personal experience if the 
members opposite will listen. I live near a lake, and there was a 
young man, he was in his teens and unfortunately he drowned. 
And, Mr. Speaker, health care provision arrived; unfortunately 
not in enough time. But in those kind of situations when you’re 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1381 

 

standing at the shoreline as I was, and you’re watching health 
care professionals try to revive the life of a young man, you 
realize how important health care is. 
 
And I was impressed with that doctor with equipment, with 
putting the electricity, trying to restore the heartbeat of this 
young man, and when minutes count, Mr. Speaker. 
Unfortunately for this young man there weren’t enough 
minutes, but at least there was an ambulance and there was a 
doctor within about 20 minutes and so there was at least a 
chance. There was at least a reason to try. And at least the 
family of that young man knows that there was a health care 
system within a reasonable distance that made an effort to save 
that young man’s life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I read the comments of the Deputy House Leader 
as he opened the debate on referring the Fyke report to the 
Standing Committee on Health Care. And, Mr. Speaker, he 
quoted me from I believe it was November 2, and he said: 
 

And I’ll quote from Hansard, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The success or failure of governments at both levels to 
design and implement an effective 21st century publicly 
funded health care system will to a large extent be dictated 
by the degree to which citizens are given the opportunity 
for real influence. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the House Leader for the government 
applauded that statement, and I certainly stand by it, Mr. 
Speaker. But we’ve seen from this government that they will 
not allow the public an opportunity for real influence and 
decision making. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see it over and over and over again in every 
area in every department of this government that it’s 
government control — keep a lid on information, Mr. Speaker, 
don’t let the public know what’s going on, whether it be water 
quality, whether it be some of the capers of the Crowns. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re led to believe that perhaps even in 
health care this government is not really wanting to give the 
information to the public and allow them to have a real 
influence over the decisions that are made regarding it. 
 
I refer back to the closing of the Plains hospital. Mr. Speaker, if 
there was ever a clear message from the people of 
Saskatchewan . . . Mr. Speaker, if there was ever a message that 
you could not doubt, it was the people of southern 
Saskatchewan wanted the Plains hospital to remain open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I went to the rallies. Some of the members . . . I 
remember the Deputy Premier being at some of the rallies. I 
think he was the minister of Health at the time if I’m not 
mistaken. He heard people practically crying and pleading. 
There were petitions that were brought forward in this House 
with hundreds and hundreds of names. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberal leader at the time was going to chain himself to the door 
of the Plains hospital and he and his two remaining colleagues 
made this the battle cry, Mr. Speaker. They’ve since forgotten 
all about it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people legitimately don’t think 

they have real influence because when they have voiced their 
opinions, and when they’ve made it abundantly clear to this 
government what direction they are to go, they haven’t had a 
positive response. They’ve had a shrug of the shoulders, Mr. 
Speaker, and a no, thank you, we’ll do it our way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the standing 
committee because this is brand new. A brand new standing 
committee on health care, can you imagine. Tens of . . . what, 
decades, and we have not had a committee. And I hear the 
Government House Leader, the member for Prince Albert, and 
he’s also the Government . . . not only the Government House 
Leader, he’s also the Minister for Economic Development, so 
he must have a . . . you know, he’s got a lot of irons in the fire. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell that member, and all members 
in the House, number one, I support the concept of standing 
committees. He said that he thought I did. Well I’ll set the 
record straight. In fact, Mr. Speaker, prior to coming to this 
auspicious Assembly, I have sat on standing committees. 
 
And I want to tell you some of the rules that we followed when 
I was serving on these standing committees. Mr. Speaker, I 
served on two, actually. I was a full-fledged member of the 
standing procedure on House rules and procedures, or 
Procedures and House Affairs, I believe it was called. I was also 
a member of the Standing Committee on Agriculture in the 
federal parliament of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was on that committee . . . when I was on 
that committee, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the 
Government House Leader would listen for a few minutes, I 
want to tell him about my experience serving on standing 
committees. 
 
First of all, the rules allowed you to question the government. 
Mr. Speaker. I was part of the committee, the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture hearings when we agreed to have the 
special session here. And then we agreed to put together this . . . 
an all-party and sector committee together. But, Mr. Speaker, 
the rules then were that yes, you can question the federal 
government, but you daren’t say anything about the provincial 
government and its responsibility. Those were the rules, and we 
were supposed to abide by those rules. We mustn’t say anything 
about provincial responsibility when it comes to agriculture, 
only point your finger at the feds. And if you can play by those 
rules, then you can be on our committee. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when I was on the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture those weren’t the rules. You could certainly . . . in 
fact the whole point of being on the federal Standing 
Committee on Agriculture was to deal with the federal 
government’s role in agriculture. 
 
As I mean . . . we let the provinces deal with the provincial 
issues, federal dealt with the federal. You would think that 
when you have a federal . . . a provincial standing committee, 
your focus would be on provincial responsibility. But not with 
the NDP; they would much rather point the finger at somebody 



1382 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

else than possibly look inwardly at their own responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, you could also . . . on the standing 
committees I served on, you could actually see the report before 
it was tabled in the House. Mr. Speaker, you were actually part 
of writing the report; you actually had input into the report. 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you were in opposition and you didn’t 
agree with the majority in the committee, you could submit a 
minority report. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s certainly different than the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations that did the study into 
Channel Lake. The opposition certainly had no hand in writing 
the report. In fact, the government members didn’t have a hand 
in writing the report. It was written by the premier’s aide, Mr. 
Speaker. It was delivered to the media before members of the 
standing committee even saw the report. What an abuse of 
democratic process, and certainly not the way a standing 
committee is supposed to function, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m really not used to the NDP’s way of running standing 
committees, Mr. Speaker. Table officers wrote the report and 
table officers consulted with all members of the committee and 
drafts were produced and changes were made democratically, 
Mr. Speaker. Not the way the NDP operates their standing 
committees where the premier’s assistant, Brian Topp, goes off 
in a little room — I suppose under direct orders from the 
premier — and writes out the report in a way that whitewashes 
and absolves the government of all responsibility and then gives 
that report to the media without the members of the committee 
having even seen the report. 
 
Even the member for Regina South knew that that was wrong, 
Mr. Speaker, and he complained, Mr. Speaker. He complained 
about the lack of democracy and responsibility on that 
committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then the opposition members chose which of their 
members would actually sit on the committee; not like this 
government who wants to choose for the opposition who would 
even sit on this committee. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know about standing committees, and, Mr. 
Speaker, I support standing committees, and, Mr. Speaker, we 
have members here on the provincial standing committees. But 
what I would point out to the Government House Leader and to 
all members in the House is that there are right and proper ways 
to run your standing committees and there are wrong and 
abusive ways to operate your standing committees. And what I 
have seen up to this point from the NDP government is they 
lean pretty heavily towards running them wrong instead of 
right. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I had mentioned, finally we have a 
Standing Committee on Health Care. Why now? Why 2001, 
almost 100 years after the province was formed? What are we at 
now, about 67 years after Tommy Douglas first became the 
premier of Saskatchewan? A half a century since the big 
medicare debate or almost half a century since the big medicare 
debate in Saskatchewan, we finally have a Standing Committee 
on Health Care. 
 
(20:30) 

Mr. Speaker, I think that there are three reasons why we have 
this committee struck right now, and they all, all three reasons 
start with the letter D. First of all, delay. Mr. Speaker, some 
decisions have to be made and that government is not prepared 
to make them. Mr. Speaker, the Fyke, the Fyke Commission 
report is tabled. The recommendations are there. The decisions 
need to be made, Mr. Speaker, but they’re not ready to bite the 
bullet whether it be good or bad. They’re not ready to stake 
their ground. They want to delay a little longer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think they have another ulterior motive, and I 
believe that that’s to deflect, deflect responsibility from 
themselves and put it on a larger group. And I’m sure that the 
Deputy House Leader and perhaps the Premier and the Deputy 
Premier and perhaps the Minister of Health sat down and said, 
you know, we’re going to take a lot of heat over this Fyke 
Commission. There’s a lot of things in there that are going to be 
pretty hard to handle because they may not actually improve 
health care in Saskatchewan. How are we going to spread the 
blame around more people than just ourselves? 
 
And so they said, what we’re going to do is we’re going to 
somehow try to include the Saskatchewan Party in this by 
striking a committee and putting their members on this 
committee, and then every time that we make a decision about 
health care, every time that we see health care professionals 
leave the province or we see a health care facility downgraded, 
they’ll say, well you know folks, the Saskatchewan Party knew 
about that. They were part of the hearings, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, their names are at the end of the report. And whether 
we oppose it or support it, Mr. Speaker, they will try to include 
us in their decision-making process, even though, Mr. Speaker, 
based on past performance, we would not be given one iota of 
say or influence on that committee whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the third reason, the third reason that they 
wanted to strike this committee, they wanted some mechanism 
to direct the outcome the way they wanted. And I use the word 
direct, but really what I mean is manipulate, Mr. Speaker. They 
want to manipulate the process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was just . . . like the Fyke report was just a little 
too cut and dried. Mr. Speaker. Probably some things, some 
things they wanted to adopt; perhaps some other areas that they 
didn’t want to adopt it and so they thought they’d direct or 
manipulate the outcome by striking the committee. 
 
And we’ve seen an example of that, Mr. Speaker, in the 
standing committee on the child sex trade. Mr. Speaker, my 
colleague, the member from Humboldt, has led a province-wide 
awareness campaign of the terrible abuse that many children are 
suffering because of the sex trade in our province. Mr. Speaker, 
she caused that issue to be made — an issue that the public 
became very aware of. 
 
I commend her, and I think all members would commend her, 
for her excellent effort on that. And she was putting some heat 
on the government. I mean, as she revealed the problem 
growing and becoming a huge problem in Saskatoon, Regina, 
and Prince Albert, the government realized they had to do 
something. 
 
So months ago — and I’m not sure; my colleague could tell me 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1383 

 

— I don’t know how many months ago this committee was 
struck, but I think it was close to a year ago when they actually 
struck this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . over a year ago my 
colleague from Humboldt tells me when they struck this 
committee. By that time my colleague had already suggested 
many concrete steps that could be taken. 
 
What does this government do? They want to delay things, they 
want to deflect criticism, they want to direct the outcome, and 
they want to do it through a long, elongated process, Mr. 
Speaker. And so that committee is still holding hearings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they still haven’t introduced legislation on that 
side of the House that will deal with the child sex trade — one 
of the most despicable things that we observe in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they talk about it until the cows 
come home. Mr. Speaker, that’s not good enough for the 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t know if they plan to mothball this 
Standing Committee on Health Care after it brings down a 
report or not. If other committees like the Committee on 
Agriculture or the Committee on the Environment are any 
indication of this government’s respect for standing 
committees, once they’ve figured out a way to deal with the 
difficulties created by the Fyke Commission, the Standing 
Committee on Health Care will become as obscure as other 
committees. Mr. Speaker, I hope that’s not the case. 
 
Anyways, Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the member for 
Melfort-Tisdale, introduced an amendment to the motion put 
forward by the government. And, Mr. Speaker, that amendment 
calls or would bring to the attention of the House a number of 
issues. 
 
The first issue that that amendment makes us aware of is that 
this government knows how to reduce health care services. Mr. 
Speaker, they have closed at least 53 hospitals in the last 
decade. And, Mr. Speaker, when they closed these hospitals — 
and some of them were in my area — they made a promise. 
They made a commitment to the people that when they 
undertook this process health care would actually improve. 
We’ll close the hospitals, but we’ll improve your health care. I 
think the member for Kindersley talked a bit about that in his 
speech on this issue on Friday. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, every community where the hospitals were 
closed have seen the deterioration of health care. Bar none, Mr. 
Speaker, bar none they have seen a deterioration in the delivery 
of health care. Mr. Speaker, we thought, because of that, we 
should include that in our amendment to the motion. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know, we know that the Fyke 
Commission recognized problems with health care but there 
were very, very few concrete proposals put forward that have 
ever been tested, that have ever been tested. And you know, the 
member just opposite was talking about agriculture policy, and 
why he raised that when I was talking about health care, I have 
no idea. 
 
But it reminds me of what the federal government did when 
they eliminated the Crow benefit. Mr. Speaker, they eliminated 
the Crow benefit and they said they were going to put 

something better in place. They said that they were going to put 
a transition fund in place, but they were going to first eliminate 
the Crow benefit and then they would get all of the other things 
put in place that were necessary. 
 
Well that’s the same tactic that the NDP use — we’re going to 
get rid of a bunch of stuff, but don’t worry; we’ll make it better 
down the road. Well, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals weren’t able to 
do that when it came to the Crow benefit, and that’s why I 
voted against the budget that eliminated the Crow benefit. 
 
This government in 1993 brought forward the wellness model 
and said they were going to make things better. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they haven’t made health care better in Saskatchewan. 
They promise . . . They do two things. They promise to take 
something away and then they promise to replace it with 
something better. They keep the first promise and every time, 
Mr. Speaker, they break the second promise. And the people of 
Saskatchewan are left the worse for wear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also mention in our amendment the fact that 
we are losing health care professionals in Saskatchewan. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, some would make this whole Fyke report an issue 
of health care in rural Saskatchewan versus urban 
Saskatchewan, but that’s certainly not the case. And when we 
see health care professionals leaving Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, I daresay more of them are leaving the urban centres 
than are leaving rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some very dedicated health care 
providers in rural Saskatchewan, but every time I pick up The 
StarPhoenix or the Regina Leader-Post, I read about specialists 
leaving Regina or Saskatoon. And, Mr. Speaker, to the point 
where whole health care disciplines are put at risk, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why are the waiting lists so long in Saskatchewan 
— not in rural Saskatchewan but all of Saskatchewan — why 
are they so long? Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s because we do not 
have the health care professionals in place to provide adequate 
health care for even 1 million people in our province. Mr. 
Speaker, our amendment deals with the issue of the longest 
waiting lists for health care treatment in all of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because our amendment recognizes the failure of 
the NDP and the need to come forward with a comprehensive 
health care package, and the need to act rather than to diddle 
and to study and to study and to study some more, Mr. Speaker, 
we have put forward our amendment that actually means 
something and is worth supporting. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am happy to support the amendment 
and I will not be supporting the motion if the amendment fails. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — There being no further speakers, we now will 
be conducting the vote. The first vote will be on the amendment 
proposed by the member for Melfort-Tisdale, seconded by the 
member for Weyburn-Big Muddy, the amendment to the main 
motion which was originally moved by the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote and the member for Saskatoon Northwest. 



1384 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

The division bells rang from 20:41 until 20:46. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 22 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
McMorris D’Autremont Weekes 
Bjornerud Kwiatkowski Brkich 
Harpauer Allchurch Peters 
Huyghebaert   
 

Nays — 28 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Atkinson Serby Melenchuk 
Cline Sonntag Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Wartman Thomson 
Prebble Belanger Crofford 
Axworthy Nilson Hamilton 
Junor Harper Jones 
Higgins Kasperski Trew 
Osika Lorjé Yates 
McCall   
 
The division bells rang from 20:49 until 20:50. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 28 
 

Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Atkinson Serby Melenchuk 
Cline Sonntag Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Wartman Thomson 
Prebble Belanger Crofford 
Axworthy Nilson Hamilton 
Junor Harper Jones 
Higgins Kasperski Trew 
Osika Lorjé Yates 
McCall   
 

Nays — 22 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
McMorris D’Autremont Weekes 
Bjornerud Kwiatkowski Brkich 
Harpauer Allchurch Peters 
Huyghebaert   
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 
(Subvote SP01) 

The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, this 
evening I have with me, to my immediate left, John Law, 
president of Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 
Behind John is Mr. Paul Radigan. He is the director of financial 
planning. And beside Paul is Garth Rusconi, vice-president of 
accommodation services. And right beside me, on the right, 
would be Al Moffat, vice-president of commercial services. 
 
Mr. Chair, in our last session there were some questions asked 
of me, and I would like to provide this response first to the 
member from Wood River. The member from Wood River 
asked a number of questions about air transportation services, 
including cost per mile, aircraft usage, and the breakdown of 
cost per mile of the aircraft. One of the questions dealt with cost 
per mile and whether our $4 per mile charge includes costs such 
as hangarage, payroll, insurance, and all other ancillary costs. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Chair, that SPMC’s cost per mile figure does 
include payroll, insurance, and other ancillary costs, but 
because the air transportation hangar in Regina is fully 
depreciated, hangarage costs are minimal, of course. For the 
hangar leased by air ambulance in Saskatoon, accommodation 
costs equal about 20 cents of that charge per mile. 
 
The member from Wood River had also asked for a breakdown 
of the usage of the fleet of aircraft and the breakdown of the 
cost per mile for the aircraft. In response to that, Mr. Chair, for 
Regina-based Executive Air for 2000 and 2001, average costs 
per mile are about $4.16, with total miles flown, 421,561. For 
Saskatoon-based air ambulance for 2000 and 2001, average 
costs per mile are $3.34, with 578,939 miles flown. 
 
The question, the final question dealt with the cost of operation. 
The costs of operating the air ambulance and Executive Air 
programs for the previous fiscal year are $1.75 million for 
Executive Air and 1.935 million for air ambulance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Battleford-Cut Knife asked a 
number of questions regarding leased spaces, leased office 
space, and vacancy in leased office spaces. The question dealt 
with the amount of . . . one of the questions that we dealt with 
was the amount of leased space that is currently vacant. 
 
Approximately 2.6 per cent of SPMC’s lease space is vacant. 
This is substantially lower than what is considered to be the 
acceptable level of vacant space in the real estate industry 
which ranges from 5 to 7 per cent. 
 
(21:00) 
 
The member from Battleford-Cut Knife asked about the ratio of 
leased office space in the four major cities. In response to that I 
would say that 50 per cent of SPMC leased office space is 
located in Regina. There’s approximately 10 per cent of the 
space in Saskatoon, 9 per cent in Prince Albert, and less than 2 
per cent in Moose Jaw. 
 
And the final question that was dealt with on the leased office 
space in Regina that is currently vacant is the amount of leased 
office space in Regina that is vacant is approximately 1.2 per 
cent. While this is a very low vacancy rate, SPMC is 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1385 

 

undertaking a number of activities now in downtown Regina 
and SPMC expects to decrease this number even further with 
these initiatives. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the members for allowing me to 
respond to their previous questions and to introduce the officials 
present with me this evening. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I’d like 
to tackle an issue that’s really very dear to my heart at home 
and that is the movement or your moving the Department of 
Agriculture from its old building to the old liquor board store. 
And I’m wondering what that cost . . . what that move is going 
to cost and who is going to get struck with the cost of moving. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I thank the member opposite for the 
question and as he states, this is something that’s been near and 
dear to his heart, and certainly on behalf of his constituents has 
followed up on this many occasions with me in conversation 
and now tonight in Estimates. 
 
We are relocating a government department from a leased 
spaced to owned space in a government building. And I’m told 
the total cost of that project was $265,000 which includes 
$132,000 for tenant improvements to have the department move 
into that space. The rental rate for the last year of the term and 
the renewal period is $127,814 per year. So the payback time on 
this project is estimated to be about 2.8 years, and from there 
we will be having our office in a government office and 
government-owned building. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, I guess 
I have a concern about this move in regards to where you’ve 
located the Department of Agriculture now where parking is at 
a premium. In fact, there is no parking or virtually none, at least 
not for farm trucks like my constituents were used to doing in 
North Battleford. 
 
So what you’ve done there is you’ve curtailed where they can 
park now and I guess that’s a concern. And I guess I have a 
concern that you as a government or as a department were not 
listening to the people of the Battlefords in this regard. And I 
have a problem with that because I think if you want to destroy 
agriculture what you are doing is just a great way to do it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair, to the member opposite, we 
are an accommodation provider for departments of government. 
 
And in this case, the client would be Agriculture. That client 
would have to determine whether they can provide the 
programs and services that they are offering in that location to 
their clientele, and then base their decision on whether or not 
they want to expend additional dollars on accommodation or 
whether that would be better spent on delivery of programs and 
services through that department area. 
 
One of the areas that we talk about in doing improvements, of 
course, because it was one that was talked about, was the need 
to have some parking improvements. Some of the leasehold 
improvements would include parking and some additional 
accessibility measures to be taken to assist in the issue that the 
member identifies. 
 

But in the end, it would be up to the Department of Agriculture 
to determine if those dollars are going to be spent on programs 
and whether they can provide the services to their clientele from 
that location and, with those savings, provide programs and 
services directly to the people and the customers that they serve. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
switching gears totally, the renovations of the legislation has 
been completed. Can you tell us what the final cost of 
renovating the building has been or is. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair, I would be happy to answer 
the member’s question because the renovations of course have 
been watched carefully by all members of this Assembly. And 
there’s been a lot of going on after hours to make sure the 
disruption is minimal to the members — to our comfort and to 
our safety. 
 
And it seems that with final figure verification there may be a 
slight, very slight, variance up and down from this number, but 
we believe the final number would be $18.6 million. The 
budget provided was a $20 million budget. So I think the final 
figures you will find will either be verified there, or we will get 
back to you information. It might be slightly under or a little 
over that, but a slight variance from that 18.6 million. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
can you tell us if there were any major projects conducted 
during the renovation that were originally not planned for? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Through you, Mr. Chair, we didn’t, 
and tonight again we were trying to decide if there was some 
discovery of something that we hadn’t contemplated originally. 
But we knew originally that stabilization had to occur so the 
work done on the underpinning and replacing some of those, I 
say, leaning soldiers of the past had been done. 
 
Then we moved to address the life safety issues, the building 
code issues; and so you would see the sprinkler systems 
installed, the accessibility issues dealt with, and all of the while 
being mindful that this is a heritage property and we are bound 
by The Heritage Property Act. But there weren’t any, through 
the process of the renovations, any discoveries of something 
that was major that we hadn’t planned or expected would be 
there. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, part of 
the renovations was the long overdue completion of the ramp 
for visitors in wheelchairs. What was the final cost of this very 
worthwhile project? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Because the Legislative Building is a 
provincial heritage property as I mentioned, we were bound by 
The Heritage Property Act to ensure that any new construction 
is sympathetic to the original heritage designs and the 
architectural drawings from 1908. To do this, we had Tyndall 
limestone that was used for the exterior of the wheelchair ramp 
with the marble railing on the interior, and the interior of the 
entrance cost approximately $300,000 which includes the 
lighting, fire detection and sprinkler systems, the new flooring, 
the wheelchair ramp, and the railing. 
 
And I have to say that some of those features, the people from 



1386 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) 
discovered some of the fixtures and went to great detail and 
some work on those to refurbish what’s part of our heritage and 
the historical value of those items. And we appreciate the work 
that they did in discovery and then restoring them. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Does this include 
the construction of the new art gallery that is so very near the 
ramp for disability? And was the gallery part of the original 
plan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — With all of the fine advice I have this 
evening, and if memory would serve us well, the $300,000 cost 
would include the entire area — the accessibility entrance with 
the gallery. But just to make absolutely certain, we will 
double-check that information and will get that back to you as 
quickly as we can. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, besides 
the ventilation system in the legislature, is there anything that 
must be done in this building in the near future that was not 
done in the major renovation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair, to the member opposite, 
this is a building that has been valued at about $250 million as a 
heritage property. And as a building of this age and the value of 
that property, we would want to keep that asset well 
maintained. And so there will always be those ongoing 
maintenance issues with a building of this nature and size. 
 
When he’s asking if there’s anything that . . . we’ve done a lot 
of work. Completed work includes stabilizing the building with 
approximately 1,800 precast concrete piles using state-of-the-art 
technology. There’s elevator pit upgrades; cross face slabs; 
dewatering system in the mechanical and electrical association 
with the building stabilization. There’s minimal life and safety 
and building code upgrades, barrier-free accessibility, 
ventilation upgrades that will be completed or are completed 
this year, and there’s upgrading of the aging mechanical system. 
There’s lower level and high capacity ventilation fans for 
smoke evacuation, upgrade of electrical systems — there’s just 
a long list. 
 
One of the things that we can think of that we will need to do is 
to do what’s called the repointing — the cladding of the 
tindlestone and the relationship of that to the brick on the 
exterior of the building. But that would be, I believe, one of the 
only major outstanding things. Besides, the ongoing 
maintenance on a building of this size and value is always quite 
a major undertaking. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just have a 
couple of quick questions and I guess they’re a little bit of a 
follow-up to the answers that you gave at the start when you 
started in for the member from Wood River on the aircrafts and 
some of the expenses. 
 
And I was interested at the one and I just wanted a little 
clarification, I guess. You had said that it was $4.16 per mile. 

Was that per mile? I believe you said per mile for using the 
aircrafts. And I wasn’t . . . I remember the question and I can’t 
remember does that take into consideration everything? Like, I 
mean salaries? Does it take into consideration fuel also? I guess 
if you could just — and whether it’s here or whenever — give 
me all the items that you included in that 4.16 per mile. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, through you to 
the member opposite. Earlier I had stated that, and we had 
stated that there is usually, when we average things out, it’s 
about a $4 per mile charge which includes many things. 
 
In the response to Regina-based government air transportation 
services, that would be about $4.16 per mile, and that would 
include pilots’ and engineers’ salaries and benefits, training, 
employee expenses, allocated administration, fuel and oil, 
materials and parts, permits and licences, in-flight expenses, 
pilots’ and engineers’ overtime, and any shop expenses. 
 
What I did mention that our hangar is a very old hangar and 
because of that the hangarage costs have been depreciated and 
so they’re very minimal right now. So that wouldn’t include the 
same kinds of hangarage charge that we have, for example, for 
the air ambulance in Saskatoon. 
 
So we can provide you with a more detailed breakdown of that 
in writing, and we’ll get that to you as soon as we can. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Minister, I’d appreciate 
that. If I could have the breakdown of the costs in writing, that 
would be very useful. 
 
It was interesting you had said that the hangar is pretty much 
depreciated out — the one here at the airport. I guess it’s maybe 
a little bit of a question for the future. What are you looking at 
doing? I’ve heard some questions and comments on that hangar 
with some black mould considered problems. And so what are 
you looking at in the future? Are you looking at relieving 
yourself of that property and getting into something else? And 
if you do, will that then be considered as an expense to be 
factored in the full expense, and how do you look at doing that? 
 
You know, if you’re looking at a private business that is starting 
up, they have to have a hangar and the aircraft and that’s all 
going to be considered in. When you’re trying to compare what 
the cost per mile is for Exec Air compared to private charter, I 
mean, those are costs that they’re going to be incurring and I 
guess that should also be probably factored in. 
 
So I guess, first of all what are your plans in the future with 
respect to the black mould that is found in the present hangar 
and what are your plans for the future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I think I would like to start the answer 
this way, Mr. Chair, in that at all times the health and the 
welfare of employees is paramount in our minds, and we are . . . 
been examining all options of how we would provide hangarage 
services at the lowest cost available to us, keeping in mind all of 
those types of requirements. 
 
So we are at present investigating all options open to us for 
accommodation with the efficiency of trying to provide that at a 
good cost or the lowest cost possible. 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1387 

 

It would be good to note, though, that we’ve done that in 
Saskatoon. We looked for other hangar options because we had 
to relocate there. And when we did that, we found new 
accommodation, as the member would probably know, a very 
good accommodation for these services and the cost is 20 cents 
per mile for that service on a leasing arrangement. 
 
So yes, that would be factored in as all other costs are. But in 
the case of providing that very good service and 
accommodation in Saskatoon, the additional charge to these 
costs would be 20 cents per mile. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So I guess . . . 
the question more though was directed at the situation here in 
Regina. I’m not very familiar, although maybe I should be, 
regarding the situation in Saskatoon. 
 
But the facility here in Regina — I guess as I said, I’ve heard 
some complaints of black mould in that building. 
 
I guess I’d like to know, one way or the other, is that a problem 
in that building and what are the steps that you are taking in the 
future? You answered what had happened in Saskatoon. I’m 
asking what will happen in Regina? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Deputy Chair, we did do a 
thorough investigation of that building and that identified 
mould contamination in the building, that has been contained 
and it’s been sealed. And we are continuing to look at this 
through the eyes of occupational health and safety and through 
the eyes of engineers in how to handle that situation and 
whether or not we would follow that as an accommodation to 
pursue. We’re not ruling out any options. 
 
We’re going to review all options available to us and whatever 
course of action, we’ll have everything to consider in that 
decision that is finally made. And when the decision is taken, 
we will then cost factor that into the cost that we give to you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To the 
minister then, when you were saying all options, have you also 
looked at . . . You’re looking at all options, I guess, regarding 
hangarage. 
 
Have you also looked at the options of private charters for a lot 
of the miles that you’re doing as opposed to going into a new 
facility? 
 
(21:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I would like to go into this in two 
parts. First there were some old discoveries in the building 
which have been sealed and contained. We are now working 
with engineers to have a full reporting on that building, not to 
rule that out as an option, but certainly to look at all options 
available to us. So we wouldn’t discount at this time what can 
or cannot be done. 
 
To the other part of the question — and I think that was what 
the member from Wood River was trying to get to and said that 
another time he’d be glad to debate that with me — we 
continually compare our service to a private service and service 
of charters, and there are many reasons why we don’t go there 

in a major way. But outside consultants have confirmed to us 
comparisons, at least twice, that we’re running a service that is 
efficient and effective for the dollars spent. 
 
And I would also add that where charters make sense — and we 
have a good working rapport with outside charters as well — 
they would say that for many services their operation has to rely 
on a mainstream of business being done, and some of the kinds 
of meetings, and the maybe prolonging of those meetings and 
the layovers, and those kinds of things, are factored into that. So 
the comparisons we’ve used have been very favourable to the 
service that we provide. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I guess what I’d like to do is kind of — and 
maybe I’m hung up on hangars here — move to another hangar 
that SPMC is in charge of with the CVA (Central Vehicle 
Agency) vehicles. I believe that’s an old hangar facility and 
there’s some problems with that one too, and mould. I believe 
that they’ve had to shift some people outside in temporary work 
units, trailers, what have you. 
 
What is the government’s plan in that respect? That building — 
I know I’ve been in it many, many times — is quite an old 
building. Are they looking at moving that whole service from 
there into another facility, or are they looking at trying to fix the 
problems that they have in that building? Just I guess a couple 
questions around that, maybe just the government’s intent to 
begin with. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — The member is correct, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, that this is another hangar building, and talking about 
service and years of service, both those building over the years 
have provided excellent service to us. 
 
This one is about 60 years old. So again when the mould was 
discovered, as he mentioned, our major consideration would be 
employees first and they’ve been relocated. We’ve looked at the 
area of contamination; we’ve contained it and sealed it. And 
now I would say in both instances we’re into the preliminary 
review of whether it’s good to utilize these facilities any further 
and prolong the life of these, or to look at a new facility or 
locating to some type of leased space. We will consider all 
options and we’re very early on in that stage. 
 
But these buildings certainly have given us a long life and usage 
over a number of years, and this one, a hangar and is over 60 
years old, would certainly say it’s had a useful life. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, just one final question than. So 
I guess the CVA situation is similar to the exec air hangar out 
where it’s depreciated out completely and the cost then would 
not be factored in to the per mile or kilometre cost of running 
CVA vehicles, which I guess in a way would kind of distort the 
numbers of how much it truly does cost per mile. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — You know, Mr. Chair, I thought I 
heard for a moment a half-baked idea coming from one of the 
members opposite. I can’t quite be sure but I thought I heard 
that. 
 
This would be right. These buildings have been depreciated 
over a number of years but again, they’re old buildings. So we 
would consider the maintenance costs, the janitorial services, all 



1388 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

of the costs of a building that you would use for those kinds of 
services. So we would factor those in but again the depreciation 
over a period of time. Those costs have been depreciated in the 
costs of earlier times but we would factor in all of the 
maintenance and janitorial. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. In 1999, SS . . . 
Saskatchewan Property Management released a five-year 
strategic plan, a business plan. Can you give a brief description 
of this plan, business plan, and update its progress. And it’s 
now into between the second and third year. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I did have that in my initial remarks to 
the member opposite but I think I will just go through some of 
that again for the member, the bits and pieces I saved, and then 
from our memory and the information that I can provide to him. 
 
This past year we’ve seen many continued and positive and 
innovative changes at SPMC. The corporation is now in year 
three of our five-year strategic business plan developed in 1999. 
The plan lays the groundwork for where the corporation wants 
to be for this new millennium. 
 
This last year we saw the development of four strategic 
priorities based on our strategic business plan. Our strategic 
priorities provide a positive, focused course for our corporation 
for the next two years. It’ll place focus on, number one, our 
customers, viable lines of business, our people, and investing in 
assets that support our strategic objectives. 
 
Now the four strategic priorities based on the strategic business 
plan would focus us on a positive course of direction to again 
provide efficient and effective services to our customers. It 
would allow us to look at what are our viable lines of services 
and how we provide them and to look at our employees and 
how to develop employees and the developing of the 
corporation and value the employee. And investing in the assets 
for again asset renewal, but assets into the future, and how we 
best provide those accommodation services. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees. A 
question to the minister regarding the E. I. Wood building in 
Swift Current, owned by the Property Management Corporation 
. . . owned and operated by the Property Management 
Corporation, specifically as it relates to an energy efficient . . . 
efficiency audit, I think, that they either approved or 
spearheaded along with SaskPower. 
 
And I think there was a contractor that was involved in the 
audit, and several pieces of work were prescribed for the 
building. And I wonder if you could inform the committee, 
Madam Minister, as to what requirements your corporation put 
on this project that any work that would be done as a result of 
the audit would have . . . would put a priority on tendering the 
work locally within the communities where the work was being 
done, in this case the city of Swift Current. 
 
(21:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Swift 
Current building, the E.I. Wood Building, is going through that 

process — having the audit done with Honeywell through the 
SaskPower processes and the partnership that we’ve 
established. 
 
But our policy would provide opportunities for any work 
greater than $25,000 to be done in that building going out to 
public tender. If it’s less than $25,000 of work that’s needed or 
services, then an invitational tender goes out and that would 
provide for some local opportunities as well. 
 
For the member opposite, I will get the final result of that to let 
him know if it falls in one category or the other to assist him 
into understanding whether there would be public tendering in 
this case or the invitational tender would go out. Thank you, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Madam Minister, I thank you for that. I look forward to that 
information because my understanding is from local contractors 
is that there was no opportunity to bid on some of the projects. 
 
One of them I’m a little bit aware of and I don’t know the 
details. Was it tender for acoustic ceiling tile or I guess it would 
also be more energy efficient ceiling tile, something of course 
that many contractors in Swift Current would be more than 
capable of at least tendering on and I would argue would have a 
chance at successfully tendering on them. But I was under the 
understanding that on that particular part of the work being 
done at E.I. Wood but that there was no such opportunity 
afforded them. And if I’m wrong then I’ll accept the correction. 
And I’d ask you to address that if you can and also I look 
forward to that information. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Yes, Mr. Chair, and I thank the 
member opposite for that example because we will look at this 
particular building and the amount of work. And again I said, 
one would be greater than $25,000 it would go out to a full 
public tendering process. But the invitational tender call would 
also include some local opportunity. So we need to give him 
that information so he’s able to speak to that and we would 
endeavour to provide that to him. Thank you. 
 
I would also like to thank my officials this evening for their 
support and advice to me in trying to answer the questions from 
the members opposite. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I move the 
committee report SPMC and move to Energy and Mines. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
 
Subvote (EMO1) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. Seated to my immediate right is our deputy minister, Ray 
Clayton. To his right is the acting assistant deputy minister of 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1389 

 

resource policy and economics, Trevor Dark. To my left is the 
executive director of petroleum and natural gas, Bruce Wilson. 
Immediately behind me is Donald Koop, the assistant deputy 
minister of finance and administration. And to his right, and 
behind me and to my right, is George Patterson, the executive 
director, exploration and geological services. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Good evening, Mr. Minister, and welcome to 
the staff once again from the Department of Energy and Mines. 
You are always very helpful and we appreciate what you can 
do. 
 
I thought that seeing as we’re at the start of Provincial Mining 
Week, we might focus a few questions in this area that’s so 
important to our province’s economy. Mr. Minister, the mining 
industry in our province faces many issues. One of them is the 
fuel tax on diesel fuel that they face, road tax on fuel used 
off-road. Some of this fuel is used on roads that they build 
themselves on mine sites and the bulk of it is used in mining 
operations specifically. 
 
What can you share with us in this regard? Is there anything 
afoot to change this? We seem to be the only province in the 
country that still charges this road tax on off-road fuel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — This response, most appropriately, 
should be directed to the Department of Finance who would 
deal with this. 
 
But let me just say this generally. I know the Department of 
Finance has dealt with this question a number of times. I don’t 
think the door is ever closed on it. But my understanding is — 
and I don’t want to speak on their behalf — but my 
understanding is that the concern is really around the issue of, 
the term they use, leakage. So that they would need to be able to 
ensure that the usage was off-road, if they ever did decide . . . 
was entirely, I should say, off-road if they actually did decide to 
go down that — pardon the pun — down that road. 
 
But if you want to ask that question with more detail, I’m sure 
the Department of Finance would be able to answer that 
question more specifically. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
and Mr. Minister, it seems leakage isn’t that big a problem in 
the other nine provinces in this country. 
 
As Minister of Energy and Mines, have you been lobbying 
Finance to make these changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think probably the most appropriate 
response is that the Department of Finance . . . this started 
sometime last fall, a committee was struck. The Department of 
Finance, Department of Energy and Mines, and the Mining 
Association together sit on a committee dealing with a whole 
host of issues and I know that this issue is in the agenda for 
discussion. And so again I say, I know that the door is not 
closed on that issue. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m very happy to 
hear that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. Minister, we also hear about tax 

structure problems in Saskatchewan that the mining industry is 
facing. They also mention the overlap and duplication of 
government in 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. Minister, we also hear about tax 
structure problems in Saskatchewan that the mining industry is 
facing. They also mention the overlap and duplication of 
government involvement in this industry. My question, Mr. 
Minister, regarding this is what is being done here, what 
assurances can you give the industry that this overlap is being 
reduced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I don’t want to be presumptive in the 
question, but I’m assuming the member is really specifically 
asking the issue mostly around the issue of uranium, I think 
probably because that’s where we hear most of the concerns. 
You may or may not be aware that the department has ongoing 
discussions with the new entity I guess it is, the Canadian 
Nuclear Safety Commission that deals with overlap to try to 
ensure, especially with our Department of Environment here in 
Saskatchewan and with the federal agencies, that we don’t 
overlap too much as it pertains to specifically the uranium 
industry. 
 
In the other areas I think that criticism, I think, is probably not 
nearly as valid. There doesn’t seem to be, from my prospective 
anyway, nearly as much overlap as we acknowledge exists in 
the uranium sector. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
Mr. Minister, that’s good. I’m glad that this committee is 
studying the overlap problem in the uranium industry. Has any 
progress been made though? Is there anything forthcoming to 
reduce this overlap? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — You asked whether progress is being 
made and I am informed that progress indeed has been made. 
They have their work plans in place. The objective is so that 
there would be one regulator in place, and the report is to be 
brought forward with those recommendations. 
 
Originally they had set it up over an 18-month period. Again I 
am told that the first six months there wasn’t a lot of progress 
made, so we are probably a year away from a report to be made 
to us. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
Mr. Minister, the industry talks about the regulatory burden 
they face. Mr. Chair, we need to grow Saskatchewan and the 
mining industry feels the regulations they have to go through 
are burdensome. What update, Mr. Minister, can you give the 
House in this situation? Are any changes being planned to help 
the mining industry in this regard? 
 
(22:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again acknowledging the regulatory 
burdens that do exist, we have an industry government group or 
body that has been established with, in fact, its first meeting to 
take place on June 9 of this year, in a matter of a couple of 
weeks, to start to address some of these issues. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, 



1390 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

Mr. Minister, they also talk of the licensing process and what 
needs to be done here in terms of streamlining this and in effect 
possibly speeding the process up. What assurances, Mr. 
Minister, can you give the industry that this is being done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, not to be presumptive but I 
believe this question is most specifically directed towards the 
uranium industry again. Again we acknowledge the issues 
around licensing. The federal government, through actually 
Minister Goodale from the province here in Saskatchewan and 
our Department of Environment, tell us that this is a high 
priority for them and in fact that they do want to make progress 
on this file as well. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
Mr. Minister, has any thought been given to the Department of 
Energy and Mines being a facilitator, expeditor for the licensing 
process between the three levels of government and between 
different departments within those levels of government in 
order to cut red tape and time lag for the licensing and approval 
process for the mining industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think unofficially the department acts 
in that role quite frequently on a day-to-day basis and that was 
really . . . For me personally when I met with especially the oil 
and gas sector, many of them, as I was introducing myself to 
them as the new minister, they talked often about their concerns 
that they had but they also talked about the department here in 
Saskatchewan and how quick they were to respond to concerns 
that they had. So that tells me that, in fact, the department does 
respond to issues. And as they tell me, almost on a daily basis, 
they act as facilitators in an unofficial capacity. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The capital tax 
resource surcharge is a huge problem that this industry faces. It 
prevents, Mr. Chair, prevents the industry from investing in 
Saskatchewan and hinders growth. What progress is being 
made? Is it a priority for Energy, Mines, and Finance to get this 
tax reduced? I believe we’re the only province in the country 
that imposes this tax any more. It’s usually one of the first 
things that the mining industry, in particular, complain about 
when we talk with them. Is there any progress being made on 
this tax, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, this really is an issue that is in 
the jurisdiction of the Department of Finance. But having said 
that, I personally know from the limited time that I’ve been in 
this portfolio that it is clearly an issue with the industry. There 
is no question of that. 
 
But I guess speaking generally, from our perspective as well 
and as a member of government, clearly we have to try to 
balance revenues off with the priorities of the public of 
Saskatchewan. And the . . . as our Minister of Finance says so 
many times, the pie is only so big and we have to, as a 
government, establish what our priorities are. 
 
In closing in the response that we acknowledge that it clearly is 
an issue with the industry, and we continue to work with 
Finance to address that issue. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m certainly happy 
to hear that. I have in my hand the document that purports to be 

financial highlights of the first quarter of the year 2001 for 
Cameco Corporation, and it shows changes from the first 
quarter of year 2000 to the first quarter of 2001 in several 
categories. Revenue, down 51 per cent. Earnings from 
operations, down 86 per cent. Cash provided by operations, 
down 46 per cent. Net earnings attributable to common shares, 
down 89 per cent. Earnings per share, down 94 per cent. And it 
goes on to cover a few more categories that are all down as 
well. 
 
Mr. Minister, I understand that the price of uranium is low and 
has been low for some time now with an oversupply worldwide. 
But what conditions are causing these dismal results so much 
worse than last year’s results, in fact? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, I would speculate on a few factors. 
First of all, there is a general oversupply caused by some of the 
following. There’s the secondary supply as a result of the 
dismantling of nuclear weapons. So that’s one of the things that 
attributes to this. The reduction of supply by strategic investors 
and also, generally, utilities holding less inventory than they 
used to hold. 
 
Now I think that one of the bright spots though, certainly with 
respect to this industry, is if we look into the United States who 
have been operating in the last number of months, particularly 
in California, with the rolling blackouts, they are I think 
particularly interested in uranium as a source of generating 
electricity. 
 
And I know from speaking to that industry, they are also 
optimistic. And you may have heard in the past week or so 
some of the public optimism that they’ve been talking about in 
the industry and I think the optimism is justified as well. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
Mr. Minister, is it the opinion of you, Mr. Minister, and your 
department that this glut, this secondary supply problem of 
uranium will have disappeared or nearly disappeared by the 
time the Cigar Lake project will come on stream in say 
approximately 2005? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Not being an expert on this myself, I 
know the industry has been speculating that this oversupply 
they anticipated will probably last for several more years yet. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, I have here a newspaper clipping or photocopy of one, 
I believe, from The Leader-Post, April 28. It states: 
 

Revenues from potash operations . . . 
 

This is referring to IMC (International Minerals and Chemical 
Corporation (Canada) Ltd. 

 
Revenues from potash operations decline 16 per cent in the 
first quarter of the year to 223.4 million due to lower 
domestic and export shipments. Sales volume decreased 18 
per cent to 2.1 million short tonnes compared to record 
company shipments in the first quarter of 2000. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 



May 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1391 

 

IMC global net profits for the quarter were 14.7 million or 
13 cents a share versus $39.3 million a year ago. 

 
Mr. Minister, in the view of you and your department, what is 
causing this recent slippage in potash? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think it’s general within the potash 
industry, I am told, that throughout the year there is certain 
months that are generally not so good and other months that 
historically are generally quite a bit better. And while this year 
hasn’t started out particularly good, there is, I am told, 
optimism within the industry that we should still have a pretty 
decent year with . . . as it pertains to potash. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, this article that I quoted from compares the first 
quarter of 2001 to the first quarter of 2000. My question really 
was — and I’m sure I didn’t make it clear — what conditions 
have changed in the last year, first quarter over first quarter, to 
cause this kind of slip? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The two main apparent factors are the, 
first of all, the late spring in the US (United States) and 
secondly, sales to the Chinese are down this year. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, do you 
expect this to be an ongoing problem with China? The seasons 
in the United States are of course an off-again, on-again type of 
thing, could be the same thing next year, might be back to 
normal. But the Chinese situation is what I’m concerned about. 
Is that going to clear up any time soon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m told the China markets are very 
cyclical — they’ve been up and down over the years — and 
again the industry is fairly optimistic about this. There’s no 
reason to believe that this is any protracted or sustained 
downward trend by any stretch. 
 
(22:15) 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Picking some 
numbers here from a StarPhoenix article regarding the Fort à la 
Corne diamond project, sample values they say came in at 148 
to $179 US per carat, with revenue per tonne of kimberlite 
processed estimated at between 28 to 33 US dollars per tonne. 
This caused Kensington director Murray Tildesley to predict a 
$50 Canadian per tonne profit should a mine go ahead. 
 
Are these numbers, Mr. Minister, holding up as far as we 
know? Apparently this mine would be able to produce 60,000 
tonnes a day at this price. That’s $3 million a day. Does it still 
appear with the latest results that this is holding up and can we 
expect that this project will go ahead? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The industry really is in the midst of 
evaluating just the very issue you raise and we would be of the 
view that it would be inappropriate for us to speculate on 
values. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, I am holding a government news release entitled, 
“Government to Boost Geo-Science Funding”. It says changes 
include a 50 per cent decrease in fees for registering a mineral 

permit. What is the cost in Saskatchewan to register a permit 
now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The price will be dropping from 30 
cents per hectare down to 15 cents per hectare. I just want to 
take the opportunity . . . actually it just fits in perfectly with this 
question you’ve just asked. I note the president of Claude 
Resources, Neil McMillan, in the paper from Saskatchewan 
Mining Journal of just a few weeks ago, says that, and I quote: 
 

You have to give the provincial government credit for 
trying with the measures they have come up with. The new 
investment tax credit and the geo-science initiative is 
money very, very, very well invested, McMillan says. 
They’ve done a good job with it. They’ve done a good job, 
period. 
 

And that’s the end of the quote. 
 
So they’re pleased generally, the industry is, with this initiative. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. This news release 
goes on to say changes are also planned in the mineral 
disposition regulations to clarify and update the land 
administration system. What changes, Mr. Minister, would that 
be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Here’s three of the main changes that 
are being proposed. We’re going to limit the number . . . the 
amount of time, I should say, that land can be held without 
exploration taking place on it. We’re going to give an extra 10 
days for registering claims, and we’re going to clarify a number 
of the definitions within the sector. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, switching now to the oil and gas industry. Referring to 
a recent article in the Regina Leader-Post from Wednesday, 
May 2 entitled, “Drillers going full bore.” Mr. Chair, the article 
begins by stating that Saskatchewan could see a record number 
of gas wells drilled this year, close to 1,800. That’s from a 
forecast done by the Petroleum Services Association of Canada. 
But continuing in the next paragraph it states that a senior 
government official says that PSAC gas well forecast may be 
too optimistic. 
 
My question for the minister is could he clarify this. How many 
gas wells will likely be drilled? Will it be 1,800; will it be 
closer to 1,300? I think 1,300 was the total last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We are running slightly ahead of last 
year and last year was an all-time record. 
 
We would be of the view that 1,800 is slightly optimistic. It 
would represent literally a 50 per cent increase over last year 
which, while we do believe will be ahead of last year’s all-time 
record, we don’t believe right now that we would hit the 1,800. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, Mr. 
Chair. Mr. Minister, 4,240 wells, you know, are expected to be 
drilled in this province according to PSAC. Now that’s up 9 per 
cent from last year. Last year was a record year for drilling. 
 
Where are the numbers at right now? Are we on target with this 



1392 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2001 

 

forecast or are we closer to the numbers of last year at this 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — On oil we are actually down a little bit 
from last year. I’m looking at the most recent records that we 
have, that is to May 18 of this year. So May 18 this year as 
compared to May 18 last year, on the oil wells, we’re actually 
down a few wells and on the gas, we’re up from last year. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, this government official that makes these predictions, 
Mr. Bruce Wilson, executive director of the petroleum and 
natural gas division of Saskatchewan Energy and Mines, also 
says in this newspaper article that lower prices for heavy oil 
could reduce the number of wells drilled in the Lloydminster 
area. 
 
Could the minister please update this Assembly on this 
particular situation? Will there likely be less wells drilled in the 
Lloyd area this season? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again in the Lloydminster area, this is 
with the most recent statistics to May 18, we are in fact down 
slightly, but it’s very, very slightly overall in the number of 
wells. 
 
And of course, the issue with heavy oil is the higher 
differentials that currently exist in that sector. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, it doesn’t seem like there’s much of a change, 
percentage wise, but how will all of this change in projected 
drillings change your numbers and financial forecasts. If Mr. 
Wilson is indeed correct about the number of wells drilled 
being less than what PSAC is predicting, could the minister 
explain how this could possibly affect the province’s finances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think the best way to answer that is 
that our estimates are consistent as it pertains to drilling, as it 
pertains to revenue. So our projections in revenues would be 
based on what we had predicted in drilling, and those numbers 
are consistent, if I’m explaining myself, I think. Period. I’ll 
leave it at that there. The numbers are consistent based on the 
wells that we projected that we would drill in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Chair, this is a convenient time to break 
off. I’d like to take this opportunity to thank the officials. 
They’re always a great help to us in estimates and we appreciate 
it very much. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:28. 
 


