















































Hansard: June 05, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1565 
 June 5, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of Wadena who 
are concerned about the reduction of services at the Wadena 
health centre. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena health centre 
be maintained at its current level of service at minimum, 
with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral services 
available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, public 
health, home care, long-term care services available to 
users from this district and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Wadena, Nut 
Mountain, Kuroki. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
still more petitioners from southwest Saskatchewan who desire 
a new hospital in the regional centre of the southwest and Swift 
Current. Mr. Speaker, I have enough petitions that I could 
probably stand every day until about the middle of August and 
present them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

We pray that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the provincial government to carefully consider Swift 
Current’s request for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today come from the great city of 
Swift Current, from Wymark, from Gull Lake, from 
Hazenmore, and Ponteix. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
and the Weyburn Council on Alcohol and Drug Abuse who are 
interested in building an in-patient treatment centre in the city 
of Weyburn. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
support this in-patient treatment centre and provide funding 
for the same. 

 
And this petition is signed by citizens of Weyburn. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding the EMS (emergency medical 
services) report, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report, 
and affirm its intention to work to improve 
community-based ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Alida, 
Carievale, Glen Ewen, and Antler area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on health today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral 
services available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to the users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Carnduff, Alida, 
Carievale, and Glen Ewen areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition calling for immediate implementation of 
province-wide 911 emergency service. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to fulfill 
its promise to the people of rural Saskatchewan by 
immediately implementing the 911 emergency telephone 
service province-wide. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Perdue, Biggar, Grandora and 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition opposed to the possible reduction of health services in 
Kamsack. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



1566 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2001 

 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that health care services in the 
Kamsack Hospital be maintained at its current level of 
service at minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency 
and doctoral services available. 

 
The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Mikado, Kamsack, Russell. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of constituents’ concerns with the 
centralization of ambulance services. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition come from the communities of 
Wynyard, Regina, and Mozart. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise in this 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding concerned 
citizens of the Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency in regards to 
the Fyke report. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce the current levels of available 
acute care, emergency, and doctor services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitions will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood, Meadow Lake, and Mildred. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with a petition from concerned citizens with regard to 
the lack of cellular telephone coverage in rural Saskatchewan. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service to all communities 
throughout the Wood River constituency. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Cadillac. 
 
I so present. 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and, pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
The petitions are nine in number and they are addendums to 
previously tabled petitions and sessional papers. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Health Care 

 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Ms. Junor, Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Health Care, presents the first report of 
the said committee which reads as follows: 
 

Your committee recommends that it be authorized to use 
the Legislative Chamber to facilitate the televising and 
Internet streaming of its public hearings. 

 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Saskatoon Northwest: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Health 
Care be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 55 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming: how much money did SLGA pay to Larson 
Consulting in 1996-97; what services did Larson 
Consulting provide to SLGA; were all of these services 
tendered for bids from other companies and, if so, what was 
the tendering process? 

 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have 
many guests in the Assembly today, so I would be pleased to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 38 grade 3 and 4 students, seated in the west gallery. 
They’re joined today by their teachers, Mrs. Reding and Mrs. 
Erichson, and a chaperone, Ms. Muntean. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity recently to be at St. Gabriel 
School with our Premier to announce the CommunityNet 
program and launch it by, not a ribbon cutting, but a plug-in 
ceremony. We were warmly welcomed and I hope I have the 
opportunity to do that for these students. We’ll meet after a tour 
and have some refreshments in room 218 and answer any 
questions they might have. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in welcoming the students 



June 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1567 

 

from the new, joint new school within the constituency of 
Wascana Plains. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and to all members of the legislature, 26 
grade 6 students from Massey School in . . . The school is 
located in Regina South but I think this particular class has 
students from Regina Lakeview, Regina South, and Regina 
Centre as it’s the French immersion class. 
 
And they’re sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 
make a special welcome to my daughter, Solveig, who is in this 
class and this is all of her classmates. So let’s welcome the class 
from Massey School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you I want to introduce 17 students from 
Minahik Waskahigan School. And translated into English, Mr. 
Speaker, it is Pinehouse School out of Pinehouse Lake, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They travelled many, many miles to be here so I want to 
introduce them in a very special way, that they’ve taken a great 
amount of time and effort to get here and I think we should 
commend them for the huge travel. But also to recognize the 
work of the people that are chaperoning. It’s their principal, 
Ron Skage, and I’m not sure if that’s his daughter Jacquie or his 
wife Jacquie, but Jacquie Skage is up there as well. 
 
So I want to welcome all here to the Assembly. And I also 
would encourage them to go to my office after they’re done. I 
can’t join them because I’ve got a meeting at 3, but I’ve asked 
my staff to make sure that there’s coffee and juice for the youth 
if they want to see the office and spend some time with my 
staff. 
 
So once again, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all the Assembly to 
welcome the well-travelled students from Pinehouse Lake. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Skills Canada Competition 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Skills 
Canada had the national championship competitions in 
Edmonton on June 1 and 2 with participants from across 
Canada. Students from the Estevan Comprehensive High 
School, accompanied by their teachers, Kevin Reiter, Elaine 
Miller, and Joyce Mack did very well. 
 
The students were Leah Penley, who won the gold medal in 
men’s hairstyling; Lynn Van De Woestyne, who won bronze in 
ladies’ hairstyling; Scott Mehler, who won silver in welding; 
and Danny Dyck, who placed fourth in precision machining. 
And it should be noted that only six points separated Danny 
from the person who placed first. 

Saskatchewan students brought home a total of 17 medals. 
 
Please join me in giving Leah, Lynn, Scott, and Danny the 
recognition they deserve. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Premier Klein Compliments Moose Jaw 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, even the premier of Alberta has 
more faith and praise for the Saskatchewan spirit than the 
members opposite. Before Premier Klein left the premiers’ 
conference in Moose Jaw last week, he was asked how he liked 
our city. Premier Klein said, and I quote: 
 

I like Moose Jaw. It’s like entering a home. Some homes 
you enter and immediately you feel that sense of warmth. 
That is the feeling I had entering Moose Jaw. 

 
Premier Klein goes on to compliment the people in the 
community of Moose Jaw. He stated, and I quote: 
 

The spirit and enthusiasm of this community, in terms of 
bolstering its economic opportunities, is really something to 
behold. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised that the opposition members still 
struggle with all the positive aspects of Saskatchewan. Premier 
Klein understands community; he seems to focus on the 
positive and not on the doom and gloom that the opposition 
likes to believe exists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one other group that should be hiding out 
in the tunnels of Moose Jaw, and they are sitting on that side of 
the House. 
 
Premier Klein managed to sum up in a 20-second radio quote 
what we have been trying to tell the opposition for years. The 
partnership with business, community, and government is 
strong and necessary for this province to continue to prosper. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fire Destroys Dysart Business 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Early yesterday 
morning a fire destroyed D R Sales & Service, a farm 
machinery dealership in Dysart. The fire devastated a successful 
business operated by the Zatylny family for more than 30 years. 
 
D R Sales & Service provides a valued service to ag producers 
and is the major employer in the Dysart area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in true Saskatchewan tradition, the Zatylnys 
announced yesterday afternoon that they would be open for 
business today. They have ordered parts, set up a temporary 
service area in a Quonset, and established an office in the home 
of one of the partners. 
 
I am told that D R Sales & Service will be rebuilt as quickly as 
possible. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, service technicians were out 



1568 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2001 

 

on calls this morning. This demonstrates the Zatylny family’s 
dedication to their customers and the tenacity of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ranking of Saskatoon and Regina Health Regions 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
month of June brings more good news for Saskatchewan, again 
from an outside and impartial source. 
 
I am referring, of course, to the annual health report of 
Maclean’s magazine. The report ranks 54 Canadian health 
regions with populations over 125,000. Saskatoon ranked 
number 5, one behind Edmonton and two ahead of Calgary. In 
the category of communities with medical schools, Saskatoon 
ranked second. 
 
Perhaps the most encouraging news is that Saskatoon improved 
its rating over last year, as did the wonderful city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can read the numbers and we can be pleased 
that they support what we have always said about our health 
system — that there is room to improve, but there is no cause 
for alarm or doom and gloom. The Maclean’s report is 
encouraging. 
 
However the report does not say what we all know to be true, 
Mr. Speaker. The Saskatoon Health District did not achieve this 
high national ranking by magic. It happened because of the 
people who work there. It is the hard work, diligence, and 
dedication of the staff, administrators, and health care 
professionals that make for the superior health care. 
 
As my friend, Carol Teichrob, used to say: things don’t happen, 
they are made to happen. The people of the Saskatoon Health 
District made this recognition happen and we are all proud of 
them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
75th Anniversary of the Prince Albert Branch of the Royal 

Canadian Legion, Saskatchewan Command 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had 
the fortunate opportunity to attend an important milestone 
marking the 75th anniversary of the Prince Albert branch of the 
Royal Canadian Legion, Saskatchewan Command. 
 
On Saturday evening, June 2, 2001 the Prince Albert branch 
held a banquet as part of its weekend celebration of this 
important achievement. The guest speaker was none other than 
our Lieutenant Governor, Her Honour Dr. Lynda Haverstock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Her Honour congratulated the branch on its many 
achievements in and around Prince Albert, making clear 
reference to the importance of volunteerism in this Year of the 
Volunteer. 
 
But the thrust of Her Honour’s speech focused on the 

volunteerism of those men and women who served our country 
so that all of us may enjoy our present day freedoms. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert branch had a unique and 
illustrious membership that also needs to be mentioned. The Rt. 
Hon. John Diefenbaker was a 50-year member, Mr. Speaker. 
And it was through his efforts another important event occurred 
in legion history. In 1959, at the then Prime Minister 
Diefenbaker’s request, Queen Elizabeth II granted the name, 
Royal, to the then Canadian Legion. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in 
congratulating the Prince Albert Legion on achieving 75 years 
of loyal service to Prince Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Connection to Oscar-winning Movie 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 
opportunity to recognize today the Swift Current connection to 
an Oscar-winning movie. Mr. Speaker, Crouching Tiger, 
Hidden Dragon was one of the top movies at the box office in 
2000. In fact it won four Oscar awards and was also the highest 
grossing foreign language film in the United States, earning 
over $100 million just last year. 
 
The movie is based on a book by Dulu Wang, a popular 
Chinese writer from the 1930s. In the 1980s his family 
republished some of his works and now one of those novels has 
gone on to become a very successful motion picture. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, what’s unique to this story is that the 
author of Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon is also the father 
and father-in-law of a couple in my constituency. Mr. Speaker, 
Hong Wang works at the research station in Swift Current, and 
his wife, Ching Liu, is also a resident of Swift Current. She was 
here not long ago at the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 
with a group of students from the Cypress Hills Regional 
College, learning English as a second language. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the huge success of Crouching Tiger, Hidden 
Dragon has brought much pride to their family in Swift Current 
and I’m sure they were watching the Oscar awards much more 
closely than the rest of us and for good reason. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Partners in Motion Win Awards 
 

Mr. Wartman: — There are many talented, creative artists and 
entrepreneurs throughout this province. Mr. Speaker, Partners 
in Motion illustrates that point very clearly. 
 
At the recent Yorkton Short Film and Video Festival, the 
Regina production company, Partners in Motion, took home 
three Golden Sheaf Awards including the award for Best of 
Saskatchewan. The awards went to the film 13 Seconds, The 
Kent State Shootings, a one-hour documentary revisiting the 
events that occurred 31 years ago last month at that Ohio 
university. 



June 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1569 

 

The film was directed by Chris Triffo and produced by Ron 
Goetz, both constituents of mine. In addition to the best picture 
award, Kent State won two technical awards for best editing 
and best sound. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, a few days before the Yorkton festival, the 
same team won seven awards at the 2001 WorldFest 
International Film Festival in Houston, Texas, again including 
the highest award given at this festival. 
 
But this time for two other films. Disaster of the Century was 
given the Platinum Award for best reality-based program, and 
Men of Valour — Heroes of the Victoria Cross won platinum 
for best biographical or autobiographical documentary. Ron 
Goetz was executive producer. Chris Triffo directed both films. 
As well, Kent State received a Bronze Award for best 
documentary. 
 
The talent is here, Mr. Speaker. The reputation of Partners in 
Motion and other local filmmakers is everywhere. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Strike Notice by Health Care Workers 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 
of Health. It is my understanding that CUPE (Canadian Union 
of Public Employees), which represents 12,000 health workers 
in the province, have served strike notice and will be in a legal 
position by Thursday morning. 
 
In their press release today CUPE says they have had little to 
show for the conciliation process so far. Mr. Speaker, should 
these health care workers actually begin strike action, health 
care delivery in 18 health districts and one northern hospital 
would be seriously affected. 
 
Will the Minister of Health detail how his department and the 
health districts are preparing to deal with the possibility of 
strike action and how will he ensure health care delivery in 
Saskatchewan will not be compromised? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the CUPE is in negotiations 
with SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations), which is the bargaining agency for the various 
health facilities that are represented by . . . or where CUPE 
represents the workers, and that process will continue. 
 
We understand obviously that notice has been given by CUPE 
that they would be in a position to go into strike action. What 
happens in that particular situation is that the districts work 
together with the union to identify those kinds of services which 
are essential and they basically try to set up the services there. 
There are other contingency plans that come into place with the 
management people in each of the districts. 
 
We as a provincial Department of Health work on various 
things that apply across the 18 districts. But basically the people 

are working to make sure that health care will be provided for 
everyone. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
fact that these health care workers are having to take strike 
action before this NDP government will deal with the important 
issues like workload depicts exactly how much trouble the 
health care system is in, in this province. 
 
The chronic NDP (New Democratic Party) mismanagement of 
the system, the questionable allocation of resources, the 
continuing inaction of staffing shortages, all by an NDP 
government who insists that everything is fine, has led to a 
system that is barely able to cope any more. 
 
Two years ago we had a nurses’ strike and the government 
promised to deal not only with the monetary issues, but also 
with the workplace issues. Now we hear on a daily basis that 
health care workers are under the same pressures that were 
supposed to have been fixed and addressed by this NDP 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit to deal with the priority 
issues of these valuable health care workers, and this time will 
he deliver on those promises? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we do value the workers and 
we will work together with management and the various health 
care providers to make sure that we get the best contract that 
will address many of the needs that are there. 
 
What I will say is that we did not run on a platform to freeze 
health care spending as they did across the way. We’ve added in 
the money that we’ve needed to address the needs that are there. 
 
I think we have heard here now since yesterday about the fact 
that Saskatoon and Regina, as health districts, rank very high 
across the country. 
 
What we have to remember is that in a bargaining process there 
is some time where people have to end up setting out their 
positions. What we encourage all parties to do is to work 
together to come to a solution, and we hope that this process 
will work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Gas Purchases 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
minister responsible for SaskEnergy. Mr. Speaker, the new gas 
year begins on November 1, 2001. To the minister: how much 
natural gas has SaskEnergy locked in for the upcoming gas year 
and at what price? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not a technical expert 
on this but my understanding is that they have not, that they 
have not locked in specifically. They’ve purchased what I 
would describe as insurance, Mr. Speaker, that would set a 
maximum cap. But my understanding is technically they’ve not 
locked in. 



1570 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2001 

 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the answer however I 
heard the minister say and confirm for the House that 
SaskEnergy for insurance, or some such reason as he’s pointed 
out, has purchased some natural gas ahead of time. That’s what 
he said. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy has said countless times that 
they use a gas-price hedging strategy to lock in a price. That 
means you buy it in advance of the gas year. In fact, in fact, in 
SaskEnergy’s submission to the rate review panel, SaskEnergy 
said that is what they do, that they buy gas prior to the gas year. 
 
How much natural gas has SaskEnergy purchased, locked in, 
for the next gas year, Mr. Speaker, and at what price? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, if that member’s being 
critical of SaskEnergy and its investors about what they have 
done with respect to investing, I would say he ought to look at 
their record, Mr. Speaker. They have, over the last 20 months, 
saved the people of Saskatchewan some $175 million by their 
investment strategy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To answer the question, Mr. Speaker, I’m not absolutely certain 
about what they have, what they have locked in. My 
understanding is, Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that they 
have purchased insurance, as I would describe it, that would 
maximize what they would have to pay if the price went above 
a certain level. I don’t know the absolute maximum amount of 
what that price is. I would be happy to provide that information 
to the member at a later time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this is a little disconcerting. The 
minister apparently went all the way to La Ronge to negotiate 
the price of a bottle of rum but he didn’t come to question, he 
didn’t come to question period today with the information on 
natural gas, the number one issue in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s not acceptable. He can’t have it both ways. 
He can’t deal with that level of detail in one ministry and come 
here unprepared for question period on this important issue. 
We’ll ask him to answer the question again in terms of 
insurance or whatever he wants to term it as. SaskEnergy has 
said their policy is to hedge, to purchase prior to the gas year. 
How much have they purchased or hedged? And at what price? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — If that member wants to get personal . . . 
and it’s easy to do for me as well, Mr. Speaker. That member 
used to deliver, as we were told, liquor in rooms in the 
legislature here, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to get 
personal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if, if you want to look at the record of SaskEnergy 
that has saved the people of Saskatchewan some $175 million 
over the last 20 months, Mr. Speaker, I think we ought not to be 

critical of what they have . . . their investment strategy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I say, as I understand it SaskEnergy has 
purchased what I would describe as insurance which will 
maximize, I repeat maximize — if there was another spike up in 
the cost of energy — maximize what they would have to pay. If 
the member wants specific detail, Mr. Speaker, if the member 
wants specific detail about what that price is, I’d be happy to 
get that information for him. I don’t have that level of detail 
here with me. He’s . . . it’s appropriate that he would ask that 
question in Crown corporations as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — This gas rate hike will affect every facet of life in 
the province of Saskatchewan. This is an important issue. It 
goes to the heart of the price that SaskEnergy is paying for 
natural gas. 
 
So with respect to the minister — with respect to the minister 
— will he then explain what this insurance is he’s talking about 
to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what I would say to this 
House, and to the people of the province is be very wary about 
information coming from that side of the House. And I want to 
remind the House, and the people of the province, Mr. Speaker, 
what that member said one month ago. And what he said was 
this. He said we should not go to the rate review panel; that 
cabinet should decide what the increase will be. 
 
And I want to quote from Hansard, Mr. Speaker, where that 
member said this. He said: 
 

. . . why are you putting SaskEnergy and the rate review 
panel through the expense of (the) rate increase 
application? Why are you putting Saskatchewan people 
through this process? Why doesn’t the minister just make 
the announcement? Why is the minister playing politics 
with Saskatchewan families? 

 
So, on May 4th, Mr. Speaker he said no panel — no panel, let 
cabinet decide. 
 
What did he say yesterday after we got the report from the panel 
— no cabinet, let panel decide. There’s no credibility there at 
all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, all of the yelling in the world from 
the Minister of Finance doesn’t change the fact that he’s trying 
to bail out the minister of SaskEnergy. These are SaskEnergy 
questions, and we’ll direct this question to the minister of 
SaskEnergy. 
 
In their application, SaskEnergy’s application to the rate review 
panel, they say and I quote: 
 

SaskEnergy’s past practice has been to lock in a price prior 
to the start of the gas year . . . (I’m quoting, Mr. Speaker) 



June 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1571 

 

for a portion of the volume purchased . . . And thereby 
avoid or minimize the gas cost variability. In a rising price 
environment . . . 
 
This strategy (it goes on to say) enables SaskEnergy to 
have rates that are below the market value for gas. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is true . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Would the member put his 
question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s true when the prices are rising in the 
industry but it is not true when the prices are falling. And that 
means that SaskEnergy may have locked into a price that’s 
simply too high. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why won’t the Minister of SaskEnergy tell us how 
much natural gas they’ve locked in, and at what price? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member is fond of 
getting up and saying maybe this will happen, maybe that will 
happen, maybe the next thing will happen. The Minister of the 
Crown Corporations, Mr. Speaker, has advised . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Crown 
Investments has advised the House that SaskEnergy, to his 
knowledge, is not locked in. The Minister of Crown 
Investments will make it clear what the detail is. 
 
But what I want to say to the House is, how credible is it that 
one day the member from Swift Current can say, don’t have a 
panel, have the cabinet decide. Then he comes in to the 
legislature when we’ve got a recommendation of the panel and 
he says, don’t let the cabinet decide, go to a panel. 
 
Well the problem is, Mr. Speaker, when you contradict yourself 
day after day after day, eventually you trip all over yourself, 
and that’s what this farcical display is all about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, again I direct a question to the 
minister of SaskEnergy. SaskEnergy’s entire rate application is 
based on the assumption that the price of natural gas is going 
up. SaskEnergy says, and I quote: 
 

Natural gas prices will be under upward pressure as all the 
competing users vie for supply. SaskEnergy must cap the 
cost of gas . . . (that’s what the minister was referring to 
earlier) so that consumers are protected from a significant 
rise in price. 

 
Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy obviously assumed natural gas prices 
were going to continue to go up. This means they would use 
their gas price hedging strategy to lock in the price. And that’s 
what we’re asking. How much did SaskEnergy lock in and at 
what price? Come clean with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — What SaskEnergy has done for the 
people of Saskatchewan is save them $175 million over the last 
20 months, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, again I refer to a 
Mr. Peter Linder who said: 
 

I want to congratulate SaskEnergy first for their astute 
hedging program and using the storage facilities to offset 
these high gas prices. (Mr. Speaker) I would suggest the 
people of Saskatchewan are extremely lucky to have been 
paying 4.52 a gigajoule when the price here in Alberta is 
much higher; precisely twice as high (Mr. Speaker). 

 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to add to what the member asked. And 
he suggests to the people of Saskatchewan that somehow you 
could buy roughly at $5 per unit or gigajoule, $5, for the next 
number of years if you lock in today. Nothing could be further 
from the truth, Mr. Speaker. I would challenge him to give me 
the phone number for me and/or for SaskEnergy where he could 
buy a contract for $5 for the next two years. I am quite sure you 
can’t do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy’s rate application says, 
and I quote again: 
 

The cost for purchase gas for November 1, 2001 to October 
31, 2002 . . . (that’s the next gas year) is forecast to be 
$471.4 million. This is the cost of gas in SaskEnergy’s gas 
purchase contracts . . . Including the price resulting from 
the gas price hedging strategy (the minister alluded to). 

 
Mr. Speaker, this suggests that SaskEnergy has already entered 
into significant gas purchase contracts for the upcoming year. 
It’s right there in their application to the rate review panel. 
 
So again, to the minister: how much have they purchased and at 
what price? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, again I will do my very 
best to answer the question as he asked, Mr. Speaker. They 
have been buying, as I understand, on the spot. They’ve been 
limited and have been selling at $4.52 a gigajoule. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, I am told that that they have 
purchased . . . and I describe it as insurance. Members opposite 
ask what is insurance. I do not know how they would not 
understand what insurance is. But, Mr. Speaker, I understand 
that they have purchased, as I would describe, insurance that 
would limit the maximum cap of what they would have to pay 
if as an example, they spike back up to 16 or $18 a gigajoule. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s the best that I can provide for them 
today. If they want specific detail, I will be able to . . . I’ll get 
that information for them, but it would be most appropriate if 
they would ask that question as well in Crown Corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to its own 
rate application, SaskEnergy’s forecasting the cost of gas to be 
471 million, and that’s for 65.7 million gigajoules. So you do 
the math and that works out to $7.17 a gigajoule. 



1572 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2001 

 

This morning’s contract price for the upcoming gas year — for 
the whole year, Mr. Speaker — for the same year we’re talking 
about on the Alberta Natural Gas Exchange was $5.56 a 
gigajoule. And we’ll provide that information to the minister, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s nearly 30 per cent less. In fact at 5.56 a 
gigajoule, SaskEnergy could buy all the gas it needs for the 
upcoming year for $365 million, a savings to the taxpayer of 
over $100 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is SaskEnergy’s estimated gas price so much 
higher than the current price? Did they lock in at a higher price? 
If so, how much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, when they were members 
in government in the 1980s, why did they overestimate their 
revenues by a billion dollars a year, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is incredible that that member would 
stand up here and somehow become the expert on investments 
and gas, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if you look at what 
SaskEnergy has done, they have saved the people of 
Saskatchewan $175 million over the past 20 months. That 
member’s agenda is clearly to discredit SaskEnergy so that if 
they ever became government they could privatize and sell 
SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Valley Potato Corporation 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question too is to the minister of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
About a month ago the Sask Valley Potato Corporation was 
making news. Making news for not paying their taxes. Making 
news for shipping frozen potatoes to Prince Edward Island. 
Making news for leasing more land to get into the production of 
potatoes. It wasn’t good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well today we’ve learned of some more bad news. We’ve 
learned that the NDP-owned potato venture is dumping 
thousands of rotting potatoes on the land near the town of 
Broderick. There is literally a wall of potatoes going up, Mr. 
Speaker. The great wall at Broderick is what it’s called. 
 
Is the government unable to sell them? Or are there just too 
many in storage and they were rotting? Or are you trying to 
make room for more potatoes that you can’t sell? 
 
My question to the minister: why is the Saskatchewan Valley 
Potato Corporation dumping truckloads of potatoes that they 
can’t sell? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve not been 
informed of the specific detail about it. But, Mr. Speaker, this 
does happen and has happened in years past as well. 
 
We’re late into the season. The potatoes have been stored all 
year long, Mr. Speaker. This would not be an unusual 
circumstance. I would question also whether the member knows 

for sure whether those potatoes belong to the Sask Valley 
Potato Corporation. 
 
Generally what has happened, Mr. Speaker, is the Sask Valley 
Potato Corporation first of all owns the facilities and stores 
potatoes, Mr. Speaker. So I’d question for sure whether or not 
those potatoes actually belong to the Sask Valley Potato 
Corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the word in the 
industry is that the NDP government is venturing back into 
potato production. They are purchasing equipment and they’re 
buying and leasing land. This in spite of the fact that the NDP 
government has lost tens of million dollars so far in failed 
potato ventures. 
 
Government involvement in the potato industry directly affects 
private producers. It opens up all sorts of problems with trade 
retaliation from the United States. 
 
So we hear that they are back in the business of growing 
potatoes. And just like two years ago, they’re dumping the 
potatoes they can’t sell. Has this government not learned 
anything? 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is this NDP government 
getting back into the direct production of potatoes? And when 
will it learn? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, if I have to go 
back through the history, I will. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we had some, with the federal government, 
some investment of around $120 million in infrastructure, 
irrigation infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. There was cereal grains 
grown out there. It was determined that we should look to add 
value to our agricultural industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the decision was then made to look at growing 
potatoes. I think if you talk to a lot of the potato producers out 
there, they’re happy that the provincial government, along with, 
at the original, SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) and now with the Sask Valley Potato 
Corporation. And I continue to receive phone calls from the 
growers out there that are happy with this investment, Mr. 
Speaker, that we continue to support them in this industry. 
 
And I am predicting, Mr. Speaker, that into the future we will 
continue to see this as a strong industry and the people in that 
community will continue to be happy with our support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, in early May we asked this 
same minister why the Sask Valley Potato Corp had not paid its 
taxes to two RMs (rural municipality) in the area, one being the 
RM of Rudy. At that time, the minister said that their officials 
would be working with these RMs and that they had quite . . . 
Well he was quite confident that there’d be a resolution found 



June 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1573 

 

in the very near future. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that near future has come and gone. Over 
the past month, the Sask Valley Potato Corp still had not paid 
any taxes to this RM. What’s the hold up? 
 
The Sask Valley Potato Corp, Mr. Speaker, owes the RMs over 
$300,000 for taxes in the year 2000. And they’re not paying 
them. They’re totally irresponsible. Every other business and 
taxpayer in this province has to pay property tax. What’s up 
with the Sask Valley Potato Corp? 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is the Saskatchewan Valley 
Potato Corporation not paying its taxes that were owed to these 
RMs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, that is a very 
legitimate question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My understanding is that the discussions between Sask Valley 
Potato Corporation officials and the RMs that are involved in 
this particular case — because not all of the RMs who currently 
have storage facilities in their RMs have chosen to make the 
decision about recategorizing the storage facilities— but, Mr. 
Speaker, my understanding is that my officials within Sask 
Valley Potato Corporation and the elected representatives of the 
RMs continue to discuss and try to find resolution to this 
difficult situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I wish I could just continue to 
discuss whether I should pay my property tax also. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again, the government has ventured into the 
potato business which is more than just questionable; it sounds 
a little bit ludicrous. They are getting back into the direct 
production of potatoes. They haven’t paid their taxes to the 
local municipalities, and now they are dumping more potatoes 
into the fields around the Broderick area. It’s unbelievable, after 
losing millions of taxpayers’ dollars already that the 
government would continue to forge ahead. 
 
I don’t understand. Is it that the minister has a deal with the 
president of the Old Dutch potato company? We’ll produce the 
potatoes and you won’t buy them. Is that the deal they’ve got 
going? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister please tell the House how much 
money the Sask Potato Valley Corporation has lost last year? 
And, Mr. Speaker, better yet, how much money does the 
Saskatchewan Potato Valley Corporation plan on losing this 
year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that 
politics is being played with a difficult situation. 
 

Mr. Speaker, for the member’s information and for the public’s 
information, what has happened here is that there has been a 
recategorization of the storage facilities from farm to 
commercial. 
 
And the issue is that this has not happened in every single RM. 
In some RMs they’ve chosen to leave them classified under the 
farm category, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, there is obviously 
even a difference in view within RMs that are adjacent to one 
another as it pertains to these facilities. It’s a difficult situation. 
 
I’ve instructed my officials to meet and try and find 
compromise if that is possible. And my understanding, Mr. 
Speaker, is that that continues to happen. And I ask the 
members opposite to not make a political situation out of a very 
difficult one that currently exists. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Carrot River on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the House, 17 grade 7 to 9 students from Pasquia Hills Christian 
School in Carrot River. 
 
They are visiting the legislature today. I understand that they 
have a fairly tight schedule and won’t be able to spend that 
much time, but hopefully I will be able to catch up to them in a 
few minutes and discuss what they have had the opportunity to 
observe this afternoon. 
 
They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Gladwin Loewen, 
and their chaperones, Leland Penner and Wayne Megli. And I 
would ask all members of the House to join with me in 
welcoming them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Eastview on her 
feet? 
 
Ms. Junor: — With leave to introduce a motion regarding the 
televised proceedings of the Standing Committee on Health 
Care. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION 
 

Televised Proceedings of 
Standing Committee on Health Care 

 
Ms. Junor: — This motion flows out of the report the 
committee made that was concurred in just recently in the 



1574 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2001 

 

Assembly. And the motion reads, moved by myself and 
seconded by the member from Regina South: 
 

That the Standing Committee on Health Care be authorized 
to use the Legislative Chamber to facilitate the televising 
and Internet streaming of its public hearings. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Saskatoon Sutherland 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to table answers to 
questions that was asked of me during Committee of the Whole 
in consideration of The St. Thomas More College Act, 2001. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

TABLING OF ANSWERS 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be 
very brief. During the Committee of the Whole I was asked 
some questions by the member from Melfort-Tisdale, which I 
was not able to answer at that time, but I made a commitment to 
the House to bring back those answers. 
 
And it specifically — I won’t go into all of the details, but just 
for members’ edification — it’s the differences between the 
1943 Act of incorporation, the 1972 Act to amend the Act of 
incorporation, compared to The St. Thomas More College Act, 
2001. 
 
And so I’d like to table those answers and thank the hon. 
members for their consideration. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Sask Rivers on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, to ask for leave to introduce a 
guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the Assembly this 
afternoon, in the east gallery, my daughter, Dana Hetherington, 
who is here today from Calgary. She’s in Regina for a couple of 
days to spend a little time with her dear old dad. If I could ask 
her to just rise and stand up, daughter, and wave at everybody. 
 
I’d ask all members to please join me in welcoming her here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Natural Gas Prices 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I think 
the priorities of the Assembly over the last two days have been 
exactly right, Mr. Speaker. We have been talking about an issue 
that clearly is the most important issue currently facing the 
province of Saskatchewan and that is, Mr. Speaker, the largest 
utility rate hike in the history of our province, the current 
recommended rate hike of an average of 35 per cent currently 
before the cabinet of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important to point out that 
while the average increase is 35 per cent, when you take out the 
distribution fee from the equation — around, ranging up to $2 a 
gigajoule — we are talking about a 60 per cent increase in the 
price of natural gas. That’s what we’re talking about and that’s 
significant for the larger institutional customers of SaskEnergy 
and of other companies in the province because for them, the 
distribution isn’t as important as the cost of gas. And so a 60 
per cent increase in the cost of gas is crippling, Mr. Speaker, for 
those institutions. 
 
Now we know that the government, based on the commitment 
of the Minister of Finance — and we’ll take him at his word — 
is looking at options to provide relief for Saskatchewan people, 
should they approve that increase. But before we decide that 
issue and before that cabinet decides that issue, Mr. Speaker, 
they ought to decide if this increase is needed as it is presently 
constituted before the cabinet in this recommendation. That’s 
the heart of the question that we’ve been asking here for a 
couple of days. 
 
And I think finally Saskatchewan people are waking up to the 
fact that this rate request, even though it’s been diluted slightly 
by the panel, is based on $7 a gigajoule going forward to 
October of 2002. And we have demonstrated without 
equivocation that the price going forward to 2002 is much, 
much less. 
 
In fact we’ve demonstrated today that if you go to the Alberta 
Natural Gas Exchange, the intra-Alberta settlement . . . Well the 
Minister of Finance has a confused look on his face. That’s 
where you purchase gas, on the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Pick your exchange then, Mr. Speaker. I’d say to the Minister 
of Finance, pick any exchange he wants today and the price will 
be in the range of $5.56 a gigajoule — that’s the price. 
 
And it’s not just for today. Later on in this debate someone like 
the member for Regina Dewdney, Mr. Speaker, will stand up 
and say, well that’s the price today. That’s what he said 
yesterday — that’s the price today but tomorrow it’ll change. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker. We’ll explain it slowly for the members 
opposite. This is a futures market and for the gas year — and 
the initials here, GY — November 2001, and that gas year, Mr. 
Speaker, is November 1, 2001 to the end of October 2002. 
That’s the gas year. And what’s the price? Is it $7 a gigajoule, 
Mr. Speaker? Is it 6.50 a gigajoule as proposed by the 
government? No. Is it 6.50 as offered by EPCOR even 
yesterday, which we raised? No. The price is 5.56 today — 
5.56. And 5.56 it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, here we 
go again. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow 
says well it was $5 yesterday. In point of fact, on the spot 



June 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1575 

 

market yesterday it was $4.80. We are . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well $5 then. Round it up. I can’t believe this, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But if you want to secure the supply — if you want to secure 
the supply — over the entire period of this increase all the way 
to October 2002 you can still buy it, you can still buy it, for 
$5.56. And the comments we get from across the way and the 
looks we get from the Minister of Finance clearly demonstrate 
that they don’t have a clue. They do need to take an arithmetic 
class. This is the minister responsible for coming up with our 
provincial budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I can’t believe it. Here are the facts from the exchanges of the 
world. And the member for Moose Jaw North will want to get 
on the Internet and find out what the price of gas is before he 
makes his decision at the cabinet table. He’ll have a role to play 
when cabinet decides what they’re going to do. And he’ll want 
to do that from an informed perspective. And the informed 
perspective is to know what can you buy natural gas for through 
until October 2002 and the answer is $5.56, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That’s the answer. It’s not 7.22 as proposed by the 
government. 
 
And so we have another motion before us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
to discuss this important issue. And it refers specifically again 
to the confusion of this government as regard to the price of 
gas. Because we have SaskEnergy basing their entire 
application on $7 a gigajoule . . . actually 7.62 a gigajoule. 
That’s the price they based on for their entire application to 
SaskEnergy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What is the price that the minister based his projections on in 
the provincial budget? What was that price? Well was it half of 
7.62? No it was even lower. For the same period, it’s $3.39 a 
gigajoule. That’s the price the Minister of Finance has come up 
with for the price of gas. 
 
And then he gets up and smugly answers all of the questions 
that we have on this issue — specific questions. He throws back 
rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, when we have asked this basic question 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. Why is there such a 
difference? And why, when we ask Ron Clark at the Crown 
Corporations Committee, when we asked him what he thought 
of Eric Cline’s numbers, he told the committee . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. You may 
not refer to the member in the individual. You should refer to 
the member’s constituency or to the portfolio that the member 
holds. 
 
Mr. Wall: — For that transgression, the members opposite are 
asking me to resign, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And there is too 
much . . . we have too much work to do on this side of the 
House to even be thinking about that, including dealing with 
this motion. But I’ll apologize for my reference to the minister 
in the first person. 
 
And what I was saying though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we had 
Ron Clark, the president of SaskEnergy before the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations, and the member for Regina 
South did an able job of chairing that particular meeting, and 
he’ll remember that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And so we asked Ron Clark, we asked him, well what do you 
think of the Minister of Finance’s projections for natural gas? 
Because we had heard rumours about a pending SaskEnergy 
increase. So we said, Mr. Clark, how do you feel about the 
Minister of Finance’s projection for the price of natural gas at 
$3.39 a gigajoule to the end of 2002? 
 
And do you know what he said, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I’m going 
to paraphrase a little bit, but he said the Minister of Finance was 
all wet. He said he was wrong. He said, I’d like to buy some gas 
from the Minister of Finance. That’s what he said to the 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. He didn’t believe 
him. 
 
So we came to the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and my colleague 
the member for Canora-Pelly asked a question, and it was an 
important question, given what Mr. Clark had said. And given 
that the consumers of the province have a huge stake in what 
the price of natural gas is. 
 
So the member from Canora-Pelly and our Finance critic, stood 
in this Assembly and he asked the question, who’s right? Who’s 
right in the government, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Was it the 
Minister of Finance at $3.39, or was it the minister of 
SaskEnergy at $7 a gigajoule. Who was right? 
 
The Minister of Finance, as I recall, fielded the questions that 
day and he seemed to imply that he was right. But there was 
still no definitive answer. Why? Because the rate request was 
proceeding. And the rate request was based on 7. 
 
So the minister’s projections were proceeding at 3.39, maybe 
lowballing the revenues the government were expecting from 
the gas royalties. Maybe that’s what he was doing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Purposely lowballing the numbers so he could build 
up his election slush fund. 
 
But here’s the question. If he was . . . if his projections were 
going forward at 3.39 and SaskEnergy’s projections were going 
forward at $7 as they were going through the rate review panel 
process, then they continue to maintain two sets of books. One 
for the Minister of Finance to lowball his revenue projections, 
and one for SaskEnergy to justify an increase that we have now 
learned may be up to $2 too high — per gigajoule, per 
gigajoule. 
 
(14:30) 
 
And you spread that out over the consumer base and over what 
SaskEnergy says they’re going to buy, and the figure you come 
up with that taxpayers will be on the hook for because they 
didn’t act at $5.56, is $100 million plus. That is what they cost 
the taxpayers because they couldn’t get their act together; 
because they couldn’t decide what the price of gas was. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s a constructive reason for the motion. 
It isn’t just to get a final and definitive explanation as to why 
these prices are different. 
 
There’s the other constructive motive behind this particular 
motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to make the government fully 
understand the gravity of the situation. To present to them what 
the price of gas is, through until October 2002, as defined by 



1576 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2001 

 

the markets today and yesterday and Friday when it was 
announced, and to plead with the cabinet to make their decision 
based on the real price of gas, not the imaginary price of gas, 
not the price that apparently — and given by the answers we 
got in question period today — not by the price that SaskEnergy 
apparently has locked us into. 
 
Because this government opposite has stood on every occasion 
and trumpeted the accomplishments of SaskEnergy. And we 
also have recognized what the hedging program did for 
consumers over the winter months — there’s no question of 
that; it’s a matter of the public record, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But if you are practicing hedging, when the prices are falling, it 
is . . . it absolutely will lead to disaster because you will lock in 
at a higher price as the market falls. And that is the basic 
question we ask and we will continue to ask until we get an 
answer: did SaskEnergy lock us in at a high price for natural 
gas, higher than $5 to 5.56, for example? And if they did, and if 
they did, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how much did they lock in at 
that price, and exactly what was the price? 
 
How can the people of Saskatchewan have a meaningful 
discussion about potential relief this government might provide 
them, that this government might provide them, without a 
knowledge of what SaskEnergy has charged for the gas, what 
they’ve locked in at? 
 
And now the House Leader is yelling from his seat, as he often 
does, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The House Leader is yelling from 
his seat. And it’s a sign, Mr. Speaker, because he leads in terms 
of this Assembly, in this House, he leads a group of people 
whose track record is all about broken promises. 
 
He leads a group of people who thought nothing of breaking 
their health care promises in terms of the wait to get emergency 
attention. He leads a group of people that say they oppose 
privatization and in the back room they’re . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I’m quite interested in 
hearing how the member will tie that into the motion before the 
House today. And I invite the member to begin doing that. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, truth be known, I’m 
also interested in how I might tie that to the issue that we’re 
discussing, except to say this: that this motion, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, again speaks to the fact that the government seems to 
have two sets of books. 
 
And now we know that in this debate — and now the House 
Leader’s listening and I’m glad to hear it because he’ll agree 
with this I think — in this debate there are three prices that 
we’re talking about. 
 
There’s the minister of SaskEnergy’s price. There’s the minister 
of SaskEnergy’s price . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Would the House please 
come to order. I would like to hear the speaker who has the 
floor at the moment and that is the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are three 

prices in this debate we’re talking about. Two of them are 
referenced in the motion. 
 
There is the price of the minister of SaskEnergy. That’s about 
$7 a gigajoule. And they have been firm on that. They have 
been firm on that. It’s all over their rate application. It’s all over 
it. It’s what the minister has said. It’s what Ron Clark told the 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. They’ve been on 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s a second price and that’s the Minister of Finance’s price 
for natural gas. And that price is 3.39 a gigajoule to 2002. And 
he’s been all over that one too, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He stood 
up in this House and basically said his colleague, the minister of 
SaskEnergy, is all wet. He said he’s wrong; I’m right — 3.39 is 
the price. And he’s never bothered to realize, amazingly 
enough, he’s never bothered to realize that that means we will 
be getting gouged if the price will be 3.39 by the end of this gas 
year — the one we’re talking about. We are going to be gouged. 
We will be gouged, to be sure, by this government. But anyway, 
that’s the second price — $3.39. 
 
And then there’s the third price, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s 
the third price. And that’s the prices we’ve been raising in the 
Assembly; the one we raised today; the price the market has 
determined. The real price for natural gas bought over until 
October 2002. 
 
I’ll make that point again because they’ll stand up and say, well 
what happens if the price changes tomorrow? No, no, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, you could have bought as much gas as you 
wanted today through until October 2002 for $5.56 a gigajoule. 
That’s the real price and it’s time this government — this 
government in this debate — stood up and explained why 
they’ve got two prices for natural gas and none of them are 
right, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s time they had an explanation for 
that. 
 
And so I move, Mr. Deputy Speaker, seconded by the member 
for Saskatchewan Rivers: 
 

That this Assembly request that the Minister of Finance and 
the Minister of CIC immediately give a full explanation 
regarding the discrepancy between the budget projections 
for natural gas prices of $3.39 per gigajoule for 2002 and 
SaskEnergy’s projection for natural gas prices of 
approximately $7 per gigajoule for 2002 on which the NDP 
government based its request for a 42 per cent rate increase 
to SaskEnergy customers. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
is my pleasure this afternoon to rise and speak on this motion 
that’s been brought forward by the member from Swift Current 
in the seventy-five minute debate. 
 
As we participate in this debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s going 
to be very curious as the afternoon progresses how the members 
opposite are going to be able to put a spin on the serious, 
serious discrepancy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the pricing that 



June 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1577 

 

CIC, through their subsidiary SaskEnergy, and the discrepancy 
that is showing up when we listen to the Minister of Finance, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we looked through the motion 
and I prepared myself a few notes, I was really curious, I’m 
very curious, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how a government can have 
such a far-ranging discrepancy in prices when actually the two 
members, the two members on the government side, the two 
ministers — the Minister from Crown Corporations and the 
Minister of Finance who sit right beside each other, across the 
aisle from each other — are double the amount of difference 
between their projections. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you begin to wonder how it is that a 
government can operate in this province when they can’t even 
talk to each other when they sit beside each other, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. How is the province supposed to be run when the 
cabinet ministers don’t even talk to each other — the left arm 
doesn’t know what the right arm is doing? That should be two 
left arms, they’re all left-armed over there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I guess that’s why they don’t talk to each other, they’re so 
busy beating each other on the head. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a bit of a disaster that is 
going to take place in this province. We have . . . the Crown 
corporation of energy is asking for a raise of 38 per cent, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, for residential housing in this province — 38 
per cent. Going to put great hardship on the families of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But what made this very curious for me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
that this so-called NDP government for years and years has 
trumpeted that they are the champion of the underdog, that they 
are the ones who stand up in this House on a daily basis saying 
that if it wasn’t for them those who are less fortunate than 
others, they are the government that will look after them. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I travelled throughout my 
constituency on the weekend talking to people about this rate 
proposal by SaskEnergy that is being looked at by this so-called 
independent rate review committee, what is it going to mean to 
those people out there who live below the poverty line? Well, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s all negative and it’s negative in a big 
time way. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I spoke to a man who is a landlord in the 
city of Prince Albert, who owns a couple of duplexes, he’s not a 
big landlord, just a little bit of retirement income that he uses. 
And I said to him, what’s this going to mean for your renters? 
He says he doesn’t know what he’s going to do because in his 
rental property, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s been a huge 
increase in property taxes. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unfortunately in order to break even 
he’s going to have to have an increase in the rent so that he can 
offset those costs. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, SaskEnergy is 
talking about a rate increase of 38 per cent. That 38 per cent, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is picked up directly — directly — by 
those renters. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he did not hear at any given time in 
the last several weeks where those people living in these 

lower-income rental properties are going to be having the type 
of rate increases in their income, whether they work at 
minimum wage or a part-time job. What kind of rate increases 
they’re going to have in their salaries so that it would be offset 
. . . would help offset these massive increases that are being 
proposed by SaskEnergy? 
 
That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a disgrace and a humiliation 
heaped upon this NDP government who stands in this House 
daily promoting the fact that they are the champion of the 
underdog, when the reality is setting in is that what they really 
are is they are the taxer. They are the taxer of the underdogs. In 
fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are the capitalists of the, of the 
underdog, not the protector. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wanted to speak for a few minutes 
on how this affects other families. Now as we’ve heard several 
times in this Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that what . . . 
that there is a crisis in agriculture — a crisis in agriculture. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, throughout many areas of the province 
where the . . . when it comes into the fall time of the season, a 
lot of the crop is taken off at a higher moisture content than is 
accepted by the elevator companies. And so these farmers, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, have to dry the grain down. 
 
So what’s going to happen now, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well, I’ll 
tell you what’ll happen now. In many areas of the province the 
government, the previous government in the ’80s, was very 
aggressive at getting natural gas out into the farm community of 
Saskatchewan. The farmers out there saw this as a great 
advantage — low-cost heating for their farms, low-cost fuel for 
their grain dryers. And so many of them took advantage of this 
and have plumbed their farms for natural gas. Now, this year, 
when farm prices are at some of the lowest, when farm income 
is at the lowest in the history of Saskatchewan, here we are 
stuck with this so-called NDP government, this weak 
ineffective NDP government, who are proposing this huge, 
massive increase in energy prices. 
 
So what’s that going to mean for the farmer, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? It means a further hardship on those farm families out 
there that are already struggling on a day-to-day basis in trying 
to make ends meet, in trying to pay their power bills, trying to 
pay their energy bills, in trying to pay their fuel bills, in trying 
to pay their property taxes which thanks to this weak and 
ineffective NDP government is going up even again. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how is it that this NDP government 
who through the 1930s championed among the farm families of 
Saskatchewan that they were the answer for all their ills and 
woes? In fact what we’re seeing now into this new millennium, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that this NDP government, this 
so-called weak and ineffective NDP government, is starting to 
attack, attack the very roots that helped to get them established 
in this province to begin with. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unfortunately for the NDP Party, 
and fortunately for the Saskatchewan Party, is that the tide has 
turned. Those very people that they now attack on a daily basis, 
on a regular basis in this legislature, are starting to understand 



1578 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2001 

 

that if they don’t turn to the Saskatchewan Party, things can 
only get worse. 
 
Now it’s hard to believe things can get worse in this province. 
But actually this NDP government, through their own economic 
forecast, are showing a downturn for the next six years. And it’s 
because of this exact mismanagement in energy that that’s 
what’s happening to our province. 
 
And then you begin to really wonder how an NDP government, 
who promotes themselves as the champion of the people of 
Saskatchewan, can actually sit there . . . and the members 
opposite are gloating that they know what they’re doing, that 
they know how to run this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what we’re seeing with this rate application 
by SaskEnergy is that this NDP government doesn’t have the 
foggiest clue what’s going on over there. And actually we’re 
beginning to wonder if they’re even interested in what’s going 
on outside this legislature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things that we noticed in the 
past, under the previous leadership of this NDP government, 
was that there was a certain presence. On this side of the House 
we may not have agreed with the policies that were brought 
forth, but we always understood that there was a presence in 
this government; there was a sense of power over there of what 
was going on. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan, people are asking me what is this new 
government like? And we have to keep telling them over and 
over again . . . In fact it’s reached a point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
when we see that a Crown corporation like SaskEnergy is 
asking for such a massive increase, a massive increase in rates 
for natural gas is that . . . what people are telling me — I don’t 
even have to ask them any more, Mr. Deputy Speaker — is that 
what they’re seeing is that this government has become so weak 
and so ineffective at running this government that people out 
there are actually starting to give up. And on a daily basis, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have to promote and promote and promote 
— don’t go to Alberta; it can get better here. 
 
So that, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure this afternoon to second 
the motion brought forth by the member from Swift Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m extremely 
pleased to enter into the debate today. And at the conclusion of 
my remarks I’m going to move: 
 

That the words after “request” be deleted and substituted 
with the following: 

 
that SaskEnergy continue to provide Saskatchewan 
residents with the lowest possible natural gas rates. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s very 
important to reiterate to the members opposite that SaskEnergy 
has provided the lowest natural gas rates in Canada, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And I’d just like to go through and reiterate again to 
the members the rates that SaskEnergy has charged at 4.52 a 
gigajoule and what their counterparts across Canada have 
charged. 
 
If you lived in Vancouver today, you’d be paying $8.82 a 
gigajoule. If you lived in Edmonton, you’d be paying $8.77. If 
you lived in Calgary, $9.81, Mr. Deputy Speaker; in Winnipeg, 
$8.42; and in Toronto, $9.54, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite are very 
concerned about a natural gas rate increase. Well I want to share 
with the members opposite that the members on this side are 
extremely concerned as well with a natural gas increase. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a natural gas increase hurts all the people 
of this province. Because as natural gas goes up, so do the costs 
to businesses, to producers, and all those costs eventually flow 
back into the costs of products that consumers consume, even if 
they’re not direct consumers of natural gas, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So let me point out a few things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When 
SaskEnergy put in the request for a review, the rate increase 
review, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the rates were at a certain value. 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if those rates go down, of course 
that will affect what will be the outcome of any actual rate 
increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I want to point out a few things. First of all, the issue of 
higher natural gas prices is not unique to Saskatchewan; it is 
actually a problem faced by all consumers in North America — 
by more than four million natural gas consumers in Canada and 
more than 60 million across the United States — all of which 
are feeling the crunch as new uses for natural gas are being put 
on-line and as consumers are, in many cases, using more and 
more natural gas to generate electricity, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
SaskEnergy has to buy its natural gas on the open market and 
therefore is subject to whatever price the market dictates. We 
don’t set the price, Mr. Deputy Speaker; we have to buy on the 
open market. 
 
However, over the last number of years SaskEnergy, I think, 
needs to be credited with doing an exceptional job at finding 
natural gas at its lowest possible point and buying it for the 
consumers of Saskatchewan. Why do the members opposite 
believe it will be any different this year than in previous years? 
We have managed to lock our natural gas supply in at the 
lowest, possible point, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’d like to quote over the last 18 months that SaskEnergy has 
saved consumers $125 million over true market prices that 
consumers in other provinces like Alberta and Ontario have 
paid. And they’ve done that by very carefully looking at the 
market and buying natural gas and at the most optimum time for 
consumers in this province. 
 
That being said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, SaskEnergy faces the 
same high prices that every utility in North America faces, and 
indeed, what every consumer faces. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, why would we believe SaskEnergy would 



June 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1579 

 

operate any differently than it has in the past? It has worked in 
the best interest of the consumers of natural gas in this 
province. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s make something 
clear. When I say the market today is still much higher than 
SaskEnergy’s $4.52 a gigajoule that it’s charging consumers 
today, that is very true. Even the members opposite can’t argue 
with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And if I went to the market today, the winter price is $6 a 
gigajoule, Mr. Speaker. Contrary to what the members opposite 
lay out at 4 . . . or 5.52 or 5.56, Mr. Speaker, if I went to the 
utility today, $6 a gigajoule, Mr. Speaker. And I might add that 
SaskEnergy also has a significant amount of deficit in its cost 
variance account that it needs to collect from the consumers for 
the past winter. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, members opposite talk about 6.69 a 
gigajoule from EPCOR in Alberta. Actually, Mr. Speaker, he 
may be accurate with that number, but as per usual he’s 
omitting a number or two. 
 
SaskEnergy’s rate recommended today by the panel is $6.57 a 
gigajoule, if you were to take that recommendation — lower 
than EPCOR’s 6.69. What the members opposite are not 
including is the cost of putting back into the coffers of 
SaskEnergy that deficit from the cost variance account, which is 
71 cents per gigajoule today. That’s what brings the 
recommendation to $7.28 a gigajoule, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that is based on a price the day the rate review committee 
made its recommendation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s very important that when we 
look at an issue like purchasing natural gas, you understand 
some of the factors involved in that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
as we look at the issue of what SaskEnergy’s task is over the 
next few weeks, it is to buy natural gas when it’s at its lowest 
optimum point that they can purchase it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And SaskEnergy’s done that for a number of years and they’re 
going to do it again this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now we hear they’ve locked into high natural gas rates. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they haven’t locked into high natural gas 
rates. What they have done is bought insurance in case natural 
gas rates going higher, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They haven’t 
locked into any long-term natural gas rates. It makes perfect 
sense to hedge your bet and lock in, buy insurance against an 
increase in cost. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are continuing — continuing, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker — to look at the cost of natural gas, as 
SaskEnergy should. 
 
Now the members opposite, the members opposite are empty. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite are trying to 
indicate to us that SaskEnergy doesn’t care about the rate in 
which it will buy natural gas or has already bought it at an 
inflated price than one would have to buy it. Now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that’s simply not true. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they will 
buy the natural gas at the lowest possible price they can. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to again 
quote from an article entitled “Natural gas price slump eases 

concerns.” This is talking about the natural gas prices going 
down across North America. And I want to talk about the 
comments made by a Janet Holder, vice-president of market 
development for the Ontario gas distributor. She says: 
 

If these prices stay and stabilize here, we will see a 
reduction in prices next winter. Ms. Holder said current 
consumer rates of $9 per thousand cubic feet would be cut 
significantly. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would hope they’d be able to cut 
their rates from $9 a gigajoule, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
right now in Saskatchewan, consumers are paying $4.52 a 
gigajoule. Half — half of what the consumer is paying in the 
province of Ontario. 
 
So when we have a gas company in Ontario saying, if things 
stay like this, they can cut the rates, well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
hope they can cut the rates. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they’re now paying twice what consumers in the province of 
Saskatchewan are paying. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even as you look at the amount of 
money that needs to be repaid in the cost variance account, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it doesn’t take it up to the $9 a gigajoule that 
the people of Ontario pay. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how can the members opposite say 
that SaskEnergy has not acted in the best interest of the 
consumers of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to move, 
seconded by the member from Regina Northeast: 
 

That the words after “request” be deleted and substituted 
with the following: 
 
that SaskEnergy continue to provide Saskatchewan 
residents with the lowest possible natural gas prices. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to second the amendment to the main 
motion. 
 
But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, it’s too bad that we have to 
be debating this issue in the House here today. It’s too bad 
because, Mr. Speaker, I think we have to take a close look at 
what increased energy prices really do. And for perhaps you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and myself and the members in this House 
here, an increase of 25 or $30 a month in energy costs really 
isn’t going to have a big negative effect on either one of us. 
 
But there are people in our society and there are people in our 
economy and there are people in our constituencies that it will 
have an effect on. And that’s primarily low-income earners and 
many of our senior people who are living fixed incomes. And 
that’s going to have a negative effect on them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think we have to deal with the reality of the times, and 



1580 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2001 

 

high energy prices is not unique to Saskatchewan. In fact it’s 
something that’s being faced by natural gas consumers all 
across Canada and the United States. And that’s part of the 
effects of the private expansion to the pipelines by the US 
(United States) private companies and to the strong growing . . . 
American growing economy. 
 
(15:00) 
 
But I think we also want to take a few moments to look at the 
history of this, of this issue, Mr. Speaker. And it goes back, it 
goes back a number of years to when the members’ opposite 
federal cousins were in power in Ottawa — the Brian Mulroney 
government — and their desire to negotiate with the United 
States a freight agreement . . . a Free Trade Agreement that 
allowed Canadian products to flow freely into the US. 
 
An agreement, which also indicated or tied, I guess you’d say 
the price that the consumer in Canada has to pay compared to 
the price the consumer in the United States, which quite frankly 
is that the Canadian consumer has to pay the same price for a 
Canadian product as it is sold for in the United States. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has had in turn a definite negative effect upon 
the Canadian consumer because natural gas in Canada for 
example is used in industry. But it’s also used in many cases as 
the sole heating of residential housing. That’s not quite the case 
in the United States where the natural gas consumption is 
primarily used in the commercial sector down there. 
 
But what’s that done then is had a negative effect on Canadian 
residential heating costs and the impact upon people’s disposal 
incomes for their need to heat their homes here in Canada. 
 
And it’s doubly sad I think, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the 
fact that previous premiers of this great province of 
Saskatchewan had envisioned the natural gas as an energy 
source of the future. And at that time when it was not under 
great demands, they were able to pick up huge, huge reserves of 
natural gas in Saskatchewan and in Alberta. 
 
And we as Saskatchewan government and we as Saskatchewan 
residents owned huge resources of natural gas that was there to 
meet the needs of the Canadian and Saskatchewan consumer 
when the time was, was at hand. Now that time is at hand and 
what’s happened to these reserves, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well as you know, and I’m sure most members in this House 
know, and I know that the vast majority of Saskatchewan 
people know that those were sold off when those people over 
there were the Government of Saskatchewan in the ’80s. They 
were sold off by the Grant Devine government and the sad part 
of it is, Mr. Speaker, they were virtually given away. 
 
They lacked to see the need in the future. The need to serve 
Saskatchewan people with the lowest energy costs. We had that 
opportunity. We had that opportunity here, Mr. Speaker, but 
those people over there in the 1980s when they were the 
government of this province gave that away. 
 
They sold and . . . they sold off the natural reserves. And we 
can remember, Mr. Speaker, their attempt when they were 
government in the ’80s their attempt to privatizing SaskEnergy. 

We remember that real well. And we remember the opposition 
in this government — this party was in opposition at that time 
— and they drew the line in the sand. They said on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people, we’re not going to accept that, and they 
stood their ground. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, they stood their ground and 
they won. The people of Saskatchewan rallied behind the 
opposition — the NDP opposition at that time — to force that 
government over there of the day, that government over there of 
the day, to back off the privatization of SaskEnergy. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, I know, Mr. Speaker, those members 
opposite will say no, no, that wasn’t us. That was the Grant 
Devine Conservatives. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting, I find it interesting that 
a quote from the August 6, The Telegraph, the North Battleford, 
Saskatchewan August 6 edition. And there’s a article in there, 
and the headline says, “Maybe Crowns have to go — 
Hermanson”. 
 
The first question asked by the reporter is, and I quote: 
 

Should Saskatchewan get rid of its Crown corporations? 
 

The answer: 
 

“Maybe we should”, Sask Party Leader Elwin Hermanson 
says. 
 

Maybe we should privatize it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I know, I know that those members opposite 
once again, those members opposite once again will say, oh 
that’s not us. We’re the Sask Party. That was what the 
privatization of the Crown corporations was, the agenda of the 
Grant Devine Conservatives. And we’re not the Grant Devine 
Conservatives; we’re the new Sask Party. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to give you an example of what 
Saskatchewan people think of this so-called new Sask Party. 
It’s an example of the old car that I drive, a 1985 Ford Mustang. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will be the first to admit it needs a paint 
job. And it needs a muffler. And it needs a tune-up. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it has over 200,000 kilometres on it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that I could take that car to Elite 
Auto Body and the boys there would do a wonderful job on it. 
They would take off the old paint, they would fix the rust spots, 
they would prime it, they would paint it, and it would come out 
of that shop shiny and bright, just like a new one. 
 
The only problem, Mr. Speaker, it would still be a 1985 model. 
It would still need a muffler. It would still need a set of tires. 
And it would still have 200,000 miles on it. Just like that party 
over there, Mr. Speaker. They can change their name, but the 
people of Saskatchewan know they haven’t changed their game. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I’m very interested in 
how this relates to the motion before the House. And I invite the 
hon. member to start bringing it back to the motion. 
 



June 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1581 

 

Mr. Harper: — I’ll explain that, Mr. Speaker. Just like the 
Conservatives in the 1980s attempted to privatize energy in this 
province to drive the prices up, that’s exactly what that group 
over there would intend to do if they were ever given the reins 
of power in this province. 
 
Well I’m pleased, Mr. Speaker, to assure you that that won’t 
happen — that won’t happen because the people of 
Saskatchewan know that those people over there may have 
changed their name, but their policies, their rhetoric, and their 
hidden agenda is exactly the same as it was in the ’80s, the time 
that drove this province into debt and lost to the people of 
Saskatchewan energy reserves that could have served us very, 
very well today. Would have put us on more than a competitive 
basis with other provinces — not only that, would have put us 
on a competitive basis internationally, Mr. Speaker. That won’t 
happen. 
 
And we must take a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to 
acknowledge the fine work that’s been done by SaskEnergy 
over the last particularly 18 months. And if you look at the 
information that’s made available to all people in Saskatchewan 
you will soon note that SaskEnergy has saved Saskatchewan 
consumers some $125 million over the true market prices — 
$125 million in the last 18 months over what consumers in 
Alberta and consumers in Ontario were paying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my great pleasure to second the amendment 
put forward by the member from Regina Dewdney. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to speak on this topic today, as we know it’s a 
very relevant topic to the taxpayers of this province. The 
taxpayers and the customers of this province are very concerned 
about their rising energy costs. 
 
And the member just finished giving his view of history. And 
I’d like to crack that member’s view of history. If the member 
would recognize that in the 1970s in the former Blakeney 
government it was called, everything was . . . the economy of 
Saskatchewan was working around the family of Crown 
corporations. 
 
And one of the theories they had that they keep oil and gas in 
the ground for future generations. But they really missed out on 
a number of opportunities and we see the repercussions today 
with higher energy prices. 
 
And what the member forgets to mention is that his socialist 
doctrine doesn’t work, never has; and what we have is a worse 
off situation than if the government of the day back in the ’70s, 
in the Blakeney days, had decreased the royalty rates and got 
development . . . oil and gas development in this province. 
 
And that’s what the government should be doing today. The 
government should be increasing . . . encouraging oil and gas 
development in this province. They shouldn’t be relying on 
their family of Crown corporations to do everything because it’s 
the most inefficient way of running economy. 
 
It’s been proven around the world again and again that 

socialism doesn’t work and the free enterprise system does 
work. Supply and demand does work. And what we need to do 
in this province is to lower the royalty rates, lower taxes, get the 
economy going and that’s directly related to the oil and gas 
industry. 
 
And companies . . . we talked to the oil and gas industry that is 
mainly based in Alberta now. It used to be based in 
Saskatchewan but unfortunately because of the socialist 
governments we’ve had in the last 50 years we’ve chased the oil 
and gas industry out of this province. And these companies say 
to us, if you would change the royalty rates, put Saskatchewan 
on the same even footing as they have in Alberta and other 
provinces and other countries around the world, that they would 
come into Saskatchewan and develop reserves in this province 
for the betterment of the taxpayers and the customers of this 
province. 
 
And unfortunately the government across does not understand 
that and it seems that they’re lost in their old ways of trying to 
run the whole province through their Crown corporations at the 
expense of the taxpayers of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that we have two ministers that 
don’t really agree on what’s going on concerning the price of 
natural gas. The Finance minister’s own budget estimates states 
that natural gas will be 3.39 per gigajoule for 2002; and even 
lower, 2.91 per gigajoule for 2003-2005. Then of course 
SaskEnergy is stating that the price will be around $7 per 
gigajoule. And so that’s quite a difference in estimates. 
 
The rate review panel, it states that the cost to purchase gas for 
the November, 2001-October, 2002 will be $471 million — that 
works out to $7.12 per gigajoule. That’s a huge discrepancy 
between the two departments. 
 
Then, I’d like to quote from . . . on April 19th, the committee of 
Crown corporations, where Mr. Ron Clark says: 
 

. . . Mr. Chairman, we’d love to have some of that 3.59 gas 
that (you’ve) . . . got . . . We don’t think it’s going to be 
that low . . . If you’ve got $4 gas, I’d love to buy (it) some 
of it. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, now SaskEnergy is saying that they are 
paying $7 per unit. We’d like to know which number is right. It 
seems that the Minister of Finance is . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. There appears to be 
several debates going on all at one time. And I believe the 
member from Redberry Lake has the floor, and I’d like to hear 
his contribution to the debate. So would hon. members please 
come to order. I recognize the member for Redberry Lake. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — We’d like to know whose books are right or if 
possibly both books are wrong. They seem to be able to cook up 
numbers at will. 
 
It could be that SaskEnergy officials have already made 
purchase of natural gas . . . (inaudible) . . . at inflated rates. And 
as we know, the trend is downward on the natural gas scale. 
 
Now the Finance Minister is predicting lower rates, and so the 



1582 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2001 

 

SaskEnergy officials already have made . . . possibly have made 
some purchases and locked it in at a price that it could be $2 
lower to save the taxpayers some money. 
 
Now the NDP has bragged about how efficient SaskEnergy was 
in locking in what was described as good prices last year. But it 
seems that we are now stuck with paying $7 for natural gas, 
when we could be paying the current price, which is about 
$5.50, and possibly falling even further. 
 
Or there’s another option. Maybe it’s that the prices have been 
locked in already at a lower price and SaskEnergy has maybe 
done its due diligence and purchased at the lower level. But the 
government — the high-handed NDP, the arrogant NDP — has 
muzzled the SaskEnergy officials. And they’re just saying well, 
let’s just leave it high, the Saskatchewan people won’t 
recognize that it’s high and we’ll just put some more money 
into our coffers and maybe we’ll buy some more dot-com 
companies with it. Or, you know, just throw some more 
taxpayer money out the window instead of taking the money, 
lowering taxes, lowering rates. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government forgets something. 
What they forget is the people of Saskatchewan, the seniors of 
Saskatchewan, families of Saskatchewan, the small-business 
people of Saskatchewan, the towns and cities and municipalities 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And it’s interesting, when we ask the Finance minister about the 
discrepancy in prices; he says we’re just crying crocodile tears. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the seniors of this province are probably 
crying tears all right, because they can’t afford another $400 in 
energy price increases this year. How do seniors, who live on 
fixed incomes, live and buy the daily necessities of life when 
they’re having to take on the extra burden of higher natural gas 
prices? 
 
And also we talk about increased costs. Our small-business 
people in this province, which is the backbone of our economy 
despite what the government says and is the backbone of every 
economy in the world that is growing and prosperous, they 
already have to pay possibly some of the highest rates in tax 
rates in Canada. And now they’re going to have to pay 
thousands of dollars more in higher energy costs to run their 
businesses. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, we have to take a look at what the higher 
energy costs are doing to our hospitals. Already many hospitals 
are over budget. They have shortage of staff. They are having 
troubles with their waiting lists. People’s health are suffering 
because of the circumstances in health care. And now these 
hospitals will be having to pay even higher energy prices, which 
will come directly out of their budgets which are already 
stretched too thin. 
 
And again, look at the schools in our province. The schools are 
going to have to pay higher energy prices. And again this 
government is forcing the school boards to raise the taxes at the 
municipal level. And once again, this government has put the 
school boards in an untenable situation where the taxes are 
going to have to go up again. 

And you look at small towns and RMs and the cities who heat 
curling rinks and skating rinks and swimming pools. Their costs 
are going to continue to rise, and either they’re going to have to 
increase their user fees or else increase taxes again to cover the 
shortfall, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again we talk about revitalizing rural Saskatchewan. Rural 
Saskatchewan needs basic things. Rural Saskatchewan needs 
lower taxes, proper infrastructure, hospitals, schools, even 
proper cell phone service. And when you increase the cost of 
energy, that affects small-town rural Saskatchewan and again 
it’s a detriment to the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
At this time, I’d like to just end my speech, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, by saying that the government has to get . . . the two 
ministers have to get together and decide whose numbers are 
right and do the right thing for the people of Saskatchewan and 
have the lowest possible natural energy gases for the customers. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ve 
listened to this debate with some interest this afternoon. And I 
want to talk about some of the issues that have been raised by 
members on both sides of the House. 
 
I am going to stay very specifically focused on the actual 
resolution and the amendment in front of us today, but let me 
say when we take a look at the issue of the projections that we 
have in the budget document and the rate review request from 
SaskEnergy, there should not be seen to be some great 
difference or some great argument here. 
 
What we are talking about is the rate that we expect to receive 
our royalties on and the rate at which SaskEnergy needs to both 
buy the gas that it’s going to sell to Saskatchewan people and 
also to make up for the variance that we have in the gas 
variance account, the $80 million deficit. 
 
The natural gas application deals with those two factors. One is 
the increase that we’ve seen in natural gas prices. The second is 
to make up for the last several months that we’ve been selling 
gas at a loss. People on this side of the House, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, believe that we have to pay our bills. We believe that 
when deficits are rung up, the deficits need to be paid off. We 
don’t believe that we can simply leave them for our future 
generations as the members opposite did when they were in 
power. 
 
There’s $80 million there that needs to be dealt with. Now if the 
opportunity had been there to charge what we were replenishing 
the supply at, we would have done that. The decision was to 
wait and see what natural gas stabilized at. Now we should 
understand that this is where this $80 million variance is. The 
$80 million has to come from somewhere, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
SaskEnergy has asked that it be added on to the gas prices in 
their rate application and that the rates that they expect to be 
buying gas at will be reflected. 
 
The member for Swift Current says, well which is it? You 
know, there’s two prices. The real price and the imaginary 
price. I would say to the member from Swift Current, Mr. 



June 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1583 

 

Deputy Speaker, that the only imaginary price is the one that he 
comes up with on the floor of the House after looking on the 
Internet in the morning. Because it is not an accurate reflection 
of what we can buy natural gas at. It is not the price we can buy 
natural gas at. If you were to go to the market today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and buy one gigajoule of gas for one day you 
might get it at the amount that the member opposite has listed it 
as. That may well be the case. 
 
I think for a lot of us when we talk about these things, 
gigajoules and prices per gigajoule, it gets complicated. I liken 
it to go and getting a mortgage. We know that there’s a certain 
mortgage rate charged that the banks have. We know that when 
we as individual consumers go into the bank and sit down with 
our bank that we have a series of options on what those 
mortgage rates are. If I go on a very short term I get a better rate 
than if I lock in over a longer term. But if I lock in over a longer 
term, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I may protect myself from the rates 
going up. 
 
This is analogous to the situation that SaskEnergy does in 
purchasing natural gas. What they do — and we have benefited 
from this for years and years under the good investment policy 
of SaskEnergy — they have been able to protect us from 
upswings in the market by purchasing it at a reasonable price. 
 
This is where the $7 comes from. This is the rate that they 
believed that they needed to charge as to where that market 
would stabilize plus cover off the $80 million deficit that’s been 
rung up over the last six months as we’ve had to replenish our 
stock at a higher price. 
 
It’s an average price, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s not a case that 
you simply walk in and pick up a gigajoule and move it over to 
your supply. This is the average price that we’ve looked at. And 
we need to understand that. Some of the gas we bought is 
significantly higher in cost. Some of the gas we’re buying today 
is certainly at a higher cost than the 4.52 that we’re charging 
consumers. 
 
This is a very simple debate. And it’s a debate that people have 
around their tables any time they go to renew their mortgages. 
Do you lock in for a short amount of time at a lower price, or do 
you lock in for a longer amount of time at a slightly higher price 
to protect yourself from rate increase? I think it’s a perfect 
analogy. 
 
This is why I don’t understand why the members opposite seem 
so perplexed by this. We know that the Saskatchewan treasury 
will get its royalty rebates, its royalty revenues based on a 
certain value of gas. We know though that when SaskEnergy 
goes to buy it, they will likely buy it at a different price. 
 
If we simply owned all the gas fields, the price would be the 
same because we could simply transfer it over. We could pull it 
out of the government’s gas fields and put it into people’s 
homes. 
 
We do not own the gas fields, thanks in part to the members 
opposite. But the other thing we need to understand, and the 
members opposite will I am sure appreciate this as the great 
crypto-capitalists that they are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the price 
of natural gas has gone up because demand has gone up. 

Demand has gone up because unlike in the 1970s, we have 
pipelines now that take natural gas down into the United States. 
That means greater demand. No longer do we simply burn it off 
at the oil field. That is part of why we’ve seen gas prices go up. 
 
And for the members opposite to somehow believe that there’s 
something untoward going on here, is ridiculous. It shows that 
they don’t understand the oil and gas industry; it shows they 
don’t understand SaskEnergy’s pricing; and frankly, I think it 
goes to show they don’t understand basic finances that anybody 
that has a mortgage understands. 
 
It says to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the members here — 
the Minister of Finance, the Minister of CIC — have a good 
understanding of how government works, and the members 
opposite are no better prepared to govern than they were in the 
disastrous time that they were here in the 1980s. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to take a look at the facts — the 
facts — not simply the outrageous innuendo and allegations and 
imaginations that the members opposite have. Gas prices 
fluctuate. 
 
I frankly would put my trust in people like Ken From far before 
I’d ever put it into my good friend, the member for Swift 
Current. And thankfully, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as long as we’re 
in government, the good officials in SaskEnergy will have the 
ability to continue to purchase gas in the best interests of 
Saskatchewan people, as we have benefited from over the last 
decade. And I have every confidence that they’ll continue in 
that way. 
 
The second issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the issue raised by the 
member for Dewdney, and that concerns the future of 
SaskEnergy. Let us not forget that these parties in this House 
are ideologically divided — as if you could forget that by 
listening to the member for Redberry Lake sputter on about 
socialism, and who knows what else he was talking about. 
 
The members opposite are ideologically hidebound to selling 
off our Crown investments. They tried in ’89 to sell 
SaskEnergy; they’re setting it up now again. And I will tell you 
that, God forbid, if they ever form a government they will try 
and sell it again. And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we’ll see 
is we’ll see fluctuations widely, like they are throughout every 
other jurisdiction on this continent. Not here in Saskatchewan, 
not today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but that’s what would happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The sixty-five minute portion of the 
debate has expired. We’ll now proceed to 10 minutes of 
questions and comments. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I guess I have a 
question for the member for Regina South on this issue that 
we’ve been debating here today. And specifically it relates to 
the fact that in the SaskEnergy’s application to the rate review 
committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, SaskEnergy clearly indicated 
that they would be hedging in terms of . . . in a rising market, 
that they’d try to peg a lower price as they did late last year. 
 
Just outside the legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, SaskEnergy 



1584 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2001 

 

officials confirmed that indeed they’re buying on the spot 
market. They’re buying today on the spot market, and so they 
haven’t bought any gas forward to October 2002. Now that 
represents an opportunity. Well that represents an opportunity 
because the price today is $5.56 plus 3 per cent, plus 3 per cent 
transmission charge — much, much lower than the rate they’re 
considering. 
 
The question to the member for Regina South is: wouldn’t he 
support then SaskEnergy locking in at the current price and 
saving Saskatchewan customers of SaskEnergy about a dollar a 
gigajoule, up to $100 million. Would he support that? 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, what I get from the members 
opposite is that they in fact were wrong in what they were 
saying, that they were accusing us of having locked in, because 
clearly we haven’t. 
 
SaskEnergy is, as the member opposite is saying, buying on the 
spot market. It would seem to me to make sense — it would 
seem to me to make sense that we take a look at what’s 
happening. Why lock in at a high price if it’s going to drop? But 
on the other hand, if the expectation is the market’s going to go 
up, of course we would expect them to take a look at that and to 
protect us on the price. 
 
That seems to be the way they’ve always bought gas. It seems 
to be the prudent way to continue to buy gas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was 
intrigued listening to the member for Sask Rivers talk about this 
government being the capitalist of the underdog. 
 
Can I just ask, what the heck did he mean by that? 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
interesting that member from that side of the House, the 
so-called NDP government, would ask a question in regards to 
capitalism. We’re certainly well aware in this province, and 
even more aware on this side, and also in our own 
constituencies, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this NDP government 
is more interested in a socialistic aspect of life rather than 
capitalism, where it would be an opportunity for corporations 
such as SaskEnergy to be able to operate in a more efficient and 
prudent manner. 
 
And as we of course heard just now from the member from 
Regina South, is that it seems as though SaskEnergy at this time 
is simply wandering in circles and has absolutely no idea what 
they’re doing, and waiting for direction from this socialist 
government. And I think it’s just a clear indication that nobody 
on that side has any idea what’s going on. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a question for the 
member from Swift Current. The member from Swift Current 
talks repeatedly about how the government is doing this and 
that, and referring to the rates used in the budget and the rates 
used in the SaskEnergy proposal. 
 
I’d like to ask the member opposite, does he know what rate per 
gigajoule that SaskEnergy used in their rate proposal, rate 

application, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
Could the member tell me that please. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well there’s a couple of figures in the rate 
application, Mr. Speaker, that SaskEnergy uses — $7.62 a 
gigajoule is the initial number that they discuss in the 
application to the rate review panel. The submission that they 
made however is around $7 a gigajoule. That’s what it was 
based on. That was SaskEnergy’s request to the rate review 
panel. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — My question is to the member for Sask 
Rivers. I was wondering if he could tell us what rate he thinks 
SaskEnergy should be charging for natural gas. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was a very 
curious question I guess from the member and curious indeed 
from the member from Regina South that he would expect us in 
opposition to be able to help SaskEnergy and the rate review 
panel set pricing for natural gas in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I last looked I believe the 
members opposite are actually supposed to be in government, 
and here they are again asking us for advice on how to set 
prices for natural gas. 
 
Well I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this is the type of attitude 
that they have on that side of the House, I think maybe they 
should just call a general election and we’ll take over 
government and then we’ll be able to help set the natural gas 
price within the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s an interesting question, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and very germane to the debate so we’ll put it to the 
member for Regina Dewdney. What price does he feel 
SaskEnergy should be charging for natural gas? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m extremely 
pleased that the member opposite asked the question. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe SaskEnergy should charge 
the very . . . the lowest possible fair price to the consumers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But I’d also like to point out . . . I’d like to point out to the 
members opposite that the number SaskEnergy used on page 13 
of their application, for the cost of purchasing gas per gigajoule, 
was $6.05. 
 
Now what they don’t seem to understand is the need to pay 
back the cost variance account, the transmission costs. All those 
things are factors in what the rate review has to look at. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they were using a figure today that 
you could buy on the Alberta commodity, natural gas 
commodity at 5.56. He’s right. But it was based on 6.05, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 



June 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1585 

 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To the member 
for Regina Dewdney is my question, and it’s pretty simple. The 
rate review panel has recommended . . . they actually didn’t 
give SaskEnergy the full increase. But their recommendation is 
$6.50 a gigajoule for the cost of gas, plus 71 cents to pay off the 
gas cost variance account per gigajoule, for a total of 7.28. 
 
If the member for Regina Dewdney does not believe that the 
6.57 is all the cost of gas in terms of this increase, if he believes 
that 6.05 is the number, what is the other 52 cents for? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member opposite wants 
to very selectively pick numbers from the application, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — the rate 6.05 on page 13, the average cost of 
a gigajoule. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite, they want to 
ask all these . . . a number of questions about how the process 
works. Maybe before they go and make assumptions about how 
— they talk about how the province is gouging the consumer — 
they should understand the process, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. During the 
debate, the member for Sask Rivers made reference to the 
independent rate review panel and its qualifications. 
 
I would like to ask the member for Sask Rivers what his 
qualifications are and why they are superior to Mr. 
Lacoursiere’s and Mr. From’s, who have clearly dealt with this 
issue. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again, a very 
curious question from the member from Regina South. Again 
he’s standing in this House asking for advice from the 
opposition side. And certainly we’re always willing to give it, 
and we give it freely and with an open mind. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to try to help the 
member from Regina South understand that he is actually in the 
government, and it’s the government’s duty in this province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to run the government and not to be 
seeking advice on a regular basis from the opposition. So here 
we are again this afternoon, the member from Regina South 
asking for advice on how to operate the government. 
 
Now certainly if they need help to operate the government, call 
a general election, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ll gladly win the 
next election on their behalf, help this province to run in a 
prudent and effective manner. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question to the member for Sask Rivers is what his 
qualifications were. 
 
One of the things we understand in government is that you trust 
your officials and you hire people who know what they’re 
doing — i.e., Mr. From in SaskEnergy; i.e., Mr. Lacoursiere in 
the independent rate review panel. 
 
I would appreciate the member for Sask Rivers not dodging the 
question and certainly answering it. 
 
While we appreciate his advice, I would certainly also note that 

we are paying fair market value for it, which is about nothing. 
But if the member would like to explain his qualifications, I 
would be more than willing to listen to them. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it would 
be my pleasure to speak for the next 15 seconds in response to 
the question from the member from Regina South — down to 
eight seconds now, I see. Thank you, the member from Swift 
Current. 
 
And I had 14,000 people who are quite aware of my . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The 75 minute debate has expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 8 — Tourism Industry Important to Economy 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Let me 
switch files and switch approach. I am quite happy to stand 
concerning a motion that I have put on the order paper 
concerning Tourism Week and the value of the tourism industry 
to Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
This is in fact Tourism Week here in Saskatchewan. It runs 
June 3 to 9, I believe. And this is an excellent opportunity I 
believe for this Assembly to recognize the good work that 
Saskatchewan businesses are doing throughout the province to 
attract tourists and the partnerships that we’ve entered into — 
government, industry, and communities — in terms of fostering 
what I think to be a very good tourism product. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in some ways it’s unfortunate, I think, that 
Tourism Week falls in the middle of summer. I guess it makes 
sense because that’s when we have most tourists here. But 
Saskatchewan has tourism opportunities throughout the year, 
and it is something that I think we should take this week and 
celebrate. 
 
I look at having grown up in central Saskatchewan, in the 
Prince Albert area, and the great recreational opportunities that 
we enjoyed during the winter months, be it snowmobiling or 
cross-country skiing — not a lot of opportunities to downhill, 
but some places they’ve been able to develop fairly decent 
downhill ski facilities as well. 
 
Saskatchewan is a four-season tourist destination, and I think 
that we should really be celebrating that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As we take a look around Saskatchewan today, I think all of us 
can see just how increasingly important tourism is becoming to 
Saskatchewan’s economy. Whether that is in Moose Jaw, or as 
we’ve heard several statements in the Assembly over the last 
few days with the work that they’ve done repositioning 
themselves as a tourist destination. 
 
Whether it is the work that we’ve done here in the city of 
Regina to try and open up many of our very nationally 
renowned institutions. I think of the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) that we are very happy to have their training 
headquarters here. The importance of things like the sunset 
ceremony that I know tourists from across the continent enjoy 
coming to take a look at. The museum that celebrates the 



1586 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2001 

 

activities that the RCMP have participated in over the last 
hundred years of opening up the West. 
 
As we look across the province, there are some very unusual 
things that we find here in Saskatchewan that are not simply 
located here in our cities. And this is one of the reasons I also 
think that we should spend a great deal celebrating what’s 
happening in the province’s tourist industry. 
 
I take a look at the remarkable find that there was in terms of 
the Tyrannosaurus Rex fossil discovery in Eastend, I believe it 
was. This was a remarkable scientific discovery, but it also is 
proving to be a very important tourist opportunity for the 
southwest part of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from every part of this province there is some 
remarkable, remarkable event, remarkable location, remarkable 
people that I think have a great deal to offer Canadians, to offer 
North Americans, and offer people from around the world as 
they come to visit. 
 
As we’ve toured . . . if any of us have toured the United States, I 
think that we often will see that they make a bigger deal out of 
their tourist attractions. Every town seems to have a thing down 
there; it doesn’t matter what it is — it’s the biggest something 
or other — and this is their tourist attraction. We’ve not opted 
for so much the gimmicks here as we have to try and build these 
things around our communities’ history and our own values. 
 
I want to speak for a minute about the situation in Moose Jaw. 
Because I was a little surprised the other day when the member 
for North Battleford took such a strident attack on the citizens 
of Moose Jaw and the work that they have done in developing 
the historic tunnels of the city in terms of trying to provide a 
greater tourist draw. 
 
The city of Moose Jaw, 10 years ago, I think was trying to 
figure out where it would go. A medium-sized city, I think it’s 
the third or fourth largest in the province — it’s always been a 
bit of a debate between Prince Albert and Moose Jaw, which is 
larger — but a very decent sized city with a lot of opportunities. 
 
The city was taking a look at how it could expand and how it 
could move forward. And it made I think a remarkable set of 
decisions to embrace tourism and use some natural advantages 
it had, as well as its own history, to promote a new product to 
attract people to Moose Jaw. Not simply to draw them away 
from Regina or draw them in from other communities, but to 
attract them to Moose Jaw. 
 
We take a look coming out of that, the redevelopment of the 
city’s downtown, the work and the money that they spent to do 
that. We take a look at the redevelopment of the tunnels. We 
take a look at the expansion of new facilities and new draws 
like the mineral springs, which I guess really is a redevelopment 
of an old facility that was there back in the ’30s or ’20s. 
 
These are kind of innovative ideas that Saskatchewan people 
came up with that said, not only do they have to be a tourist 
attraction or can they be a tourist attraction, but this can help 
make the cities a better place to live and make our communities 
a better place to live. 
 

And I salute the people of Moose Jaw for the work that they did 
in establishing themselves as a tourist draw. And I really do 
think that it serves as a model for communities across this 
province and indeed across the Prairies to see some of the 
benefits of how we can attract people in to enjoy our scenery 
and our communities. 
 
I think it was unfortunate the other day, and perhaps the 
member for North Battleford didn’t mean to be so strident in his 
attack on the people of Moose Jaw for their redevelopment — 
I’ll give him the benefit of the doubt that he didn’t — but I do 
believe that it is important we recognize the initiatives that 
people have gone through. 
 
When I take a look at the city of Regina, we are remarkably 
blessed in this community with a large number of draws. This 
Legislative Building is one of the top tourist attractions in the 
province. It’s one of the top tourist attractions in the province 
because it’s a beautiful, remarkable facility that springs out of 
the prairie. 
 
Positioned on the lake, surrounded by a beautiful park that I 
think any of us in this city know is very well used by joggers, 
cyclists, people out walking their dog, by families. People use 
this area. This is something that is both a tourist attraction and 
also makes our community a better place to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was watching the CBC Newsworld the other day 
and I was surprised to see two stories on the CBC Newsworld 
back to back, celebrating Saskatchewan. One dealt with the 
wildlife sanctuary actually, the bird sanctuary over in Wascana 
Park not too far from here, just over by the Centre of the Arts, 
and talking about what a draw it was to Saskatchewan people 
and to people from across the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can take a look at communities throughout the 
province. I want to spend a minute talking about Saskatoon 
because they’ve opted for a slightly different approach to 
attracting tourists that has been equally successful. 
 
Saskatoon is very fortunate to have a very creative and artistic 
community. They have gone forward with some very innovative 
ideas to foster community tourism growth. And I take a look at 
one of the long-standing productions that they put on up there. I 
think it was one of the first in the country, this Shakespeare on 
the Saskatchewan. 
 
Now it’s somewhat in vogue that we would see Shakespeare 
reperformed. I think Halifax does Shakespeare by the Sea. 
There’s Shakespeare on Princess Island in Calgary. Winnipeg 
has something similar. But Saskatoon in a lot of ways was a 
pioneer in this by bringing Shakespeare to the people and 
modernizing it, and bringing I think a very positive artistic and 
cultural draw in the community. 
 
If I’m not mistaken the Shakespeare on the Saskatchewan starts 
running in about the middle of July, about the same time that 
the jazz festival starts in Saskatoon. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Saskatoon is very fortunate to have a very good set of . . . a 
beautiful venue in their river valley. They certainly play off of 



June 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1587 

 

the remarkable landscape that they have around them. And they 
have integrated this into a very good tourism product. 
 
Cultural activities like the Shakespeare on the Saskatchewan, 
like the jazz festival, which is held — I would note to the 
members opposite who are always interested in selling off the 
Crown corporations — held in partnership with SaskTel, 
sponsored in a large part by SaskTel, which adds to the 
community. 
 
They also then have the ability to draw into other things like 
Wanuskewin Heritage Park. Wanuskewin is I think remarkably 
turning into one of our great natural treasures. For those of us 
who have had the opportunity to be out there, I am always, 
always impressed by the sense of peace and tranquility that one 
gets from travelling there, and this reminder that people have 
been living here on these prairies for thousands and thousands 
of years. 
 
And it is I think a remarkable work that was done by the 
community, by the provincial governments over the last decade, 
two decades, 15 years I guess, and the federal government in 
terms of recognizing this as a heritage park. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have, as I say, these things are certainly not 
limited to our large cities. You take at look at the . . . we need 
only take a look at the situation in Batoche and the excellent 
facilities there the federal government has invested in. The 1885 
uprising and rebellion was a time in history that I don’t know 
that many people would think anything good could have come 
out of. But as we take a look at what has been done today, we 
understand that there is a market there for people who want to 
learn more about their heritage; who want to learn more about 
their country. 
 
And this is one of the things that we see out in Batoche, in the 
Duck Lake area, the Duck Lake Interpretative Centre. These are 
remarkable facilities which draw thousands and thousands of 
people from across the country, and across the continent every 
year. 
 
We see these sorts of situations, and I hear the member for 
Wood River has decided to re-enter the Chamber, and I wanted 
to congratulate the people in his riding for the work that they’ve 
done in terms of developing a tourist product . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’d just remind the member from Regina 
South that he’s not to make any remarks about the presence or 
absence, directly or indirectly, about the presence of absence of 
any members. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I apologize for 
that. I do however hear the member for Wood River, from his 
seat, talking about the situation. And I do want to say that the 
people in the . . . throughout the province have done a 
remarkable job and indeed the people in his riding have done a 
remarkable job also in developing tourism product. 
 
We take a look at one of the things that I think is relatively new 
in south Saskatchewan, and that is this march back across the 
Red Coat Trail. The Red Coat Trail . . . I forget what it’s 
named. It runs through several of the ridings. I think it’s 
Highway 13 or something of that nature. But it is a remarkable 

opportunity to travel across that part of the province where the 
North West Mounted Police came. 
 
And I had the opportunity a couple of years ago to travel across 
some of that. And I am hopeful that we are going to put some 
money into a highway upgrade there because it felt a little bit 
like the old trail, I think, did back then. But it was remarkably 
beautiful, beautiful scenery. And I know that the communities 
take great pride along that part of the trail in terms of 
celebrating the sort of tourism opportunities there and enjoying 
the visits with people from across the country as they come 
through. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have attractions across this province that we 
have not yet opened up. I think it is unfortunate that more of us 
have not had an opportunity to travel Saskatchewan’s North. 
 
Well the Churchill River of course has been designated as a 
heritage river, and it provides a great canoeing opportunity for 
many of the hardier in our midst. I’m not one of those, but I 
believe the Minister for CIC has canoed this river at some 
length. I have not doubt the member from Cumberland, if not 
recently, certainly in his younger days will have spent some 
time on that river as well. And I think that we have a great deal 
to open up in the North for people to celebrate. 
 
When I was growing up, I had the opportunity to spend 
summers, several of my summers in La Ronge, where my dad 
was working. And I was always impressed by the approach that 
particularly the American tourists had when they would come 
up to La Ronge which tends to be a dropping off point to the 
further northern lakes. Northern Saskatchewan was unlike 
anything they had ever seen or experienced before. And it is so 
truly unique as part of our province. It is something that we 
really should encourage more people to go up into. 
 
Certainly there are challenges. We are aware of the problems 
that the federal government’s gun laws are having potentially 
with this tourist industry. But nevertheless there is a great deal 
of fishing to be done up there and I know that the outfitters that 
are in the north central part and northern part of this province 
do an excellent job of providing a good product. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that in time we will see greater 
development in our North. That we’ll have a very . . . continue 
to have a very prosperous outfitters’ operations, and that we 
will continue to see people move throughout this province and 
experience the various different regions and the different 
cultural and ecological offerings of this province. 
 
Saskatchewan people often I think underestimate the beauty of 
the place that we live and what a draw it can be. I’ve never had 
the opportunity to travel much in The Great Sand Hills or travel 
up to the Athabasca Sand Dunes. But I believe these too are 
also great opportunities. Increasingly, Grasslands National Park 
is becoming a draw. This is very good news for people in the 
deep south part of the province, as it draws many people into 
the communities. 
 
And we would also be remiss if we didn’t mention the good 
work that is done, particularly in the autumn, as we’re fortunate 
to have a large number of those ducks and geese fly across our 
province, Mr. Speaker, and it attracts in a great deal of 



1588 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2001 

 

American hunters who have an opportunity to come up and 
enjoy Saskatchewan’s hospitality. 
 
We are getting better I believe as a province in terms of 
attracting and branding ourselves as a tourist destination. 
 
One of the projects I had an opportunity to work on before 
being elected of course was Casino Regina. It was our belief in 
bringing in casino expansion that not only would we deal with 
some of the economic issues that were . . . there were some 
compelling arguments put forward on the part of Aboriginal 
people, but we would also have an opportunity to develop an 
additional tourist draw. 
 
Casino Regina has proved very much, no doubt to the skeptics, 
to the dismay of the skeptics, but it’s proved very much to be a 
very positive draw for tourists from across Canada and from 
across the continent. 
 
I was not long ago in Minnesota, and it was interesting that we 
. . . I talked to some people who were aware both that we had 
direct flights from Minnesota into Saskatchewan, but also that 
we had excellent hunting, and happened to have a very good, a 
world-class casino here. 
 
I have no doubt that these sort of things are helping draw people 
into our province, helping stimulate our economy, and helping 
build a very well-branded Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tourism is a great, great economic benefit to 
Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan people. And I have every 
reason to believe it will continue to be so. 
 
As we continue to develop our tourism industry in the winter, as 
we move more and more towards further development of our 
snowmobile trails, we take greater advantage of recreational 
opportunities, and the fact that people throughout the continent 
are taking advantage of the abilities to travel more and they 
have seemingly more discretionary income to spend on tourism, 
we are making sure Saskatchewan stays as part of that. 
 
Back in the early part of the opening of the West, we are 
reminded that there was actually I believe a Hollywood movie 
made, called simply, Saskatchewan. I don’t know if Mary 
Pickford was in it but it wouldn’t surprise me. And they had this 
— there’s of course a classic painting for the poster of this of 
Saskatchewan — this beautiful flat prairie and this gorgeous 
woman and this rugged mounted policeman and these beautiful 
mountains. 
 
Well it didn’t quite turn out that way. Unfortunately we can 
promise just about everything except for the mountains here, 
Mr. Speaker. But everything else, we have been able to deliver 
on. I think if we could just airbrush that poster a little bit we 
could probably use it again to market the province. 
 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, as we talk about the . . . as we talk about 
opening up Saskatchewan, one of the things that has also 
helped, I think, has been the fact that we are seeing an 
expansion of the film and video industry here and seeing more 
and more of Saskatchewan landscapes in our movies. The fact 
that we are seeing these landscapes, I think, help to show some 
of the beauty of Saskatchewan to the world. 

It is important for us, I think, to understand that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Moosomin on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — With leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I noticed 
in the west gallery a gentleman who’s joined us this afternoon 
from the Langenburg area — well known in the seed industry 
— Roger Kaeding. And he’s not only well known in the seed 
industry and for his farming techniques, but also he’s very 
involved in the political sphere as well and has a keen interest. 
 
So we’d like to extend a warm welcome to Roger joining us this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 8 — Tourism Industry Important to Economy 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I of course would 
like to welcome the guests that are in the gallery as well. 
 
But I want to pick up on where I had left off in terms of the 
great opportunities we have in this province to market ourselves 
and to promote Saskatchewan as a great tourist destination. 
There are so many things for people to do here, whether it’s to 
enjoy the excellent cultural activities that we have, the festivals 
that go on. 
 
I was entertaining a friend who was in from Calgary, last week I 
guess it was, the week before, and he was bemoaning the fact 
that he couldn’t be at Calgary — he had some festival on. We 
happened to wander down to the Cathedral Arts Festival and 
this particular individual was surprised at just how lively things 
were; couldn’t believe that this was possible in his old 
hometown of Regina, that we could have so many people out 
enjoying such a great street festival. 
 
This really is a remarkable place that we live. And I have seen 
over the last several years more and more Saskatchewan people 
involve themselves in helping to foster this. 
 
I believe it is this next weekend that we will be hosting Bazaart 
here in Regina which is of course a great festival to foster, for 
various people in the craft industry to show their wares and to 
. . . we attract in people from all across Saskatchewan who will 
come to Regina to enjoy this. 
 
Festivals; great facilities like the spa, like the casino; a beautiful 
environment, whether that’s the northern lights that people have 
a chance to see during the winter months in particular, whether 
it is our fabulous lakes, whether it is an opportunity to fish and 
hunt here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, there are very, very 
few things that we cannot do in this province. And I can tell you 



June 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1589 

 

that people from across this . . . across the country and across 
North America are interested. 
 
I want to share with the members a brief, very brief story. I was 
down in Louisiana. I had taken a road trip one summer and I 
thought I’d do this great American road trip and had a map that 
seemed to go down to Louisiana and I thought, well I might as 
well follow it down there. I was driving back through Arkansas, 
decided to drive up through the Ozarks and got hungry, stopped 
just outside Branson — Branson, Missouri — at a Denny’s. It 
happened to be what there was . . . the restaurant there was. 
 
I came out from the restaurant and there sitting on the hood of 
my car was the biggest guy that I have just about ever seen. He 
was even bigger than the member for Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker. 
And I thought oh, oh, this is not good news. All of a sudden I 
thought about every bad stereotype that I could ever come up 
with. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why are you looking at me? 
 
Mr. Thomson: — And I don’t look at the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast for any reason. But I’ll tell you, all of a 
sudden that banjo music from Deliverance started playing in my 
head and I thought this is not going to be pretty. 
 
So I thought, well I’ll wander over to the car and see . . . just 
kind of wander past, and looking at this guy and wondering 
why he’s sitting on my car. And he says, is this your car? And I 
said yes, it’s my car. And he says, you’re from this 
Saskatchewan place? And I said yes, yes. I said, do you know 
where it is? He says no. He says, but I hear you’ve got big, big 
white-tailed deer up there. And I thought oh, okay, I think I’m 
going to get off lucky on this one. 
 
And he asked basically about how you get information on 
Saskatchewan. All he had heard is that buddies had come up 
here and gone hunting and he wasn’t sure whether you could in 
fact fly up from Missouri. I don’t know what the answer was. I 
just politely said yes, of course you can, in hopes that he would 
accept my answer and let me get on with my drive home. 
 
But it was interesting that even there, deep in the Ozark 
Mountains, that people had heard of Saskatchewan. And I think 
that we often underestimate the draw that even the name of the 
province has in terms of attracting people. 
 
I want to say — I won’t speak very much longer, Mr. Speaker 
— except I do want to say to all the people in the tourism 
industry across this province, congratulations. Congratulations 
because this is an excellent product that they are developing and 
I am very proud of my fellow citizens who have been able to 
develop these products throughout the province, be it from the 
Moose Mountains through to the Cypress Hills and up north 
into the heartland of this great province, up where I grew up in 
Prince Albert, and further north. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will with that . . . I just want to make one final 
comment. I shouldn’t say that this was the end of my speech. I 
want to make one final comment. And that concerns the attitude 
that I think that we need to start exuding as Saskatchewan 

people. I had the opportunity this last winter to take in a couple 
of Action Saskatchewan meetings that the chamber of 
commerce were putting on as they were talking to people about 
what they thought needed to happen. In fact I took in a meeting 
in the member for Estevan’s riding in Estevan. 
 
And it was interesting listening to what people had to say there. 
Almost every single person that came to these meetings said 
that we needed to be more positive about Saskatchewan. We 
needed to be more positive. We needed to stop trash-talking this 
province of ours and we need to start celebrating the many, 
many good things that are here. Not simply the natural 
resources, but also the people and the businesses and the 
enterprises that we’ve been able to develop over the last 100 
years. And in the case of Wanuskewin, I guess over the last 
10,000 years here on this prairie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is part of the key to us continuing to build this 
province. We need to continue to think about this province as a 
great place to visit, a great place to live, and we need to tell 
everybody that. If we simply say, gee aren’t we hard done by 
here, you know what, they’re going to look at that poster and 
they’re going to see the mountains and they’re going to go west. 
And they’re not going to stop here and enjoy this great, 
beautiful prairie of ours and the beautiful communities that 
we’ve built up around it. 
 
That is something each and every one of us here in this 
Assembly can do. And something that I hope each and every 
one of us does over the next several months as we just make a 
little bit of an attitude adjustment ourselves. I’m not saying that 
we shouldn’t debate how we can make Saskatchewan better, but 
it is time that we stop trash-talking this province. And it’s time 
that we take a more optimistic approach. 
 
I believe that that — especially if we do that in this Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker — that that will not only serve our province well 
but will put us more in line with the people who sent us here to 
represent them because they feel good about Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that I am pleased to move, seconded by my 
colleague from Regina Dewdney: 
 

That this Assembly, during Tourism Week, recognize the 
value of the tourism industry to provincial employment and 
economic development; and join with the editors of many 
Saskatchewan newspapers and with the members of the 
tourism industry in urging Saskatchewan residents and 
people from across North America to visit the many 
attractions our province offers the traveller. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased this 
afternoon to rise and second the motion made by the member 
from Regina South. Like the member from Regina South, I very 
much appreciate the tourism opportunities within our great 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now having lived my entire life in the province of 
Saskatchewan, I have had the opportunity to visit many, many 



1590 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2001 

 

of Saskatchewan’s tourist attractions. It doesn’t matter what 
corner of this province you go to, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there is clearly many, many fine tourist attractions that 
the people of this province have worked very, very hard to put 
together to enhance tourists to come to our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about a few of those great 
tourist attractions in southwest Saskatchewan, where the 
member from Cypress Hills will know of all of these, if not a 
few more that maybe even I have forgot about. Because it’s 
been a few years since I grew up there, and some of these places 
I haven’t seen since I was a boy. 
 
But nestled in between the town of Shaunavon and Eastend is a 
little regional park called Pine Cree Regional Park. And the 
member may well have spent some time at that park, but I have 
very, very many fond memories as a boy picnicking, running, 
and playing in Pine Cree Park. A little regional park nestled in a 
valley between two small communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
but yet it in itself holds many attractions. 
 
When I was a boy there was a cave there that they had that a 
hermit lived in. And we used to walk up and see where the 
hermit lived. And the cave was actually still there. We could go 
in and there were some of the artifacts from when the hermit 
lived there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
There’s a little creek runs through it, one of the most 
picturesque spots I’ve ever seen in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And that’s nestled in southwest Saskatchewan 
among the flat prairie, a little south from where it’s a little bit 
flatter, I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but still nestled in the 
prairie between the towns of Eastend and Shaunavon. 
 
And you don’t have to go very far there to go to Eastend, where 
one of the most expansive finds in archaeological history has 
been found, Mr. Deputy Speaker — Scotty, the T.Rex. And 
around that is built an entire industry, tourist industry, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And the community of Eastend is today 
reaping the benefits of that industry in that community. 
 
Go a little bit further west, you have the Cypress Hills, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — the highest spot east of the Rocky 
Mountains, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Cypress Hills, Saskatchewan 
— a tremendous provincial park, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with all 
the opportunities that any tourist would like to find in a 
provincial park anywhere in this country or, in fact, anywhere 
in North America, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Beautiful lake nestled 
among cabins and a pine tree forest. Very, very picturesque, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And you go a little further west and you have Fort Walsh. You 
can’t forget the unique history that the North West Mounted 
Police played in the development of our country, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and in particular the role they played within our 
province. 
 
Now Cypress Hills is a beautiful, beautiful territory, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And within the west block of Cypress Hills, 
you have Fort Walsh. You have the settlers’ trading posts there. 
You still have, today, the opportunity to take an old wagon ride 
from the fort down to the trading post, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Things that many, many of our children . . . their only 

opportunity to see that type of activity or participate in that type 
of activity is at a place like Fort Walsh. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in that same southwest corner of the 
province, you have some of the most unique badlands in the 
province or in the country, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Where you see 
the prairie change instantly to picturesque badlands — different 
terrain, different opportunities, different wildlife, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, considerably different. It changes over in just a matter 
of a few miles. 
 
Also in the southwest part of the province, we have the 
Grasslands National Park. We have the Red Coat Trail, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And that’s only a few of the many, many 
tourist attractions in southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, southwest Saskatchewan is the most 
sparsely populated area with the exception of the far north in 
our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But yet it offers one of the 
greatest opportunities for tourism in our province. 
 
Not to mention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, hunting. Many, many 
tourists come to our province and many, many of our 
Saskatchewan citizens hunt. Well southwest Saskatchewan is 
also one of the nicest places in Saskatchewan to hunt, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. That Cypress Hills area and the 
Shaunavon/Maple Creek area has an expanse of mule deer, 
white-tailed deer. And in the Cypress Hills they have both 
moose and elk as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Opportunities for 
those people in our province who want to travel to hunt in our 
communities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about other 
provincial parks across the province. Our network of provincial 
parks in this province provides opportunities for the citizens of 
this province and for people across Canada, and for that matter, 
for international travellers. We have in this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, numerous provincial parks. And many people 
in this province probably aren’t even aware of all the provincial 
parks we have. 
 
But if you go to the southeast part of the province you’ve got 
Moose Mountain Provincial Park nestled against a beautiful 
valley scene, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The member who represents 
that area is extremely pleased and happy with being a member 
for Moose Mountain. And I believe that he should be, because 
Moose Mountain Provincial Park provides great recreation 
opportunities for people in our province, provides the 
opportunity for people to participate through friendship, work 
together within their communities, and then go away for the 
weekend, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But we also have in that part of the province many, many other 
tourist attractions as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But the member 
from . . . excuse me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can’t think of the 
name of his constituency at this moment. But the member from 
the Moose Mountain area of the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
has many, many, many tourist attractions. 
 
Yes, the member reminds me that it’s the member from 
Souris-Cannington. Now he should be very pleased and very 
excited about the tourism opportunities within his constituency, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



June 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1591 

 

The Red Coat Trail goes through his constituency right down 
along the southern part of the province, right through to the 
Cypress Hills — one of the most historic routes in Canadian 
history, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Over that trail literally hundreds and hundreds of two-wheeled 
carts, pulled by oxen and pulled by horses, made the trek across 
Canada to open up what we know as Saskatchewan and Alberta, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. A very historic trip along what today is 
Highway No. 13. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can’t forget for a second some of 
the tourist attractions that our cities represent, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We only have to look at Regina or Saskatoon, 
Yorkton, North Battleford, Moose Jaw. Each one of these cities 
offers unique tourist attractions to the people of our province, 
for that matter the people of Canada, the people of the world. 
 
You look at Regina. Regina has the Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police museum, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police training 
centre. Every Mountie in Canada, our red serge that’s 
recognized across the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker — those 
Mounties were all trained here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the members opposite asked me to 
name each one of them. Well, I’m sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
but I couldn’t name them all. I would ask the member opposite 
if he could, but the member opposite obviously couldn’t either, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You only have to go 40 miles down the road from Regina to 
Moose Jaw to talk about the Tunnels of Moose Jaw, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — one of the most fundamental tourist attractions 
developed in the last decade in Saskatchewan. They represent 
the depiction of an era of the 1930s, and the smuggling of 
alcohol and the Al Capone of Canada. 
 
The Tunnels of Moose Jaw represent a part of our history that’s 
forgotten in many places. Now Moose Jaw represents some 
unique history in itself, but the tunnels are becoming a 
world-class tourist attraction. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Moose Jaw also has the Western 
Development Museum dealing with transportation. In the 
Western Development Museum in Moose Jaw, you can see the 
earliest farm equipment and machinery used in our province. 
You can see automobiles that have long since quit being 
manufactured, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Some of those automobiles 
in the Western Development Museum are one of a kind, and the 
opportunity to go see some of our history, transportation 
history, is also available in Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you want to look at tourism in 
Saskatchewan you can’t forget Batoche, the Riel Rebellion, and 
the opportunity that Saskatchewan people have to see a great 
part of Canada’s history in a very short time span . . . at the 
church at Batoche, and the ridges around Batoche, the 
graveyard. Mr. Deputy Speaker, history in our province is 
significant to the development of Canada. And people have 
spent a great deal of time developing these sites. In this case, 
Batoche is largely developed by the federal government. But 
Canada’s history can be seen first-hand at Batoche, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many, many other tourist 
attractions across our great province. We would be remiss if we 
didn’t talk about many of them. I’d like to talk about a few of 
them throughout the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in various 
parts of the province. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Now the members opposite are so excited about tourism, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, so they’re just glued to their chairs and that’s 
good, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to talk about Prince Albert 
National Park. Now we need to talk about our great, great 
forest, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the fact that we have many, 
many lakes and many, many recreation opportunities within our 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are just so excited 
about tourism that they’re just glued to their seats and listening. 
But we want to talk about Prince Albert National Park. Not only 
does it support two of the nicest golf courses in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, but it has great activities around the lake. 
A beach that’s just absolutely beautiful, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
has opportunities to . . . nature trails, it has a paddle boat, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — many, many things for tourists to participate 
in. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite are so 
interested in it, I could talk about each grain of sand on the 
beach, but we’re not going to go that far, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
We can’t; there’s so many things to see in Saskatchewan that 
we can’t talk about the grains of sand. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, those members opposite would seem to like to talk 
about that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have many, many beautiful parks in our 
northern Saskatchewan. We have Candle Lake, another 
beautiful park, nestled on a great lake with many opportunities 
for both boating, fishing, waterskiing, and other recreation 
activities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s great camping, 
swimming — it’s unbelievable the things, the opportunities that 
are presented within Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have . . . we’d be remiss if we 
didn’t go further north and talk about recreational and tourist 
opportunities in far northern Saskatchewan because, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, Prince Albert National Park is the geographic 
centre of Saskatchewan. Half the province is north of Prince 
Albert National Park. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we would be remiss if we didn’t talk 
about the great Athabasca Sand Dunes just south of Uranium 
City. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to 
walk in those great sand dunes south of Uranium City. Had the 
opportunity to take a boat ride across the lake and walk in the 
sand dunes of the Athabasca area. And, Mr. Speaker, there is 
some very, very unique vegetation found in those sand dunes. 
 
And many, many of our Saskatchewan residents even haven’t 
had the opportunity to see some of that great tourism 
opportunity. 
 



1592 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2001 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, now we’re just starting to open up parts of 
the North with roads, the Far North. And as we do that, there 
are many, many new opportunities for tourism that are being 
developed. 
 
And tourism in conjunction with economic development as 
well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because as you develop new areas 
for tourism, along with it comes opportunities for stores, cabins, 
motels, gas stations. So that all the tourists in our province have 
the opportunity to buy those necessities as they’re out exploring 
our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You get into the central part of our province, I’d be remiss in 
not talking about both North Battleford and Saskatoon as well, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The city of Saskatoon offers many, many tourist attractions. Not 
to mention just a few, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but they have a 
Western Development Museum as well. They have a number of 
very, very, very good attractions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s known as the city of bridges and they have some of the 
most beautiful bridges along the Saskatchewan River that we’ve 
ever seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And you have the opportunity 
to see the historic Delta Bessborough, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And many people may not know this but you can actually go on 
a riverboat ride in the city of Saskatoon. It loads just behind the 
Delta Bessborough and goes along the bridges and see all the 
bridges in the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I need to talk a little bit about a few other communities, but I 
want to mention the city of North Battleford and the town of 
Battleford, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Both those communities have 
played a role in the development of our country. At one point, 
at one point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Government House in 
North-West Territories was located in North Battleford, 
Saskatchewan . . . in Battleford, Saskatchewan, pardon me, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And today that historic site still sits, still 
stands in Battleford, Saskatchewan. 
 
Not to mention there’s the historic fort in North Battleford . . . 
in Battleford, Saskatchewan, pardon me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Many, many of these tourist attractions draw thousands and 
thousands of tourists each year from across Saskatchewan, 
across Canada, and indeed from across the world, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to talk about a couple 
of other historic communities in our province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that attract a large number of tourists. 
 
Fort Qu’Appelle, Saskatchewan, just a short 45-minute drive 
from Regina, the capital, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it has two 
beautiful lakes divided by the highway. But it also is one of the 
communities that was at one point in consideration to be our 
capital, Mr. Deputy Speaker. At one point, it was looked at as 
the capital of Saskatchewan should be on the historic banks 
where Fort Qu’Appelle sits today. Now none of us were alive 
when that decision was made and when Regina was selected, 
but you can look at Fort Qu’Appelle and you can see many, 
many picturesque advantages to having the capital in Fort 
Qu’Appelle. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to talk about the community of 
Indian Head, the community of Indian Head. As you’re driving 
down the No. 1 Highway, there are many, many beautiful 
tourist attractions. But as you drive by Indian Head, you will 
notice the unique, the unique tourist attraction that Indian Head 
presents. It’s a beautiful teepee, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
forestry farm. Many things that also played part of our heritage. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite have 
probably had the opportunity to spend time in this province 
looking at its tourist attractions, but I want to talk a little bit 
about Meadow Lake Provincial Park; Blackstrap Provincial 
Park, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Meadow Lake Provincial Park has 
within it five lakes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And some of the 
nicest camping and fishing available anywhere in the world. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members 
opposite, the members opposite are so excited about tourism 
that they want to tell me more things about . . . that I haven’t 
seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
want to tell me about attractions I have not had the opportunity 
to see. And yes, there are many, many things I haven’t seen 
within the province of Saskatchewan, but I have had the 
opportunity to do extensive travel and see many, many of the 
tourist attractions within the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to talk a little bit about 
Blackstrap. Now one of the unique things about Blackstrap 
Provincial Park is in fact the man-made mountain, what we call 
Mount Blackstrap. Now Mount Blackstrap, if you drive along 
the highway, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will see this great big 
hill. In Saskatchewan, that’s what we call Mount Blackstrap. 
 
Now it was made, I’m told, by piling used cars and other types 
of refuse together to make a mountain. Now I wasn’t there 
when it was made, but one of the members opposite said they 
were there when it was made. But just the fact that we in 
Saskatchewan would go to the extent to build a beautiful ski hill 
on the plains right beside that picturesque valley, in itself is 
unique about our tourist attractions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to talk about some of 
the unique tourism opportunities on the road from Green Lake 
to Buffalo Narrows and La Loche, some of the most beautiful 
terrain to drive through, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s one of the 
things that Saskatchewan offers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
opportunity to drive through some of the most picturesque, 
undisturbed parts of the province, and in fact undisturbed parts 
of our country, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have more lakes in our province than we could ever hope to 
develop for tourism opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have 
more opportunity for natural tourism than virtually anywhere in 
the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our Far North presents many, 
many opportunities. And the people of the North want to 
develop those opportunities for both tourism and economic 
development potential, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the developing of that economic potential in northern 
Saskatchewan through tourism provides a base of jobs for those 
people in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A base 
of jobs that’s extremely important to the people of northern 
Saskatchewan, and in fact extremely important to the people of 



June 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1593 

 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite want to know 
if I’m going to go to 5 o’clock and tell them all the great things 
about the province of Saskatchewan. I haven’t quite decided 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I think there’s much more to talk 
about, about tourism within our province. Now the members 
opposite would like me to go to 5 o’clock, they’d like me to go 
to 10:30, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I don’t think I’m going to go 
to 10:30 tonight, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite remind me of 
one of the significant things we need to talk about. And that . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Harper): — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Yates: — The members opposite remind me of something 
significant that I need to say. That the development of our 
tourism industry in Saskatchewan requires the people of this 
province not to trash-talk our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now the members opposite need to understand that tourism 
requires people to have a positive outlook of their province. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members on this side of the 
House are very proud of this province; they’re very proud of 
our tourism opportunities, and they’re very proud of the 
economic development that goes around our tourism industry. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Americans see Saskatchewan as a 
place to come and a land of opportunity for tourism, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Many, many Americans every year take time 
to come to this province to hunt, fish, and just simply relax in 
the beautiful Saskatchewan terrain, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 
like to sit around our beautiful, clear, cold lakes, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, where there’s clean water, where they don’t worry 
about all the things they have to worry about in some . . . 
(inaudible) . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
They like the opportunity, they like the opportunity to rent a 
boat and water ski, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, here the members opposite are trash-talking our 
province again. 
 
What clean water, they say. Have they never been outside 
Regina? I wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they seem to forget that this legislature 
sits in the largest, largest city park in Canada, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — Wascana Park, beautiful Wascana Park. You only 
have to go out the front doors of this legislature to see the 
beautiful Wascana Park, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But the members opposite, they don’t want to talk about the 
good things in this province. They tend to want to talk about the 
negative things about our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
too bad because they could be contributors towards positive 
tourism or they can be negative towards our province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve spent a fair amount of time 
talking about the good things in our province and the 
opportunities for tourism. It would remiss of me not to give the 
members opposite an opportunity to talk about this issue as 

well. So with that I’m going to conclude my remarks and just 
say that I’m extremely pleased to second the motion made by 
the member from Regina South. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to make a few comments about the motion that we have 
before us this afternoon. And for once I’m probably going to 
have to acknowledge that this, the motion itself is a fairly 
positive motion and it’s a motion worth discussing because 
certainly we do have a good tourism industry. 
 
I would have to question some of the speeches that have been 
given on this motion though as well. But, Mr. Speaker, as the 
member from Regina Dewdney has just indicated, yes, there is 
a lot to talk about when you talk about tourism in 
Saskatchewan. And in the southeast part of Saskatchewan we 
do have a lot to brag about when it comes to tourism. 
 
We do have one problem though, Mr. Speaker. It’s a matter of 
creating a highway system and a network so that people can 
come to this province and access the tourism centres. 
 
(16:30) 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, if you were to be in Manitoba and 
came just directly . . . travelled directly west of Virden to the 
Saskatchewan border you would arrive at the Saskatchewan 
border and you would see this nice big sign on the border that’s 
saying . . . welcoming people to Saskatchewan and it says, 
Saskatchewan Naturally. The unfortunate part is when you 
drive across the border it is Saskatchewan naturally. It reminds 
you of the horse and buggy days, the highway network that 
people have to travel across when they’re coming to visit our 
communities and our centres, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I guess what we have to say, Mr. Speaker, if this government 
really wants to promote tourism then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
maybe they should take a little more . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Harper): — Order, order, order. 
The floor belongs to the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
suggest that if the government in promoting their tourism — 
and certainly my colleagues and I promote tourism very 
excitingly in our constituencies — the government’s going to 
have to move a little further ahead and start promoting a 
highway network that people can access and be able to travel on 
so they can access their tourism centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s more to tourism than Regina and Moose 
Jaw or Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. There are centres like the 
Rafferty-Alameda, Kenosee park, Greenwater Lake, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I would like to say in regards to 
tourism, yes we do have a lot to offer in this province. We’ve 
got the resources on hunting. We’ve got parking . . . or parks, 
Mr. Speaker. We have camping, beautiful camping. We have 
nature trails. All of that’s available, Mr. Speaker, but we just 



1594 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2001 

 

have to create the opportunity for people to access it, and not 
only promote it but encourage people to come north, not turn 
them away because we don’t have a highway network that gives 
them the opportunity to access these facilities. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know there’s a lot more that can be 
said in regards to the tourism issue but I believe there are other 
issues that need to be addressed as well. And therefore at this 
time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I feel that this motion is 
extremely important. Tourism is a huge industry in this 
province. We have a lot of things to talk about and to praise and 
this is Tourism Week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it is . . . This is 
an extremely important motion to be debated and I don’t feel 
that it should be adjourned. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at Moose Jaw and all the 
things that have gone on in Moose Jaw, a city that was dying. A 
lot of our storefronts were empty. The citizens and business got 
together and put a lot of hard work into the process of 
redeveloping our downtown and our city. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at not only Moose 
Jaw itself but what that has spawned in the outlying areas, other 
projects have been given new life. The Claybank Brick Plant, 
Chaplin, with their natural resources, and the shore birds, how 
that has been developed. 
 
And when you get the major developments that have sprung 
forth over the last number of years, you also get smaller ones 
that begin to fill in and pick up the slack and fill in areas that 
encourage people not only to stop and visit these main areas, 
but what they do is encourage people to stay in those areas for a 
longer period of time. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things I just attended in 
Moose Jaw was from Agriculture and Food. They put on a 
seminar about tourism, rural tourism. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
what this did was talk about all the areas in rural Saskatchewan 
and the things that can be done there — a guest ranch, working 
ranches. There was a whole variety. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on for quite a while, but I 
realize that there’s other things that people wish to debate this 
afternoon, but this is a very interesting area. And I said 
Saskatchewan has huge appeal in many areas, and whether you 
talk about natural tourism or whether you talk about 
destinations, rural tourism which is a . . . can be a huge business 
for rural Saskatchewan and has huge appeal not only in the 
United States but across Canada, but also Europeans love to 
come to Canada. They can’t believe our wide-open spaces and 
the things that we have here. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I feel we should continue this debate, but I 
will move a motion now that we do adjourn. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise to 
enter into this debate, I believe, on the motion put forward by 
the member from Regina South: 
 

That this Assembly, during Tourism Week, recognize the 
value of the tourism industry to provide employment and 

economic development; and join with the editors of many 
Saskatchewan newspapers and with the members of the 
tourism industry in urging Saskatchewan residents and 
people from across North America to visit the many 
attractions our province offers visitors. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees, there’s many aspects that I’d like to highlight in 
my brief comments today. And it’s up to the members how 
brief they’d like me to be, but the issues that I’d like to talk to 
are about the value of the tourism industry as it pertains to 
economic development and employment, and as to positive 
aspects to our society in this province. 
 
With regards to initiatives and programs that Tourism Week 
and Tourism Saskatchewan actually supports economic 
development, one of them is working alliances with tourism 
sectors associations — such as Saskatchewan Country 
Vacations Associations, Hotels Association of Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan Outfitters Association, and Ecotourism Society 
of Saskatchewan, as well as the Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association. 
 
As well, the annual production and distribution of the highly 
rated Saskatchewan Literature Series, including the 
Saskatchewan Vacation Guide and the Accommodation Resort 
and Campground Guide, and that sort of thing, and on-line 
Saskatchewan events calendar featuring information on 2,300 
events around the province. 
 
As well, an establishment of an outfitters database used at US 
outdoor adventure marketplaces to identify lodges that meet 
specific needs of marketplace contacts and to provide qualified 
leads to fishing and hunting operators. Saskatchewan TourNet 
worldwide Web program linking Saskatchewan Tourism Web 
sites to participating businesses. 
 
Some of the successes, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, 
include tourism expenditures reaching $1.16 billion in 1999, an 
increase of 2 per cent over 1998 and 23 per cent over 1994. 
 
As well expenditures from other parts of Canada and United 
States and overseas grew to $443 million in 1999, an increase 
of 9 per cent over ’98 and 46 per cent over 1994. United States 
visitors’ average expenditures per overnight or longer trips 
grew to $788 in 1999, an increase of 31 per cent, Mr. Deputy 
Chair of Committees. 
 
In 2000, tourism-related employment hit almost 50,000 jobs, 
representing one in every ten Saskatchewan worker — 69 per 
cent of these jobs were full time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on. There’s many good news 
stories that are going on in the province of Saskatchewan for 
tourism. 
 
We’ve tested a test banner Internet advertising campaign, and in 
2000 Tourism Saskatchewan had won two summit creative 
awards in the consumer and trade magazine advertising 
categories from among 3,000 entries from Canada, Europe, 
Australia, and the United States. 
 
The centenary enhanced signing program was launched in 



June 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1595 

 

partnership with the tourism industry and Saskatchewan 
Highways and Transportation — a three-year, $1.2 million 
initiative to enhance tourism signage throughout the province. 
 
As well, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, the annual 
Saskatchewan tourism award of excellence gala honoured 20 
businesses and individuals for their outstanding contributions to 
success and growth in the province’s tourism industry. 
 
The on-line Saskatchewan events calendar launched in April of 
2000 now involves all events Saskatchewan partners and 
features information on 2,300 events around the province, an 
increase of 80 per cent over last year. This is the most 
comprehensive calendar of its kind in Canada and is available 
on all five partner Web sites. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s some very good news in the area of 
tourism education and training that I just wanted to highlight on 
briefly. A record of 127 people were certified in tourism 
occupations in one year to September 30 of last year. 
Saskatchewan continues to have the highest per capita 
registration in tourism professional certification in Canada, 
involving more than 2,200 people from 350 businesses and 78 
communities. 
 
And Saskatchewan exceeds its tourism careers for youth goal 
by training 485 youth over two years to enter the tourism 
workforce. More than half of these are Aboriginal youth with 
70 per cent successfully gaining tourism-related employment. 
Mr. Speaker, we also worked with SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) to establish a 
two-year diploma course in tourism management. 
 
There’s all sorts of good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As hon. members previous to me have mentioned, this is 
Tourism Awareness Week from June 3 to June 9, and I’ll read 
briefly from a news release that was issued earlier this week and 
it goes like this, quote: 
 

From pristine, natural settings, to adventurous escapes, to 
attractions rich in cultural and historical significance, 
Saskatchewan’s tourism industry offers something for 
everyone. 

 
. . . Tourism generates $1.16 billion in revenue for 
Saskatchewan each year and directly and indirectly 
employs more than 49,000 people —that’s one in every 10 
workers in the province. 

 
. . . The public can learn more about Saskatchewan’s 
vibrant tourism industry and the more than 2,000 events 
which take place in communities across the province 
year-round, by visiting Tourism Saskatchewan’s (the) web 
site, at www.sasktourism.com/events. 

 
Just briefly, Mr. Speaker, as my time is running out, I just 
wanted to reiterate that the department . . . the Post-Secondary 
Education department supports training in the tourism industry 
through our programs like JobStart and Future Skills and 
through our sector partnerships with organizations such as the 
Saskatchewan Tourism Education Council or STEC, a division 
of Tourism Saskatchewan. It’s a very important partnership is 

the one between STEC and the Apprenticeship Trade 
Certification Commission. 
 
The commission has provided journeyed persons’ certification 
to graduates of the STEC training programs in food and 
hospitality trades. And this is very important, Mr. Deputy Chair 
of Committees, Saskatchewan was one of the first provinces to 
designate tourism and hospitality trades as apprenticeable 
trades. 
 
Make no mistake about it; tourism is a growth industry with 
more than 42,000 full- and part-time workers contributing an 
estimated 1.4 billion to the provincial economy. It’s an industry 
with a bright future and many opportunities for success. 
 
Saskatchewan is not only rated the best place in the world to 
live, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, by the United Nations, 
but it also is a great place to visit. 
 
I’d like to speak a little bit more about some other matters and 
that is related to the motion that was put forward by Regina 
South and that is to talk about editors and the tourism industry, 
to urge Saskatchewan residents to visit people, visit 
Saskatchewan’s many attractions. 
 
And I’ll just briefly quote from, from some of the editorials that 
are in the . . . for example, the Grenfell Sun, “Taking a vacation 
in Saskatchewan,” this individual . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Okay. 
 
This individual visited the Motherwell Homestead in Abernethy 
and I’ll quote from it. Quote: 
 

People from all over the world have visited the Motherwell 
Homestead (he said). More people from outside of 
Saskatchewan have seen this farm than from those who live 
in this province. 

 
Here was a tangible piece of our province’s history unknown to 
hundreds of thousands of Saskatchewan residents. 
 
(16:45) 
 
It was also then that the writer was struck with the realization of 
how much she hadn’t seen of our province. And she also 
realized that she’s one of the many Saskatchewan residents who 
are not taking advantage of the attractions of this province, and 
what all this province has to offer. 
 
She goes on to speak about the misconceptions that people of 
Saskatchewan have that Saskatchewan is flat, and that there’s 
very much . . . very little for it to offer. But some of the good 
examples were the badlands, which lie near the southern border; 
the prairie fields that most people are aware of. But also in my 
neck of the woods, which is the northwestern Saskatchewan, 
which is the areas that have all the lakes and the rivers and the 
streams and the wildlife. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go on just for one 
more moment and quote from the Eston Press Review. And I 
quote like this, quote: 
 

In acquiring the Press Review we’ve come up squarely 



1596 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2001 

 

against the main problems facing this province, and that’s a 
negative perception. 

 
Mr. Speaker, tourism, I think, is something that can bring all of 
the people together. It’s good for Saskatchewan people, it’s 
good for the businesses in the community. And having worked 
at Makwa Sahgaiehcan Provincial Park, and also Pike Lake 
Provincial Park, I’m very much aware of the importance that 
tourism plays to this province and to this economy. 
 
And I’m quite pleased to support the motion. But seeing the 
lateness of the day, Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:48. 
 
 


