















































Hansard: May 07, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 951 
 May 7, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, even 
though the hospital in the city of Swift Current has been 
designated a regional hospital, there is a considerable amount of 
concern by residents, both in the city and the area surrounding 
it, with the condition of the hospital and the monies that have 
been made available to it. And I have a petition here today 
signed by many Swift Current residents, but even more 
residents from the constituency of Cypress Hills, particularly 
the community of Gull Lake. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition regarding two of the government’s Crown 
corporations, SaskPower and SaskEnergy. Both recently 
announced significant rate increases for residential and business 
customers. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the fine 
community of Biggar, Saskatchewan. I’m pleased to present the 
petition on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today with people concerned about the rural ambulance 
services: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Fosston and 
Rose Valley. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition that’s dealing with health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre is maintained at its current level of service, at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan, and southwest Manitoba and beyond. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people 
from the communities of: Tilston, Manitoba; Maryfield, 
Bellegarde, Antler, and Redvers. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people concerned in southwest Saskatchewan with the state of 
the hospital in Swift Current. And, Mr. Speaker, this petition’s 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by people from the 
city of Swift Current, from Hodgeville, from Gull Lake, from 
Stewart Valley, from Cabri, and from Kyle. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the citizens of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are concerned about their ambulance services. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Kayville, Ogema, and 
Crane Valley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present 
petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned on 
the EMS (emergency medical services) report. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 



952 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2001 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed in communities of 
Redvers, Wakaw, and Storthoaks. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present on the Redvers Health Service Centre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service, at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care and long-term care 
services available to users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan, and southwest Manitoba and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from the Redvers, 
Storthoaks, Gainsborough, and Antler area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition on behalf of citizens concerned about ambulance 
services. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And this petition is signed by the good citizens of Leroy and 
Englefeld. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition 
regarding citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about health 
care. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce current levels of available 
acute care, emergency, and doctor services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood and Mildred. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by citizens of Saskatchewan. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at very least, current 
levels of service and care are maintained at the Pioneer 
Lodge in Assiniboia. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Wood 
Mountain, Bengough, Assiniboia, Thompson Lake, Fir 
Mountain. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise 
with a petition to stop further cuts at Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Fife 
Lake, Rockglen, McCord, Fir Mountain, Assiniboia, Willow 
Bunch, and Lafleche. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order, a petition regarding the Highway 
22 between Cupar and Dysart has been reviewed and found to 
be irregular; therefore, cannot be read and received. 
 
Other petitions have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) 
are hereby read and received. And they are petitions that are on 
the same matters as those filed as sessional papers no. 3, no. 4, 
no. 5, no. 10, and no. 58. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 36 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority: why was Bonnie Swan, manager of 
the southwest region of the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority terminated from that position? 
 

Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy 
today to be able to introduce to you and through you to the rest 
of this House, 56 students from St. Jerome School, which is in 
my constituency, and their teachers, Mr. K. Anderson, and Ms. 
Bzdell, and they’re up in the west gallery there. I’d like you to 
join in welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 953 

 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly a special person in the life of one of our pages, Loni 
Schick. In the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Bev Schick, Loni’s 
mother from Melville, who is accompanied by Angus Gilpin, 
who is visiting from Bradford, Ontario. 
 
They’ve come to see Lonnie at work, and I’m sure that she will 
demonstrate a high level of responsibility and pride in 
participating in the events of this room. I would ask all 
members to invite her special guest today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the legislature, a number 
of individuals who are here for the second reading of The 
Registered Nurses Amendment Act. 
 
From the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, Donna Ottenson, who 
is the chairperson of the Regina SUN (Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses) district council, Marlene Brown, who is the 
vice-president of finance for SUN. From SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology), Yvonne Warnes, 
who is the program head for the advanced clinical nursing 
program at SIAST, and Joyce Bruce, who is the faculty in the 
advanced clinical nursing program at SIAST. And from the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, Donna 
Brunskill, who is the executive director, and Heather Keith, 
who’s a member at large and a primary care nurse who works in 
the North and will be now working at the Four Directions Clinic 
in Regina. 
 
I ask all members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to join with the Minister of Health on behalf of the 
official opposition to welcome the members of SUN, and 
SIAST and SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association) here this afternoon. 
 
This is another milestone in the nursing profession and we 
certainly are very pleased that you’re here to witness the 
democratic process that will begin today. And we look forward 
to your comments and input, much of which I’ve already 
received, and I do appreciate that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I certainly do invite all members to join in 
welcoming these worthy representatives of the health care 
profession to watch the proceedings today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Purple Ribbon Awareness Week 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this week 
has been proclaimed Purple Ribbon Awareness Week by the 
provincial government and the Saskatchewan Battered 
Women’s Advocacy Network. SBWAN founded the campaign 

in 1993 and promotes Purple Ribbon Awareness Week to raise 
awareness about violence against women. 
 
The week commemorates victims who are experiencing 
violence or who have died at the hands of their partner. This 
campaign also urges the public to work toward the total 
elimination of all kinds of violence. 
 
Along with Purple Ribbon Awareness Week today was witness 
to a new very successful, partnership between government and 
the community. Last year, SaskTel and the Provincial 
Association of Transition Houses of Saskatchewan (PATHS) 
developed an agreement that published the Abuse Help Lines 
page in every telephone directory in the province. The page 
offers information on what violence and abuse is and where to 
get help. 
 
PATHS worked very hard to produce the page and piloted the 
project in Saskatoon last year as the Hot Peach Pages. SaskTel 
sponsored and partnered with PATHS to get the page into 
telephone books. The project fits well with SaskTel’s social 
commitment to child abuse prevention. 
 
The successful partnership between SaskTel, the Women’s 
Secretariat and PATHS leads the way towards building safer 
communities. It shows us that together, as government and 
community, we can make a difference and prevent violence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Violence Against Women Campaign 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today marks the first 
day of Purple Ribbon Awareness Week, a week set aside to 
commemorate women who have died suffering violence at the 
hands of their partner, and also to raise awareness of those who 
are still victims of violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, violence against women is a very serious issue 
and the growing number of victims indicates there is much 
more that has to be done to eradicate this. It is one thing to say 
that we adopted zero tolerance on this shocking and preventable 
subject. It is yet another to say that we have met with any 
success. 
 
How can we say we have been successful when thousands of 
women are still physically tortured and abused every year, and 
hundreds more die as a result of their injuries? 
 
How can we say we’ve been successful when the number of 
shelters and transition homes across the country keeps 
increasing? 
 
How can we say we’ve been successful when every year we 
have to keep reminding others that violence — any violence — 
simply will not be tolerated? 
 
(13:45) 
 
It seem appropriate that Purple Ribbon Awareness Week 
includes Mother’s Day this year. How many women died 
needlessly in the past 12 months, and how many children will 
be without their mothers this Sunday. 



954 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2001 

 

On behalf of the official opposition, our deepest appreciation 
for the Saskatchewan Battered Women’s Advocacy Network 
whose dedication and hard work to this cause is without end. 
Thanks to them, women and their children are given the 
opportunity to start a new life. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Nursing Week 
 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a busy week. 
May 7 to 13 is also National Nursing Week, a time to remind 
ourselves of just what it is nurses do, to rid our minds of the 
narrow clichés surrounding this essential profession, to renew 
our efforts to enhance the conditions under which nurses work, 
and in general just take a few moments to recognize how crucial 
nurses are to our health system, and thus to the well-being of 
our society. 
 
In Saskatchewan there are over 12,000 licensed practical nurses, 
registered psychiatric nurses, and registered nurses. Nurses 
constitute the largest single group of health providers in our 
province, comprising about 40 per cent of the total health 
workforce. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, nurses work in all areas of the community, 
far beyond the hospital setting with which they are traditionally 
identified. As well, the role nurses play in the delivery of health 
services is becoming increasingly more proactive and complex. 
 
But regardless of how expanded their role becomes, nurses still 
are usually our first human contact with the health system, 
which can be a formidable institution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we as a community and we as a government value 
our nurses. We have new programs to upgrade skills, to 
increase the number of nursing students, and to expand access 
for northern and Aboriginal students. And we are working both 
to keep the nurses we have and to improve the conditions under 
which they work. 
 
There is more we can do but I am proud to say that most 
recently 75 per cent of our nursing graduates from the nursing 
education program of Saskatchewan have remained to work in 
Saskatchewan. That I think is a comment both on the quality of 
our programs and on the commitment of our nurses to 
Saskatchewan and its people. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

North Battleford Water Quality 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As members know, 
this is a very difficult time for my constituency. It is a bitter 
irony that while Canada has over one-fifth of the world’s 
freshwater resources, we are unable to guarantee the safety of 
municipal water supplies. 
 
I welcome the Premier’s decision to visit North Battleford. I 
also congratulate his decision to convene a judicial inquiry. 
However, I believe our main energy should be devoted to 
correcting the situation as opposed to assigning blame. 
 

It is clear some procedures must be improved. It disturbs me 
that this province is not regularly testing for cryptosporidium. I 
call on the Department of the Environment to have mandatory 
and regular testing throughout the province. 
 
Second, an official of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) said the department had commissioned 
a consultant’s report last fall on the North Battleford water 
system. The mayor categorically denied that the city knew of 
such a study. The province has not communicated any concerns 
to the city. There is now an onus on the minister to say what his 
department knew and why this information was not shared with 
the city. 
 
Finally, if it determined that the sewage treatment plant does 
not meet necessary standards, I call upon the federal and 
provincial governments to assist with its replacement. 
 
I congratulate Joe Clark and the national Progressive 
Conservative caucus for their approach, calling for a national 
standard of national safe water. All members should support 
Mr. Clark’s initiative for national safe water standards. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw Women of Distinction Celebration 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the fifth annual Moose Jaw 
Women of Distinction celebration took place May 6. This event 
honours the accomplishments of women who keep the 
pioneering spirit of the Prairies alive through their leadership 
and commitment to the community. 
 
This spirit was well represented, both by the community and the 
host organizations — Moose Jaw YMCA-YWCA and the 
Transition House. The Moose Jaw YMCA-YWCA has been 
providing services and programs since 1905 for women and 
girls, men and boys. They strive to make our community safer, 
stronger by bringing people, needs, and services together. As 
well, the Moose Jaw Transition House has provided shelter for 
over 1,400 families, along with providing services through the 
outreach and children’s programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a moment to formally 
congratulate all the nominees this year who represent women 
whose talent, service, and creativity has made an impact on our 
community. As well, Mr. Speaker, I would like the rest of the 
House to join me in congratulating the winners of the Women 
of Distinction awards: Chelsea Jukes in the youth category; 
Diana Humenick, leadership in the workplace; Gladys Pierce, 
community enhancement; Vivian Meikle, community mentor; 
Heather Segall, science and technology. 
 
These women are inspiring examples of what we can achieve, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

North American Occupational, Safety, and Health Week 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday marked 
the first official day of the North American Occupational, 



May 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 955 

 

Safety, and Health Week — a week set aside to focus the 
attention of employers and employees and the general public on 
the importance of preventing injury and illness in the 
workplace. 
 
This year’s theme, Mr. Speaker, is Prevention is the Cure, and it 
is vitally important that we remember we are all partners in this 
initiative. We are all responsible for doing everything we can to 
ensure a safe work environment. 
 
In this year’s campaign, it is fitting that young and first-time 
workers are being given special attention because they have a 
higher rate of work-related injuries than other age groups. It is 
not because they are careless, Mr. Speaker, or less responsible. 
It’s simply because they have the least experience in the 
workplace and as a result they will have the highest number of 
accidents. We must also remember that workplace injuries and 
illnesses do not just affect the employee and the employer; they 
also impact families, friends, relatives, and even entire 
communities. 
 
As Labour critic, on behalf of the official opposition, I’d like to 
acknowledge the hard work and dedication of the various 
agencies, organizations and departments who have committed 
to educating all of us about the important of having an 
injury-free work environment. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Book on Saskatchewan Trivia Wins Award 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Parkland Publishing’s book, Saskatchewan Trivia Challenge by 
Robin and Arlene Karpan, won the Souvenir of the Year Award 
at the 2000 Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence gala 
held in Regina. 
 
The Souvenir of the Year is awarded to the item which best 
enhances awareness of Saskatchewan both inside and outside 
this great province. 
 
This 192-page book is packed full of important as well as 
completely frivolous tidbits of information about 
Saskatchewan’s biggest, best, firsts, records, famous folks, 
oddities, and just plan cool stuff that makes Saskatchewan such 
a remarkable place. 
 
Discover why the folks at Cape Canaveral came to 
Saskatchewan to buy fire bricks for their launch pad; which 
lieutenant governor had a pet monkey that liked to swing from 
the chandeliers in Government House; and the crop where 
Saskatchewan farmers account for three-quarters of the world’s 
production — and no, it’s not wheat, barley, or canola. Find out 
where you’d be playing golf if you hit the ball on the ninth tee 
and the ball landed an hour later in another country. 
 
This book will test your knowledge of Saskatchewan as well as 
representing the wonderful past and present this province has. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to formally congratulate Robin and Arlene 
Karpan on a job well done. They indisputably represent the 
spirit of Saskatchewan. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Water Quality in North Battleford 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is now admitting that during 
periods of high inflow, untreated sewage is pumped into the 
North Saskatchewan River, just 2 kilometres upstream from the 
water treatment plant. An official also said that every time 
untreated sewage is pumped into the river, it must be reported 
to SERM. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell us: how often does this 
happen; how many times in the past year was untreated sewage 
pumped into the North Saskatchewan River just 2 kilometres 
upstream from the water treatment plant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite in this Assembly this afternoon — because I know that 
this issue as it relates to North Battleford, is one that’s been on 
our agendas and certainly in the minds of people of 
Saskatchewan for some weeks now — and I want to say to the 
member opposite and to this Assembly that today, just a few 
minutes ago, the Premier had announced that he is going to be 
proceeding with an independent public inquiry on issues related 
to North Battleford. 
 
And I want to say to the members opposite that we need to pay 
close attention to what’s happening across the province. And to 
say to the member opposite to not only in Saskatchewan but 
across the country, because there’s a growing concern and 
assurance that we need to have quality safe drinking water for 
our public, as I said, not only in Saskatchewan but across the 
country. 
 
So today we’re proceeding to take in a more fuller fashion a 
public inquiry as it relates to the North Battleford issue, and 
particularly around the issue that the member talks about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We as well 
appreciate the call for a public inquiry. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, my questions relate to what are supposed to 
be routine operating procedures for Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now know that untreated sewage is sometimes 
pumped into the river because the sewage treatment plant does 
not have the capacity to handle all of it. 
 
We also know that for three weeks in late March and early April 
North Battleford’s water filtration system was down. This raises 
the question: how much untreated sewage was pumped into the 
river while the water filtration system was down? 
 



956 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how many times in late March and 
early April was untreated sewage pumped into the river during 
the period that the water filtration system was not working? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’d like to say to the Assembly and to the 
member again, Mr. Speaker, when you have a situation that 
deals with the disposal of waste in this province and the 
determination of the quality of the water levels in this province, 
there are a number of actors and players that are involved in this 
process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s the municipalities that are involved in making sure that 
the treatment of waste is disposed in an appropriate fashion. 
There’s the public health officers that work within district 
health boards across this province. And we have agencies of 
government, Mr. Speaker, who are involved in this process as 
well. 
 
And so on occasion, Mr. Speaker, we get to a place of this 
nature. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, the Premier today 
announced an inquiry into an issue of this nature — to look 
more fully, Mr. Speaker, at where in fact there have been some 
difficulties; how in fact Mr. Speaker, we might enrich and 
ensure that we have quality water systems in our province into 
the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, once 
again, we do welcome the call for a public inquiry. But how is it 
even supposed to work if the department itself cannot answer 
questions about what are supposed to be routine operating 
procedures and policies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, it now appears that at some 
period in late March and early April, untreated sewage was 
pumped into the river. During the time that the water filtration 
system was down, raw sewage was being pumped in the river 
just two kilometres downstream. That same contaminated water 
was being pumped then into people’s homes. The government 
stood by and let this happen and never told anyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how could Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management let this happen? They 
were supposed to be documenting each and every incidence of 
sewage being pumped into the river. How could they let the 
residents of North Battleford drink what amounts to untreated, 
unfiltered sewage water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the members 
opposite and to the member opposite who is asking the question 
that we should be extremely careful in terms of the 
determination of what might have happened in North Battleford 
today. 
 
What I hear the member opposite talking about is he’s laying, 
he’s laying blame, Mr. Speaker, on a particular department of 
government. And I say to the member opposite that the inquiry, 
the public inquiry is not about laying blame on anybody. The 

public inquiry is about examining what happened in a situation 
in North Battleford because you’ll have many people, Mr. 
Speaker, who will tell us and tell the member opposite in this 
Assembly that they engaged in the inappropriate time . . . in an 
appropriate time. 
 
And I say to the members opposite we should be extremely 
cautious about pointing our finger at anybody and say to the 
member opposite that that’s why we invited and are beginning 
with a public inquiry, to examine this fully so that we both have 
a better appreciation of the determination of what our facts are 
and what we can do in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We understand 
that the public inquiry will address the role of all of the players 
in the incident in North Battleford. But is he somehow trying to 
suggest that we do not have a role in questioning the role of the 
department in this incident as well? Because, Mr. Speaker, it 
got worse. 
 
This morning we learned that the sewage treatment plant and 
the water filtration plant don’t communicate with each other. So 
we had raw sewage being pumped into the river while the water 
filtration system was down. No one at either plant knew the 
problems at the other plant. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Meanwhile over 100 people had gone to the emergency room 
complaining of stomach problems, but the health district had no 
idea that there was a problem with the water system either. So 
no one’s talking to each other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how could this happen and why did it take so long 
for the department to warn the people of North Battleford? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
one more time, that there is no question here at all about 
whether or not this issue should be raised in this Assembly by 
the opposition. Not at all. 
 
Nor is there any doubt, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House 
that we should be providing a full response to this issue 
because, Mr. Speaker, there are a whole host of people who are 
involved in making sure that we have appropriate disposal of 
our sewage, that we have quality and safe water across this 
province. There are a variety of different people who are 
partners in providing that role, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would say to the member opposite and to this Assembly, 
that we have a variety of different individuals who 
communicate and there’s protocols across the province for a 
variety of different processes that occur. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, we should permit the inquiry 
to do its work on North Battleford, to allow the inquiry to 
independently assess and determine what the issues are. And at 
that point, Mr. Speaker, then we can draw conclusions from 
which we might be able to ensure that we have a safer, better 



May 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 957 

 

water-quality system in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well let’s just 
go over this one more time. We’ve got raw sewage being 
pumped into the river. These occurrences are supposed to be 
documented as a matter of routine policy and procedure by the 
Department of Environment. 
 
This is happening two kilometres downstream. That same water 
is being pumped unfiltered into people’s homes. North 
Battleford people are drinking the water, hundreds are getting 
sick. The emergency room had over 100 cases of stomach 
problems. The drugstore can’t keep enough medication on the 
shelves and, yet, no one connects the dots. Where was the 
documentation? 
 
And no one warns the people of North Battleford until April 25, 
weeks after the problem first started. Mr. Speaker, why were the 
people of North Battleford kept in the dark for so long and why 
was there no warning about the serious problems with the North 
Battleford water supply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate to the 
member opposite, one more time, in terms of how the processes 
of managing and ensuring that we have safe water in this 
province and that we have control and safe sewage disposal 
system in this province. 
 
And the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, is targeting one 
particular portion of the system which is responsible for certain 
responsibilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what the member is not talking about is that to provide 
those kinds of assurances across the province, it requires the 
participation and involvement of a whole host of different 
people, from SERM to municipalities to district health boards. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, if there has been a 
breakdown in this particular process by those authorities who 
are involved in making sure that we have safe drinking water 
and appropriate disposal, then we need to make sure that this 
inquiry does it work — as the inquiry will do its work — and at 
the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, will determine for us where in 
fact we need to enrich the kinds of services that we’re providing 
today and make sure that those that have responsibility for it 
take a greater . . . play a greater role in it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For three 
weeks, unfiltered, untreated sewage water flowed into the 
homes of North Battleford families. For three weeks, people 
were drinking this water. They were giving it to their children 
certainly unaware of any problem. As a result hundreds of 
people became ill and possibly as many as three people may 
have died. And the people of North Battleford were never told 
anything until it was too late. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how could this have gotten by the Department of 
Environment and Resource Management? How could a simple 
monitoring process such as keeping track of the number of 

times that sewage was released into the river not be accounted 
for by that department? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite again that the member opposite has focused his 
attention primarily in question period today on the Department 
of SERM. And he’s pointing his finger at a group of men and 
women today who have some responsibility for regulatory 
process. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, before you act on a 
regulatory . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Just may I remind the member to continue to 
speak to the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, just to say to the member 
opposite that to ensure that the regulatory process can be 
performed on fully, Mr. Speaker, we need to be sure that the 
other actors and players are involved in that process in a full 
expedience. 
 
And I say to the member opposite today, we have a number of 
other people who were involved in this process and we raised 
those kinds of questions and concerns, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
why today the Premier has announced the public inquiry, Mr. 
Speaker, to answer those kinds of questions that the member’s 
raising in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, if the minister responsible for SERM is unwilling to 
answer any questions today, perhaps the Minister of Health will 
answer some. My question is for the minister. 
 
Today it is being reported that one North Battleford doctor 
alerted the medical officer as early as April 12 that there may be 
a problem with cryptosporidium in the area. He had confirmed 
one patient with the parasite, but what raised alarm bells with 
him was the local pharmacy who told the doctor they couldn’t 
keep the anti-diarrhea medication he wanted to prescribe on the 
shelf. 
 
The medical health officer said now that while he knew of this 
diagnosis, a full investigation had to wait until after the Easter 
long weekend. He said, and I quote: 
 

Once it was apparent that there was more happening, we 
had to look at all the hospital records and visits related to 
similar symptoms. That was not possible over the Easter 
weekend. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is our health system not able 
to accommodate a medical health officer’s investigation in the 
face of a serious public health issue because of a holiday long 
weekend? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to follow up on 



958 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2001 

 

the question which is really ancillary to what the member 
earlier had asked, and that is the processes that are in place 
today to ensure that you have safe, quality water in our 
province. 
 
And now the member opposite talks about yet another partner 
here, Mr. Speaker. He now talks about the role of the medical 
health officer, which is exactly the question that I was 
answering a minute ago, that there are a number of people today 
who were involved in the process of making sure that we have 
safe, quality water in this province, Mr. Speaker, of which the 
medical health officer is one of those players. 
 
And now we have, Mr. Speaker, identified two groups of people 
who should be involved to a greater degree possibly in this 
process, and there will be others that should be involved in this 
process. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, today the Premier 
announced the public inquiry to examine fully — to examine 
fully, Mr. Speaker — what the role and responsibilities of all of 
these people are in the province today to ensure that in North 
Battleford, Saskatchewan we have safe, quality water that we 
talk about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Dr. Lipsett felt that his 
confirmation of one case of cryptosporidium infection and the 
subsequent knowledge that pharmacies in the city of North 
Battleford were experiencing strong sales of medication should 
have been enough knowledge to warrant a public advisory at 
least. 
 
The citizens of North Battleford dealt with a boil-water 
advisory last fall. SERM has had concerns with the water 
treatment plant since last fall. Surely the medical health officer 
has been aware of those concerns. And with the knowledge on 
April 12 that the doctor and the community had further strong 
suspicions and concerns that there was a problem in the city, 
one would think that the medical health officer might have 
acted sooner to put a boil-water advisory in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why did the medical health officer 
not take the precautionary approach and issue a boil-water 
advisory for the city of North Battleford on April 12? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member’s question 
is exactly the reason for why the Premier today has announced a 
public inquiry — the very reason why the Premier has 
announced the public inquiry. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker, why have there not been some answers that 
we might have to these questions over a period of time that we 
might be able to respond to in a more, in a more intense, 
clarified fashion, Mr. Speaker? Why can’t we do that? Because, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been a whole group of people who are 
involved in this process, Mr. Speaker. There are people from 
Sask Water, there are people from SERM, there are individuals 
from the district health board, Mr. Speaker, and there are people 
also from the municipality. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, today we have the inquiry is to 

try and find out why over a period of two months we find 
ourself in a situation today where we have a claim of 36 people 
who are confirmed to be infected by this particular illness. And 
that’s why, Mr. Speaker, today we have the inquiry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Water Treatment Facilities 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister of municipal government or his 
designate. In light of the problem facing the city of North 
Battleford, other communities in the province are taking a close 
look at their own water and sewage facilities. Many 
communities know they need to upgrade their facilities or even 
build new plants, Mr. Speaker, but they don’t have the money 
to do it. 
 
Chronic underfunding to municipalities by the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government has forced these communities to 
delay these projects. Some communities who need new water 
treatment facilities have applied for a federal-provincial 
infrastructure funding but have been turned down. So they have 
no choice but to put this project on hold. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Municipalities have been telling 
you that a chronic underfunding from the NDP government was 
going to put safety of the residents at risk and now that’s proven 
to be true. At a time when public health is being affected, why 
has the minister and his NDP government refused to increase 
revenue-sharing grants to municipalities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that he just needs to look at our own 
backyard, Mr. Speaker, where he comes from and where I come 
from. And there are examples where communities are working 
together today, Mr. Speaker, to run public waterlines that 
incorporate the city of Melville and Yorkton and subdivisions 
outside of our community, and go past my community to 
smaller communities outside of that. 
 
We just need to look at the Canora project today where you 
have a number of farmers and smaller communities around 
Canora that are getting that particular service. We need to look 
at the Wakaw-Humboldt. 
 
We have municipalities today, Mr. Speaker, who are concerned 
in a major way about what the future direction should be in 
terms of supplying water. And the member opposite should take 
some credence in this, Mr. Speaker, and support those 
communities in that process, as we do through the provincial 
Canada health . . . through the Canada-Saskatchewan grant 
program, infrastructure program, Mr. Speaker, and also to assist 
municipalities, Mr. Speaker, in making sure that we have the 
appropriate manpower to ensure that we have the quality of 
water that we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, if the Deputy Premier wants to answer 



May 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 959 

 

questions today, let’s talk to him. Mr. Speaker, that minister 
was minister of Municipal Government and no increase to 
revenue sharing for municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then we went to the member for North Battleford, 
minister of Municipal Government — no increase to revenue 
sharing. 
 
Now we have the member for Melville, minister of Municipal 
Government, this year’s budget —not one thin dime of 
increased revenue sharing for municipalities. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is the Department of Municipal Affairs 
doing to help the city of North Battleford deal with this water 
crisis? And is there consideration being given to help the city 
build a new sewage treatment plant prior to the 2003 planned 
building time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is an interesting 
question for the member opposite to be asking this government, 
Mr. Speaker. Because what we did, Mr. Speaker, is that we put 
across the piece a variety of different spending initiatives for 
not only municipalities but also for health boards and school 
boards and across the piece, Mr. Speaker. And what happens 
when we do that? That member opposite stands up when it 
comes time to vote for the budget and he votes against the 
budget. 
 
And I say to the member opposite . . . And he asks me what 
we’re going to be doing in this province today, Mr. Speaker, as 
it relates to quality of water in this province. In this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, in SERM, we had additional funding for 10 more 
employees that would come on staff, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 
that we have safe, quality water in this province. And what does 
the member opposite do? The member opposite votes against 
the budget, Mr. Speaker. Ten new people to be working in the 
assurance that we have quality water — but those members 
opposite vote against that budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Premier, Mr. Speaker, we voted against this budget for 
a good reason. The reason being no increased revenue sharing 
for municipal government which may, which may, Mr. Speaker, 
prevent problems like the problem we see in North Battleford. 
 
That’s why we voted against this budget, Mr. Deputy Premier, 
and that’s the reason places like North Battleford are having 
problems keeping up with their infrastructure and renewing that 
infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the questions that I think we need to ask 
today too is has the minister or the department of municipal 
government been aware of SERM’s concerns with the water 
treatment plant in North Battleford from last fall, and was his 
predecessor, the minister of Municipal Affairs, the member for 
North Battleford, aware of SERM’s concerns since last fall? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite of which last year or the year before, we were in a 
huge donnybrook in this province, Mr. Speaker, about what we 
should be doing in terms of municipalities’ responsibilities in 
this province. Of which that member talked a lot about making 
sure that municipalities had the individual rights and 
opportunities to decide what they want to do in making sure that 
their infrastructures are maintained and sustained. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, today, that 
we’re not laying blame, Mr. Speaker, on anybody. We’re not 
laying blame on anybody, Mr. Speaker. What we’re saying, Mr. 
Speaker, is that in North Battleford today we have an issue, Mr. 
Speaker, and we have a huge issue in North Battleford, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what we’re asking the inquiry to do is to do a full 
examination of what’s happening in this province today, Mr. 
Speaker, as it relates to managing the quality of water, as it 
relates to the sewage disposal, Mr. Speaker. And I expect 
they’ll even look at what the infrastructure is today in place to 
make sure that the people of North Battleford are well served. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, let the inquiry do its work in 
North Battleford, and it will report to us in due time to make 
sure that the people of North Battleford are well provided into 
the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Public Inquiry into North Battleford Water Quality 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have a water crisis in North Battleford and the government has 
made the proper response in authorizing an independent public 
judicial inquiry. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, now the government can take two paths. 
Either they can be as open and as accountable as a government 
can possibly do in preparation for this inquiry to do its work or, 
Mr. Speaker, they can try to cover up as much of the evidence, 
throw as much distraction as they possibly can to prevent the 
truth from coming to light. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have asked this government to be accountable. 
We have asked the Minister of SERM to report from his 
department. We have asked the Minister of Health to report 
what his department is doing. But we hear nothing but wait for 
the public inquiry. The facts are not being brought forward. 
 
I ask the Deputy Premier, will he allow his ministers to present 
the facts regarding the North Battleford situation to the public 
prior to this inquiry doing its work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — This is an extremely interesting question 
that the member from Rosetown asks. Because the question 
earlier, from Carrot River, pointed to the fact that we have a 
problem today in SERM — directly pointing to those members 
from SERM. And then I have the member from Melfort who 
stands up and he says this problem is about the public health 
officer. 



960 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2001 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, now we’ve gone from the SERM to the 
public health officer, and the member opposite now is saying to 
me that we don’t have an accountability process. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, that’s why we have the 
public inquiry. The public inquiry is to make sure that people in 
this province have a full appreciation, Mr. Speaker, of what’s 
happening in this area. That the people of Saskatchewan have a 
full appreciation, Mr. Speaker, of what’s happening with the 
quality of water; what’s happening, Mr. Speaker, today with the 
disposal of our sewage in this province. And we’re not laying 
blame on anybody, Mr. Speaker, unlike what I’ve heard in the 
previous two questions from the previous members. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, this is about finding out the 
facts and making sure that the people of North Battleford are 
well served, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF LETTER OF RESIGNATION 
 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly . . . Order, please. 
Order. Order. Order, order. 
 
Members of the Assembly, I’ve received a copy of a letter from 
the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Regina 
Sherwood, which I would now like to read into the record. It is 
dated May 7, addressed to the Speaker of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan: 
 

Dear Sir: With deep regret, but due to my profound respect 
for the Legislative Assembly, I hereby tender my 
resignation as Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’m also requesting that I be removed from those standing 
legislative committees of which I am a member: 
Constitutional Affairs, Crown Corporations, Private 
Members’ Bills, the Special Nominating Committee, and 
the Continuing Select Committee. 
 
Sir, it has been my privilege and honour to serve with you 
and all officers of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Yours truly, Lindy Kasperski, MLA for Regina Sherwood. 
 

Pursuant . . . members of the Assembly, pursuant to rule 26(1), I 
would advise the Assembly that the election for Deputy Speaker 
would be held tomorrow, just before orders of the day; and that 
members will have until 5 p.m. today to submit their names to 
the Clerk of the Assembly indicating their desire to run for 
Deputy Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to stand and table a response to question 150. 
 
The Speaker: — A response to 150 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 

The Speaker: — 151 is converted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Registered Nurses 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Registered Nurses 
Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, attracting and keeping key health care providers 
are top priorities for our government. We continue to compete 
in a worldwide shortage of health providers. The shortages are 
not unique to Saskatchewan but we must develop uniquely 
Saskatchewan solutions to address the shortages. 
 
Nursing practice is changing across the country. Here in 
Saskatchewan nurses are also increasing their education and 
their skill sets. A number of registered nurses have received 
advanced training so that they are able to diagnose basic 
medical conditions, prescribe drugs, and order diagnostic tests. 
 
The Act before you explicitly recognizes the role of advanced 
practice nurses and ensures that they have the legal authority to 
perform advanced services. It is one of several new initiatives 
by our government to assist with the recruitment and retention 
of health professionals. 
 
The specific services will be further outlined in the bylaws 
pursuant to the Act and these bylaws will require the approval 
of the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to working with all 
of our health sector partners to develop and implement solutions 
that will strengthen our health system. We have consulted with 
many groups on this Act and I will list them: the Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses’ Association, the Saskatchewan Association 
of Licensed Practical Nurses, the Registered Psychiatric Nurses 
Association of Saskatchewan, the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association, and 
the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations. All of 
these groups support what we are proposing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another important amendment will allow the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association’s Council to 
issue temporary licences to registered nurses who may come 
from other jurisdictions and do not meet all of the requirements 
for a full licence. For example, if a registered nurse comes from 
another province or country that has a different education 
program than we have in Saskatchewan, the nurse may still be 
licensed on a temporary basis. This will enhance the ability of 
registered nurses to come from outside our province to work 
here. Not only is this required by the Agreement on Internal 
Trade, but it makes good sense when we are facing a shortage 
of these valuable health care providers. 
 
The Act will also increase the number of public representatives 
on the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association council 
from two to three. This change is consistent with newer 



May 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 961 

 

professional legislation and ensures that a public perspective is 
provided in the regulation of this profession. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes will benefit the province by 
ensuring that nurses with the appropriate skills can provide 
primary health care services as part of an interdisciplinary team. 
It will also provide greater flexibility to the association in the 
licensing of registered nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Registered Nurses Amendment Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege 
and a pleasure to respond on behalf of the opposition to The 
Registered Nurses Amendment Act, I guess for many reasons. 
 
We’ve certainly heard over the last number of months and years 
of the shortage in the nursing profession and how it’s affecting 
our health care system. Everyday we are hearing, on our side of 
the House anyway, hospitals that are struggling to keep beds 
open. We’ve had an example of a hospital such as a Lanigan 
who will be closing for the summer and the main reason, via the 
health district, is that they didn’t have enough health nurses to 
. . . registered nurses to keep the facility open. 
 
So if this Act is going to attract and retain registered nurses 
throughout the province, we’re going to be fully supportive of 
that because that’s certainly an area that we’ve talked about for 
many, many months. And I guess from an own personal 
standpoint as being married to a registered nurse and hearing 
some of the stories that she puts up with in the operating room 
of the Regina General Hospital and the shortages and some of 
the hours that have to be put in by, by some of her colleagues, 
it’s definitely an area that we need to address and, as I 
mentioned before, retain and attract registered nurses. 
 
When I heard the minister speak of the number of different 
organizations that have been consulted already —I believe there 
was seven different organizations — by the sounds of it, it met 
with rave reviews. So as I said, we’ll have no problem moving 
along with this in an orderly fashion. 
 
Things like increasing the representation on the committee, as 
he mentioned, is a great idea. As I said, some of the specific 
services . . . he also touched on some of the specific services. 
He didn’t touch on them, but he said that will be through the 
regulations, I believe, that there would be some work done in 
there. So I’d be very interested to see how they’re going to 
broaden the scope of practice, I guess, in that area. 
 
So at this time we’ll adjourn debate on this Bill for now but it 
does sound like it’s a very positive step in the right direction. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Dietitians Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Dietitians Act. 

Mr. Speaker, our government is working with all of our health 
sector partners in order to develop and implement solutions that 
will strengthen our health system. For the past two years we 
have been consulting with the Saskatchewan Dietetic 
Association to develop this new Act. 
 
The current Act is outdated and does not contain the necessary 
and standard provisions required in newer professional 
legislation. Today health services are reaching out into 
communities across the province to help our residents improve 
and maintain their health and well-being. I am pleased to say 
that this new Act contains some very positive changes for both 
the profession and the people it serves. 
 
First and foremost, Mr. Speaker, this legislation will reserve the 
use of the titles dietitian and registered dietitian to qualified 
practitioners. This allows the public to have confidence in the 
services provided by these valuable health care providers. It 
will set out a clearer and more effective process for responding 
to and resolving public concerns about dietitians. It will ensure 
that dietitians are accountable to the people they serve. 
 
The Act contains a number of updated public accountability 
measures that are standard in today’s professional legislation. 
For example, representatives of the public will be included on 
the association’s board and disciplinary committee. Disciplinary 
hearings will be open to the public, making the entire process 
transparent. This will allow the association to respond more 
effectively to public concerns. In previous years, Mr. Speaker, 
this government made similar changes to the legislation 
governing most of our health professions. 
 
(14:30) 
 
The Act will also ensure flexibility in setting registration 
requirements and issuing licences. It will require the association 
to file an annual report with my office. 
 
As well, bylaws that may affect the public will require 
government approval. The approval process will include 
consultation with key stakeholders such as physicians, 
therapists, educators, and health districts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are some very positive changes developed in 
close consultation with the profession. Our government is 
committed to providing quality health services to support 
people in their homes and their communities. I believe this Act 
will serve dietitians, including my mother who has been a 
dietitian for over 50 years, their clients, and the province well 
into the future. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of 
The Dietitians Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
stand today in the House and speak on Bill No. 5, An Act 
respecting Dietitians. 
 
As the minister has just stated, the present Bill or Act that the 
dietitians are governed by is outdated. I understand it goes back 
to the . . . 1958. And that definitely, in today’s modern world, 



962 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2001 

 

needs to be updated to take into account all the changes in our 
health care system and conditions that the citizens of this 
province are living under today. 
 
It’s very important that the dietitians are able to govern 
themselves and have the regulations in place to govern their 
own body and their own individuals and be able to set 
guidelines and standards for their members in the dietitians’ 
profession. 
 
As in many other health care areas, there’s a shortage or a 
potential shortage of workers in the health care system — as my 
colleague had just mentioned a shortage in nursing, a shortage 
of doctors — and that situation will increase as the years go by. 
And I believe dietitians are an important part of our health care 
system. They are serving the community and the health care 
system. And we need to take steps to ensure that we have 
adequate number of dietitians in our health care system in our 
province. 
 
And on the face of it, I don’t believe we have any strong 
objections to the Act as it is. We believe that The Dietitians Act 
should be strengthened, which will help strengthen the health 
care system. 
 
But at this time I’d like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 2 — The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to rise in the Assembly today to give a 
response to Bill No. 2, The Securities Amendment Act. 
 
One of the big things I noticed in the Bill, Mr. Speaker, was that 
the government is actually allowing individuals to do business 
and to register for a longer period of time than one year. This is 
a good thing, Mr. Speaker. It allows for a permanent 
registration system of deals and salespeople involved in 
securities trading systems, and ending practices of yearly 
registration which is currently in place. 
 
The proposed amendments also includes provisions that allow 
for the sharing of information about market participants with 
the regulators for the purpose of conducting investigations, and 
allows for the electronic delivery of documents to security 
holders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the member from Redberry Lake, in 
his response said: 
 

That the Act needs to reduce and streamline regulation and 
red tape which is a very high concern to small business in 
Saskatchewan. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the amount of red tape dealing 
with small business in Saskatchewan, the amount of red tape in 
Saskatchewan is totally absurd. Small business have better 
things to do than spend time dealing with regulations. They 
should simply have more time to spend just doing business. 
Hopefully, this will streamline business and make . . . maybe, 
just maybe, cut out some of the ridiculous administration which 
we have so much of in this . . . in Saskatchewan by this form of 
government. 
 
The changes being made in this legislation, from what I gather, 
for the most part, seem well-intentioned and positive. In this 
day and age when so many people are getting involved in the 
markets and trading stocks and securities, it is important that we 
keep our laws as current as possible to both, and to keep up 
with the demands of the current security trading industry and its 
continuing of our best to protect consumers. 
 
I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that one of the changes in this 
Act makes it illegal for those conducting trades to make 
misrepresentations. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that many people 
join with me in our surprise that this is the . . . that it is only 
now being made illegal. 
 
It is important to have laws in place that we do protect citizens 
from those who make . . . who may have less scruples, and to 
enhance investigation procedures against those with a mind that 
tends to drift away from what is right and what is legal. 
 
Now we do see an increased power to share information here 
for those involved in the markets with investigators and other 
provinces. Now one will hope that proper safeguards are in 
place so that this new power to share such information cannot 
be abused, and the privacy of individuals not involved in illegal 
activity . . . and it cannot be infringed upon. We will want to 
question the minister closely on this when the Bill comes to the 
committee later. 
 
It also appears, Mr. Speaker, that some of the changes here are 
modernization of the legislation and a nod to progress. We see 
that electronic delivery of information is now being recognized 
over and above the traditional mail system. This obviously is 
necessary . . . necessarily given with growing use of the e-mail 
and electronic delivery and less reliance on the post office, 
which may be going the way of the pony express in terms of 
this necessity to people. 
 
One of the aspects of this Bill that I’m a little concerned about, 
Mr. Speaker, is a familiar refrain. That is the movement of 
issues and items out of the actual legislation and into 
regulations, meaning further changes to these areas will not 
come before the legislation — legislature, pardon me. 
 
Members on this side of the House, and at least one who now 
sits on that side of the legislature, have complained in the past 
about the current government’s penchant for moving more and 
more to the statutes of this province to regulations and out from 
underneath the scrutiny of the legislature and MLAs. 
 
The minister states that this makes future changes to the rules 
easier to make. And I’m sure it’s true. I’m sure it would be far 
easier for any government to make the change it wants to make 
without bringing those changes to the legislature. 



May 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 963 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, our system is not in place to make 
things simple for those governing us. Our system is in place to 
allow elected officials scrutiny over government actions. And 
when more and more is moved to regulations that have little 
scrutiny until after they are passed in cabinet, the people’s right 
to hold their government accountable is weakened further. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I want to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 13 — The 
Class Actions Act/Loi sur les recours collectifs be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure this 
afternoon to join in the furthering debate of Bill No. 13, The 
Class Actions Act. Mr. Speaker, it’s quite a privilege to be able 
to get up this afternoon and talk about a new Bill coming into 
this province, a Bill that is probably long overdue. 
 
I was going through some of the background, Mr. Speaker, and 
noticed that this province and this government, this weak and 
ineffective NDP government, is finally deciding in the year 
2001 to catch up to where other provinces have been trying to 
go to since 1996. It’s certainly a great deal of honour to be able 
to get up and say a few words and maybe add some thoughts to 
this Bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, class action suits are certainly a common 
phenomenon throughout the world. We see them taking place 
many times in North America, throughout the entire Americas. 
Certainly in the past if citizens of this province ever wanted to 
participate in a class action suit, Mr. Speaker, they were forced 
to join suits that were taking place in other provinces as it 
affected them as individuals. 
 
Bringing a suit . . . an opportunity such as this into 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, means that we’ll be able to provide 
our citizens, the citizens of Saskatchewan, the same opportunity 
that is enjoyed throughout much of Canada and the rest of the 
Americas. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, although there are many good things about 
this Bill, there are some things that we have some concerns 
about and I will be bringing them up as I go along, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the oddities that took place in this province 
for many, many years, and will be corrected by this Bill through 
The Class Actions Act, Bill No. 13, is that in the past in order 
for a group of people to be able to indulge in some sort of a 
multi-person suit against someone, they had to have all suffered 
virtually the same injury. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that would seem odd that just in reference 
maybe to say . . . such as a car accident where there was, say, a 
fault of a manufacturer or something like that, everyone would 
have had to have suffered a broken leg, a broken left leg, Mr. 
Speaker, in order to have sued. 
 

Now under this Act, which will bring residents of 
Saskatchewan in line with other jurisdictions, all they have to 
do is have suffered an injury in any way, shape, or form. We 
see that as a very positive attribute, Mr. Speaker. And for that, 
we’re glad to see that this weak and ineffective NDP 
government is finally catching up to speed with much of the rest 
of the world. 
 
Unfortunately it seems though, Mr. Speaker, that Acts such as 
this, Bill No. 13, The Class Actions Act, are being driven by a 
NDP government that is more reactive than it is proactive. And 
that’s usually the case, Mr. Speaker, of a weak and ineffective 
government that is simply scrambling to try to find ways to 
maintain some sort of semblance of power in the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we have gone through this Bill — and 
certainly on this side of the House, we’ve gone through the Bill 
extensively, which will surprise the members on the other side 
of the House who probably have no idea, many of them, of 
what the Bill is about — this Bill speaks to bringing the 
opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan to be able to protect 
themselves after an event that has happened that has brought 
massive injuries, or massive financial repercussions to them. 
And now we’re going to have an opportunity for class action 
suits to be able to brought forward inside this province, Mr. 
Speaker, against corporations or individuals that operated inside 
this province. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Now as we stop and think about that, Mr. Speaker, in the 1990s 
one of the things that has been well documented in the area of 
class action suits, is the province of Saskatchewan. This weak 
and ineffective NDP government has many times brought 
actions against its own citizens that in fact now, under this class 
action suit, would allow its own citizenry to sue them. On this 
side of the House of course, Mr. Speaker, we see that as a very 
positive move. 
 
Now we should cite a couple of examples, Mr. Speaker, as to, 
from this side of the House, our perspective as why we see this 
Bill No. 13 being a positive move on behalf of the citizenry of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that one . . . the first one I’d like to speak to, Mr. Speaker, 
is GRIP, the gross revenue insurance program that was 
introduced in the 1980s and torn up; and torn up, Mr. Speaker, 
by this weak and ineffective NDP government even though they 
promised — they promised, Mr. Speaker — that as they were 
tearing it up they were going to replace it with a brand new 
plan. 
 
Now in order, in order for a government to have the credibility 
when they stand up and say yes, we’re tearing up this contract 
— it’s no good but we’re going to replace it with something 
new and better, and not do that, Mr. Speaker, that is going to 
provide the farmers of Saskatchewan the opportunity they really 
needed in the early ’90s to be able to sue this government for 
lost monies that they had already put into the plan, monies that 
they were looking forward to using in an insurance basis, Mr. 
Speaker, an insurance basis that would allow farmers the 
opportunity to be able to plan for, just in case, in case, Mr. 
Speaker, of downloading onto farmers, lower commodity 



964 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2001 

 

prices. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, when weather, when weather plays 
such an important factor, Mr. Speaker, in the operation of farms 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it’s really unfortunate that we 
didn’t have this class action suit, Bill No. 13, in place in the 
early 1990s and then the farmers of Saskatchewan would not 
have the problem that they do with this government, that they 
do now. 
 
And that’s really unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. Because one of the 
things that we noticed in the early 1990s when this government 
said we’ve got to have a better program, insurance revenue 
program for farmers of Saskatchewan, the farmers of 
Saskatchewan were actually quite excited about that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now what would have happened, what could have happened, 
Mr. Speaker, is that if we would have had the opportunity for 
class action suits, which is going to be coming forth hopefully 
in this session in this Bill No. 13, Mr. Speaker, the government 
of the day would have been forced to actually do that, actually 
replace GRIP with, as they said, something bigger and better. 
 
Well we never did see anything bigger and better, and the 
farmers of Saskatchewan were forced to simply curl up into a 
fetal position and take a whipping from this government that 
they have become quite used to. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s one other incident, I think, that I’d 
like to bring up at this time too. As you’re well aware, Mr. 
Speaker, one of the great downfalls that we have in this 
province, that’s been brought forth by this weak and ineffective 
NDP government, is this so-called no-fault insurance. 
 
Now no-fault insurance, Mr. Speaker, as we’re all well aware, 
eliminated the people of Saskatchewan . . . from the people of 
Saskatchewan the right to sue, to sue SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) for damages that were incurred should 
they be involved in an accident. 
 
Now this is a great tragedy, Mr. Speaker. What’s going to 
happen now, unfortunately for this government — I don’t know 
why they haven’t figured this out because we’ve certainly 
figured it out from this side of the House — is that with the 
opportunity to bring class action suits against perpetrators such 
as the Saskatchewan Government Insurance is that now the 
people of Saskatchewan are actually going to be able to 
continue suing this government in a much larger and more 
effective manner. 
 
Now what’s happened, Mr. Speaker, is that no-fault insurance 
has eliminated fault from the government. They are never to 
blame for anything, as we heard from the Deputy Premier 
earlier today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Even though the water problems in North Battleford are 
extreme, very worrisome, and are of a great deal of concern to 
us on this side of the House, the Deputy Premier got up and 
said, we’re not to blame. Even though it’s their own 
government departments that seemed to have missed the point 
on their own responsibilities that, Mr. Speaker, this type of 
legislation — as I get back to it — relates quite distinctly to this 

very issue. 
 
When something goes wrong and a department who is supposed 
to be held to a higher standard in looking after the citizens of 
Saskatchewan, this type of Bill, this type of opportunity such as 
Bill 13 should present, will allow individuals and communities 
— and certainly communities — to be able to examine whether 
a department has looked after them appropriately in the past and 
in the present, and whether they should be suing that 
department for neglect. 
 
Now certainly we’re hearing the province is looking at a 
judicial inquiry, and certainly we welcome that. But of course 
they’re still talking about the judicial inquiry is not going to 
allow any opportunity for blame to be placed. But it will . . . 
well hopefully enough information will come forward, Mr. 
Speaker, that maybe the city of North Battleford or even the 
citizens of North Battleford an opportunity to take a bit of an 
inner look at the problems that have risen because of the lack of 
water quality, that maybe they’ll have to take a look at suing 
someone. 
 
As we continue, Mr. Speaker, talking about this weak and 
ineffective NDP government and its lack of ability to take 
responsibility for anything, it’s interesting that I received a call 
just today, Mr. Speaker, from someone who is going to be 
attending the rate review panel hearing in Prince Albert on May 
14 in regards to the energy rate hikes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, really it would be my pleasure to be able to 
tie in what is going to happen here. On May 14 the meeting in 
Prince Albert is talking about a rate hike, what people think 
about having a rate hike for SaskEnergy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this call that I received this morning asked 
me very specific, very directly, is it possible for the citizens of 
Saskatchewan to sue SaskEnergy for mismanagement? Well, 
Mr. Speaker, should this Bill become law, I would say yes, 
that’s exactly what’ll happen. 
 
Now what we see here is a Crown corporation who, through its 
own inability to be able to operate a utility company, is now 
asking for a rate increase because of their own mismanagement, 
their own inability to be able to manage a Crown corporation in 
a judicious manner. 
 
So we’re going to try to find out through the next few days as 
we further debate this Bill, the opportunity for the citizens of 
Saskatchewan to be able to actually sue a Crown corporation 
for mismanagement. And, Mr. Speaker, that will certainly be a 
good day for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I was going through the Bill in this last few 
days, taking a look at what’s in it — what’s good, what’s bad. 
One of the things that I really noticed is that there is a lot of 
good in this Bill — I really have to admit that — Bill No. 13. 
 
But unfortunately, this weak and ineffective NDP government 
always manages to find some way to be able to mismanage an 
opportunity to do something good for the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I was looking through this Bill and I was 



May 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 965 

 

wondering, as the Bill was being put together, why they would 
need to have an opportunity, they feel, for the courts to reduce 
the powers of professionals in this province. 
 
One of the things that it has come to our attention on this side of 
the House and probably no one on the other side of the House, 
on the governing side of the House, Mr. Speaker, is aware of, is 
that in this province where we have no-fault insurance and up to 
the presentation of this Bill of course we have no opportunity 
for class action suits, Mr. Speaker, is that we have people in this 
province who are making professional decisions who are not 
professionals in that field. That is really unfortunate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This Bill, this Bill for some unknown reason, probably even 
unknown to the government, Mr. Speaker, is why that process 
will continue. Why is it that . . . we’re wondering why, Mr. 
Speaker, a government would allow court officials the 
opportunity to make medical decisions. Now we’re really 
amused by that, and concerned, very concerned. 
 
In Canada, we would like to think that a doctor is able to make 
medical decisions, that a psychiatrist would be able to make 
psychiatric decisions. Unfortunately in this province, those type 
of professionals, Mr. Speaker, are often overruled by the 
bureaucracy of this weak and ineffective NDP government. We 
see that in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, where that is going to 
continue to be perpetuated. We have a lot of concern with that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re wondering why this NDP government 
would not think about the fact that in this country, that we have 
trained professionals in very specific medical fields that are 
very good, very good, Mr. Speaker, at their job and should be 
allowed the opportunity to practise their profession without 
intervention from this weak and ineffective NDP bureaucracy. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, because of the problems, this very 
singular problem that is in this Bill, we need time to take a look 
at it. And maybe the government in their wisdom would take 
opportunity to take a look at this Bill a little further and maybe, 
without assistance from this side, be able to use their own 
wisdom and correct that minor little problem, from their point 
apparently — certainly a major problem from our point — in 
this Bill. And I would ask that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 16 — The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2001 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister for Culture, Youth and Recreation was quick to point 
out how much money her government has made in the past few 
years with The Film Employment Tax Credit Act and how 
much it hopes to make in the future. 
 
In 1997 the value of the film and video production in this 
province was about $26 million. One year later, after the 
implementation of The Film Employment Tax Credit Act, that 

amount had more than doubled to $58 million. Last year the 
figure had climbed to 60 million. It’s predicted that this industry 
volume could reach a hundred million dollars in production 
over the next few years. 
 
We’ve all seen what this government likes to do with its money. 
They like to sit on it. In fact right now as we’re debating this 
Bill, we’re sitting on a huge election slush fund of nearly $700 
million in two combined funds. But this government has no 
plans to share it with the taxpayers — people who should have 
access to this money. They believe it’s theirs. 
 
This province has also seen a dramatic rise in the number of 
larger and more expensive film and video projects that are being 
produced in the province. We’ve also attracted national and 
international attention. This certainly speaks not only to our 
province’s many attractions, but also to the level of 
professionalism of the people working in the industry. 
 
The minister is also quick to point out how much The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Act has contributed to the overall 
growth of the province not only from a cultural aspect, which 
we are all encouraged to see, but also in the terms of economic 
growth. 
 
A closer look at how The Film Employment Tax Credit Act has 
impacted the province reveals the following: tax credits, 
training young people, more jobs, economic growth, and 
spinoffs. 
 
We’re pleased that the members opposite have recognized the 
positive impact tax incentives can have on the economy, and for 
a very good reason. It’s the message that this opposition has 
been promoting for many years. 
 
What is disappointing, however, is that the members opposite 
only want to select this offer to a select group of people in the 
province. This government is always bent on picking winners 
and losers in the economy and we can only ask why, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Why won’t this government target the rest of Saskatchewan’s 
businesses and industries? Why not offer them the very same 
incentives? I believe they deserve it as well. It’s a well-known 
fact that they, and not the Crown corporations of Saskatchewan, 
are the engines that drive our province’s economy. 
 
But this Bill will certainly not address that problem, not even 
when we hear on a regular basis of businesses closing down, of 
businesses relocating, or just plain refusing to set up in this 
province. And why? Because after 10 years of NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government, there’s just so much 
bureaucracy, too many taxes, and not enough opportunity. 
 
The members opposite might well say if you decrease taxes 
you’re going to run into problems because it will lead to deficit 
budgeting. Nothing could be further from the truth, Mr. 
Speaker. For proof, all we have to do is take a look at what 
happened to a small sector of the economy that’s dealing with a 
film employment tax credit. We see more jobs, more young 
people, more economic spinoffs. It just doesn’t get any plainer, 



966 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a pretty simple equation when you think about it. And I 
hope the members opposite will listen just for a minute. 
Decreased taxes equals increased businesses equals increased 
economic growth. 
 
We know that when this government cut its small-business tax 
by 2 per cent in this year’s budget, it was welcome news. And 
the small-business income tax rate . . . claim threshold was 
increased to 300,000 from $200,000. Some encouraging little 
baby steps from the members opposite who are so unwilling to 
depend on anything but the Crown corporations in this 
province. 
 
But we have to ask them, why are you stopping there? So much 
more could be done. Will this Bill make any advancements in 
these areas? I think not. What the government seems to forget is 
that while someone from outside the province is working and 
training here in Saskatchewan, there is some very serious 
secondary expenditures being . . . taking place. 
 
For instance, people working in the film and video industry 
have to be provided with accommodations, meals, travel, 
entertainment, and general necessities. And where will the 
people access all of those? Obviously from wherever they’re 
shooting on location, whether it’s in a city, town, or small 
community. This is where the economic spinoff really occurs, 
yet there is not recognition for the companies that are providing 
those services to the people. 
 
So while this Bill addresses the issues of extending the waiver 
of residency for non-Saskatchewan personnel involved in the 
film or video industry, and while the Act itself provides for tax 
credits to that same industry, we can’t help but be reminded that 
those secondary expenditure businesses are getting no such tax 
breaks. 
 
What’s even more troubling is that businesses have been treated 
very unfairly by this government in the past. The last few 
months in particular have been very disappointing. For instance, 
the 2 per cent business tax cut will literally be swallowed up by 
the huge utility rate hike facing all the small businesses in this 
province. SaskPower predicts it will have to raise its energy 
rates by another 10 per cent before the end of the year, and 
SaskEnergy has recently applied for a whopping 42 per cent 
increase. 
 
How does the government expect those businesses to realize 
any profit when they’re tied up with bureaucratic red tape and 
hampered by skyrocketing operating costs? 
 
And let’s not forget about reassessment, Mr. Speaker. This 
government’s method for determining property tax values will 
literally force some businesses to permanently shut down. In 
fact we’ve heard that some businesses are going to see their 
taxes going up from 200 to 300 per cent. 
 
Now while this Bill seeks to extend the waiver of residency 
provision, we can’t help but note that it is to be used when no 
qualified Saskatchewan resident is available for employment. If 
we look a little deeper into this, Mr. Speaker, we might be 
tempted to say that the film and video industry is facing a 

labour shortage much like the rest of the province. It would 
appear that there are not enough qualified Saskatchewan 
residents available for work in the industry so the industry is 
forced to look elsewhere. 
 
This points out two very-troubling factors. One is that this 
government is addressing the labour shortage in a small, 
confined sector of the economy by extending a waiver of 
residency provision. The other factor is that — as with every 
other sector of the economy — it seems that once a young 
person has received the training in this province, they pick up 
and leave. There is simply not any incentive to keep them here. 
 
According to StatsCanada, in the last decade the number of jobs 
in Saskatchewan has grown by 3.5 per cent — less than 
one-quarter of the national job growth average of 14.3 per cent. 
So while this Bill extends . . . provides for a time extension that 
will allow a tax credit for out-of-province residents, it does not 
even begin to address the many issues and concerns facing job 
growth here in this province. And it also doesn’t address the 
issues facing the rest of the province’s businesses and 
industries. And it most certainly does not contain any vision or 
a plan for long-term economic growth that would be provided 
for all sectors of the economy and not just a select few. 
 
So with those few words, Mr. Speaker, I ask that we adjourn 
debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 6 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 6 — The Planning and 
Development Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, The 
Planning and Development Act amendment that’s being 
brought in, I think, is relatively straightforward and a simple 
amendment. However, it’s been our experience in the past that 
the most innocuous changes brought in by this NDP 
government have sometimes hidden a number of things within 
that amendment. 
 
And when contacting municipalities out there, when even they 
haven’t picked up on something, when the final outcome comes 
out, it’s not for the best of the people of Saskatchewan. I guess 
that’s where our mistrust sometimes comes with this 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I remember a similar amendment a couple of years ago and it 
altered the way assessed appeals are handled at the local level, 
and in particular, assessment appeals. It appeared on paper to be 
fairly innocuous. And the minister at the time, Mr. Speaker — 
and by the way, that was what, three, four, ministers of 
Municipal Government ago, Mr. Speaker — assured the 
Assembly at that time that the legislation was minor. She 
assured us that the proper consultations had been done. 
 
Then when the municipalities started to call in, Mr. Speaker, we 
find out that yes, she had contacted the municipalities, but 
before they’d had time to respond the amendment had come 



May 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 967 

 

forward. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on the surface this looks like a very minor 
change, something that I don’t believe municipalities will have 
any trouble with, but wavering on the side of caution, I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I will move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Vote 27 
 
Subvote (CR01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister. Would she 
please introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Today 
with me is acting deputy, Ken Pontikes; Jill McKeen, director 
of corporate development; Emile St. Amand, director of sport 
and recreation; Larry Chaykowski, executive director, finance 
administration and facilities; and Clare Isman, executive 
director, human resource development. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
Madam Minister, and welcome to your officials. As Culture, 
Youth and Recreation is a new department in total, I just have 
to start off with a question of the mandate of the ministry. And I 
realize that it says in the budget book that the mandate is to 
support and celebrate Saskatchewan as a great place to live and 
work. It goes on a little bit more, Madam Minister, but it’s quite 
vague. 
 
And so my question would be: what is the mandate of this new 
department specifically, and what direction it’s supposed to 
take, and what plans are in place to implement this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I don’t wish to spend an excessive 
amount of time on this, Mr. Deputy Chair, but that is a fairly 
broad question. And I think to answer it properly I’ll have to 
spend a little bit of time on it. 
 
There’s three areas really that we cover. The area of recreation, 
culture, and youth are the main focus for the department. And 
certainly these are all areas that are very linked to quality of 
life, health, lifestyle choices, employment, economic 
development. And there are also areas that have changed a lot 
over the years where at some points in the past, I think people 
saw these more as personal pursuits rather than strategic efforts 
on behalf of community growth, quality of life. And really as 
we move into the knowledge economy, as we move into a 
global society, and as we move into a more technologically 
oriented society, there are elements in all of these areas that 
have a lot to do with how successful we are in those other areas. 
And I can be more specific. 
 
For example, in culture, the change we’re seeing in the 
information economy, globalization, and new economic 
opportunities means that whether it’s developing content which 
is a very large part of an information economy, whether it’s for 

the multi-channel universe, whether it’s for the Internet, 
whether it’s distance education, all of a sudden there’s a huge 
demand for the kind of creative workers, the writers, the 
producers, the people who come out of the cultural sector. And 
so this sector has got a focus, as it never has before, from 
people who are interested in developing content for the 
information economy. 
 
In terms of globalization, it’s certainly true that people 
everyday turn on their TVs and are bombarded by information 
from around the world; on the Internet they’re bombarded by 
information from around the world. So you have to ask 
yourself, how do you retain your identity in the face of that 
bombardment. 
 
And I think there are still a sufficient number of people that 
think there’s a Canadian identity and a Saskatchewan identity 
that’s worth preserving; that feel that the best offence, the best 
defence in that environment is to have a strong cultural sector 
where we not only know who we are and support the 
development of cultural products, but also that we have a lot of 
pride in region which we certainly share with the other Prairie 
provinces. 
 
And I think you’re going to see both collaborative efforts across 
the prairie region in this area, as well as efforts in Saskatchewan 
to, shall we say, put our brand on the international marketplace. 
 
The next thing in terms of economic activity is — I think it’s 
partly because of some of the aging baby boomers and whatnot 
— but there’s been the development of a fairly substantial 
number of people who are moving into retirement. They have 
disposable income and a lot of people are choosing cultural 
tourism as their first choice for how to spend their money. 
Whether it’s events, festivals, heritage tours, whatever — 
there’s a big demand for that kind of product that wasn’t there 
before. In fact recently the Tourism Association had a cultural 
tourism conference. 
 
(15:15) 
 
So there’s all kinds of new opportunities here that weren’t there 
before. Because people saw these more as individual pursuits, 
or personal pursuits before, rather than as social imperatives or 
economic imperatives. So we’re moving into a very different 
world and part of that world is very focused on young people, 
because of course they’re the generation that grew up in this 
environment. 
 
And so the intent of the department is to capture the synergies 
between these different areas in the new environment that we’re 
working in and really create a strategic sector for growth and 
development in Saskatchewan. And it’s not that we don’t have 
elements of this here and there but this is an attempt to, without 
huge additions of staff or bureaucracy, to create a real focus on 
making sure that youth understand that we want them here, that 
we see them very much as part of the growing economy. 
 
We’ve got issues of out-migration, we’ve got the Aboriginal 
baby boom, we’ve got succession planning, we’ve got growing 
skills shortages, we’ve got people who need work experience. 
So we’re getting very focused on how we can create all of these 
opportunities and send a strong message to our youth, to our 



968 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2001 

 

recreation people, to our cultural workers, that this is the place 
where the action is and that we want them to be part of the new 
opportunities. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Whew! Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, 
and thank you, Madam Minister. I appreciate your comments. 
There’s a little bit more I think that I was looking for in there, 
something like a specific type of a plan. 
 
I totally understand the cultural diversity of Saskatchewan. It’s 
very easy to get up and say we’re very culturally diverse, but 
how are we going to retain that? It’s very easy to say we must 
retain our cultural identity, but my big question is how? 
 
Economic activity, cultural tourism — I couldn’t agree more. 
We have ample opportunities for cultural tourism. What are we 
doing for it? 
 
Same as the youth. I mean the buzzword of the day is extremely 
simple. We have to do something to keep our youth in this 
province. Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question to the 
minister is what are we doing, not the rhetoric of we must do 
something. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we find is 
that in any kind of surveys or whatnot that are done, is that 
youth really lack knowledge about the Saskatchewan economy. 
They lack an understanding of where the opportunities are, 
which sectors are growing, where there’s skill shortages. 
 
And quite frankly we have shortages right now in places like 
health care, trucking, trades, forestry, energy, mining. We have 
a wide range of areas where there’s opportunity and we find 
when kids are interviewed in school that they don’t even know 
that these exist. So certainly part of the effort here is to create 
the linkages between growing sectors of the economy so that 
people understand what those opportunities are, where they are, 
how you prepare yourself for them. 
 
But there’s another side to that, and that’s the recruitment side. 
What we find these days is that employers from other 
provinces, other places, are very actively recruiting 
Saskatchewan skilled young people that we’ve invested a fair 
bit in training and preparing for the workforce. 
 
And we also will be wanting very much to work in partnership 
with the private sector to send strong messages, both verbally in 
terms of recruitment practices but also in terms of practical 
supports like mentorship opportunities, work/study co-op 
internships, to help link young people to those opportunities in 
the growing sectors of the Saskatchewan economy, and I think 
to help employers understand how competitive that 
environment is out there and how they can more successfully 
compete in that environment. 
 
Because I think there’s still a bit of a tendency to passivity on 
the part of some of our employers. And I can assure you that 
when some provinces come recruiting here, they’re not passive 
at all in their efforts. They’re very aggressive in encouraging 
young people to go to their provinces to work. 
 
So we have to get that same sense of urgency developed 
amongst our business community, our employers, and the youth 

themselves as far as being practical and looking for where the 
opportunities are going to be. 
 
And then part of our role in the department is to make that 
linkage, so that we’re linking employers who are excited about 
having skilled young Saskatchewan people, young people who 
are excited about working here, and really helping them form 
the link that’ll be a success story for both of them. 
 
So we’re going to be devoting a fair bit of our effort over this 
summer working in a partnership that’s already underway to 
have youth in business and others involved in creating these 
linkages in a very transparent and open way for young people. 
 
The other thing is, in the budget, you will have noticed the film 
tax credit, which of course is very much in support of the 
continuing growth of the film industry in Saskatchewan. And 
certainly there’s been very huge returns on that investment. 
 
In the cultural industries, you’ll notice a new expenditure in the 
budget. And what they largely use that money for is training 
and marketing so that people know about the content, the 
products that are coming out of the Saskatchewan cultural 
industries. But also that people understand how they can turn 
their talent into an economic success story for themselves. 
Because there’s many people who are very talented who never 
make a living by that talent because they don’t know how to 
package it, how to market it, how to turn it into a business 
opportunity for themselves. 
 
So people in the cultural industries, that’s what they do — they 
help people figure out how to do that kind of thing. It’s a very 
entrepreneurial sector of culture and we’ve devoted additional 
resources to that in this budget as well. 
 
On the sport front, as luck would have it, just as I arrived in this 
portfolio, the federal government caught wind of what we were 
doing and decided to spend more money on both sport and 
culture. 
 
And we’re going to be arguing that there needs to be a strong 
municipal component in the new federal strategy, because of 
course most of where sport activities exist is at the municipal 
level. And certainly around Saskatchewan communities and 
rural areas and northern areas, there’s a big need for a strong 
recreation infrastructure there. 
 
And we will be working with the federal government on that as 
well as trying to determine what their intentions are for the use 
of the cultural monies that they’ve just designated. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I really agree with you on the linkage from 
youth and getting youth in partnership with business. I just 
think we’re maybe 50 years too late because we’ve had such a 
mass exodus of youth from this province, as we all in this 
House know and everybody in this province knows . . . and 
what has created that over the years. 
 
I look at the area that I now live in and there’s a gap of people 
from the ages of about 20 to 50 that have all departed this 
province. So it would be nice to see if there was some kind of a 
plan where we could do this other than just a linkage. And I 



May 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 969 

 

think I’ll have more questions on that a little bit later. 
 
Same as the rec infrastructure. We have a continuing problem in 
rural Saskatchewan with the closure of facilities. We know of 
even churches that are closing because of high energy rates. 
And when you get a small community that’s blessed with these 
high gas and power rates and there’s not a tax base to help out 
one of the rec facilities, they are closing. And we know that 
that’s happening. 
 
So it’s nice to see if there’s something come along from the 
federal government on recreational infrastructure and I sure 
hope some of it gets out to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, question to the minister is, as this is a new 
department, can the minister say how many people are now 
working in this department and where will the central location 
for this department be located at? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The staff that are headquartered in 
Regina will be in the Bank of Montreal. I don’t know the actual 
buildings they are in the other communities. But we certainly do 
have staff at La Ronge, Saskatoon, and Melfort to serve the 
various areas. 
 
There were in total 19 staff transferred from the previous area in 
MAH (Municipal Affairs and Housing), and I think the total of 
new staff is 17 and there’s some summer students as well. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Again a 
question: is that a ceiling or is that a starting place or where’s 
the expansion going and where will we be going on that; 
because my next question, it comes to salaries. So could you 
just let me know where this is going or if we do have a target 
number? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Our intention is not to build an empire 
here. Our intention is to do as much as we can in partnership 
with organizations that share the objectives but to use the staff 
we do have to facilitate those working relationships and the 
strategic focus in the areas that I mentioned earlier. 
 
And over time as we get things done, we can then shift our 
attention to new things that need doing. So I don’t see us just 
fixing a path and then being stuck there. I see it being very 
much evolving as we get things done and move on to do other 
things. And hopefully on any subsequent day we’ll find a new 
hill to take. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. 
Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the minister. When I talked 
about the salaries, I just note that salaries have been budgeted at 
$546,000 in the next fiscal year, an increase of nearly a half a 
million dollars. 
 
Can you tell us how many full-time people will be employed in 
this? And I know you’ve given me 19, but in order to come up 
with a figure of 546,000 there must have been some rationale to 
come up with that figure. And how this would break down with 
respect to assistants, communication, department managers, 
deputy ministers or whatever, if you have the breakdown of 
that? 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes. In that particular vote, it’s the 
administrative vote that you’re looking at and that doesn’t 
represent the entire department. That represents the minister’s 
office, the deputy minister’s office, the communications, the 
administrative services, the human resource services. 
 
And I’ll mention that there’s no additional ministers, and each 
minister’s office would have had a complement charged 
somewhere in the system before, depending on their 
responsibilities. The only real new part here is the two persons 
in the deputy’s office, the deputy and corporate services. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. 
Deputy Chair, I also wanted to touch on an aspect of the budget 
— and I know we already talked about youth and technology 
services a bit in the preamble — but youth and technology 
services, I believe, have a budget of $334,000 with a mandate to 
provide research and policy analysis to integrate the perspective 
of youth, innovation, and technology under government 
decision making. And that’s right out of the budget book. It will 
also coordinate and supplement youth employment. 
 
How will this be any different than, for instance, the various 
departments of Labour, Post-Secondary Education, and 
Economic Development? What’s the difference that they might 
provide that this would be different? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you for your question. In this 
particular area, there’s a lot of questions around the work 
environment that young people expect today when they come 
into the workplace and that they find attractive to them in terms 
of being involved in the workplace. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And in this particular area, we’ll be dealing not only with how 
we assist Saskatchewan in the transition to the information 
economy because, as you know, we made a fairly large 
commitment in this budget to the CommunityNet, to 
government on-line, to creating broadband networks throughout 
the community so that businesses and community organizations 
and service providers would have access to broadband Internet 
services. And in this whole changeover youth will be a very 
important component of helping make this a successful 
changeover, because they have both the skills and the high 
comfort level in working in this environment. 
 
And so we’re going to be part in this department of helping to 
create the opportunities for youth to be very involved in those 
changeovers, but also to make sure as we work with our 
education partners, that all the appropriate training is there to 
build the capacity in our communities to participate in the 
information economy and the changeover to broadband 
networks. But also as we look at our student youth employment 
program, that we think about how we use some aspects of that 
youth employment program to help both government, 
businesses, community organizations to make this transition 
into being comfortable with using technology both for social, 
geographic, and business reasons. 
 
So really what we’re doing I think is creating value added as far 
as bringing the youth technology component into government. 
And you could do it . . . technically speaking you could do it 



970 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2001 

 

through Post-Secondary Education, who we’ll certainly be 
working closely with. You can do some aspects through K to 
12. 
 
But this is really to create a strategic focus on youth innovation 
and technology, and also to send a message to the youth that 
they matter to us and that we want to have them involved and 
we’re aware of their desire for these type of work environments 
and their participation in them. 
 
The other comment I would make is in the new media area, 
we’ve certainly got our eye on that in terms of all the young 
people wanting to move into work in content development. And 
that’s a very growing sector of the economy. We’ll be quite 
involved in that. 
 
But also there’s hardly a government in the world that doesn’t 
have a Web site for youth that helps to coordinate government 
services to youth through that Web portal. So part of our 
resources there will also be to develop that Web portal so that 
we can compete with other governments in terms of youth 
access on the Internet to a window of government that is 
speaking to them specifically. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I guess that’s a 
subject of debate, whether we get into whether governments get 
involved with providing all of the support to the youth or 
whether the ideas come from the innovative approach of 
business. And I’ll get to that soon when we talk about the 
summer student program. 
 
I saw in the budget that the summer student employment 
program has been given 5 million this fiscal year. Could you 
provide a breakdown of how that 5 million will be spent? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to answer the 
member’s question, in executive government there’s 300 jobs; 
in the commercial Crowns, 300; in post-secondary institutions, 
200; in urban parks and conservation areas, 100; regional parks, 
100; and community-based organizations, 500; for a total of 
1,500 new jobs. 
 
Now it might be of interest to the member that when students 
started to see the high quality of these jobs and what they 
actually were, we just had a flood of applications. I think the 
day these jobs were posted on the Internet, within a very few 
days after, we had 7,000 applications. So there’s been a huge 
uptake as students are looking for jobs that match their 
educations and are part of their ongoing career development. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. 
Deputy Chair, in the summer program and the figures I was 
trying to write very rapidly here, I’ve got 300 for executive 
boards — is that correct; 300 for Crown corporations; 200 for 
post-secondary; 100 for urban parks; and 100 for regional 
parks. Are those figures correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll just mention, the first one you 
mentioned, executive board, that’s executive government — 
that’s like all the departments of government. And the one that 
was missing from your list was community-based 
organizations, 500 jobs. 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. 
Deputy Chair, there’s one glaring exception to the whole 
summer student employment program that I can see, and it’s a 
lack of initiative into small business. 
 
And we just previously spoke about the linkage between youth 
and the workforce. And what this would suggest is that your 
only concern on workforce is government-funded agencies or 
government agencies, rather than an entrepreneurial business 
sector such as the small business sector. This would have been a 
prime opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to have some program 
for youth to enter into the business sector to learn, to learn a 
little bit of the entrepreneurial side of it. 
 
Could the minister discuss that and why the business sector was 
totally ignored in this program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think the member has quite a 
legitimate question there, and hopefully he’ll agree that I have 
quite a legitimate answer. 
 
But what I’ll just say first of all is that government as well as 
being government is also an employer — one of the largest 
employers in the province. In the health sector alone, for 
example, there’s 36,000 employees who are public employees. 
 
And all of these areas have needs for recruitment, needs for 
experienced people, needs for renewing their workforces. And 
what this is, is the first step really in renewal of the public 
sector as we look forward to retirements right across our entire 
public sector. So we have an obligation, not merely as 
government but also as an employer, to look at renewal within 
the public sector system. 
 
Now that being said, nothing in this program is written in stone 
and if through our work over the next few months with 
employers, with students, we find that there is a need to 
strengthen that component . . . And then we would also sit down 
with the federal government who provides a private sector 
program to make sure that we’re not duplicating funding that’s 
already there for the private sector through the federal 
government. 
 
We do have the opportunity to strategically target some money, 
whether it’s to the business community getting teched up for 
benefit in that community, whether it’s getting people involved 
over the winter in mentorships, co-op programs, internships, 
work study with various employers. 
 
I think that if you have any very specific ideas about how 
people might usefully be given high-quality work experience 
that will build on their B. Comm. (Bachelor of Commerce) 
degrees or build on their desire to work in the entrepreneurial 
sector, I think, certainly one would consider those carefully. 
 
But also again I emphasize working with the federal 
government so that the money that they’re investing in the 
private sector also has a public sector complement, because we 
have a lot of groups and organizations out there, whether it’s 
parks or people providing group homes or whatever the 
community service is, that also require young people coming 
into their systems and certainly have a need for support because 
they have no other place to get that income. 



May 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 971 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — To ask permission to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. In the 
Speaker’s gallery are two women that I would like to introduce 
to you. One is Arlene Heppner and the other one is Kathy 
Janzen. They’ve spent the last two days in Regina on a buying 
spree, not for personal but for their businesses. 
 
Arlene owns a store in Rosthern and Kathy is one of her 
long-time employees. So they’ve spent the last two days here. 
And if anyone wants to know some of the difficulties of running 
a business in Saskatchewan, I’m sure Arlene would be glad to 
tell you about that. 
 
One other thing that I should mention is, Arlene’s also known 
as Mrs. Ben Heppner on occasion. So I would ask you to 
welcome her to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Vote 27 
 
Subvote (CR01) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I just 
note with a bit of interest, and I’m going to go back to the 
entrepreneurial side of it. And I know that we have a lot of 
concern on this side of the House with only using government 
agencies, and your comment about someplace to make money. 
Well I think most of us on this side feel that you could make 
money in the business sector too, especially an entrepreneurial 
sector where somebody, some youth, if there’s a program 
provided that was equal to the one that was being provided to 
the government agencies. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the Minister: I’d like, if you 
wouldn’t mind, comparing the youth program of a year or two 
years ago — and I don’t remember the numbers offhand and 
hopefully that you do — how many numbers of youth were 
employed through the youth program vis-à-vis the 1,500 that 
we have under the program that you just outlined? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well actually I do have a recollection 
of why there was a decision made not to continue that program. 
And really at the subsidy level there was . . . the fact of the 
matter was the federal government provided a much more 
attractive program to employers. And we realized that if we 
were going to be in the summer job employment business, that 
we had to provide an attractive program both for employers and 
for students. 
 
So the old program that we had really just wasn’t meeting the 
grade any more and the federal government was actually 

providing a better service on that front. And so we believe that 
this new program has a good beginning. We had to get it 
implemented quickly in order to get students hired for this 
season. 
 
But again I emphasize that over the winter we have the 
opportunity to be thoughtful about what the best use of these 
dollars is, both for the students and to serve Saskatchewan 
service needs as well as a growing economy. And certainly any 
suggestions that you would want to make in that regard would 
be welcome. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. 
Deputy Chair, what I understand is the last program is from the 
small-business sector. It’s not every one . . . not every one of 
the employers met the criteria, was one of the downfalls in the 
system. It wasn’t, from what I understand, a problem with the 
youth getting valuable experience from that. 
 
My question now to the minister is, is there any avenues that are 
open to the small-business sector to help them? We’ve already 
identified that there’s a labour shortage problem and again there 
is more agencies out there other than government agencies, 
although the government is one of the biggest employers. But 
there are other people that I think all of us are concerned with 
because there is a lack of workforce out there. 
 
Is there any avenues open to the small-business sector to help 
them with this labour shortage problem? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It would be I think beneficial, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, for the Minister of Post-Secondary to provide a 
little more information here. 
 
But in this budget as well I know that money was targeted for 
special initiatives in Aboriginal training, and technology, in 
forestry, in construction trades. So there are a number of areas 
where there was money strategically provided in the budget for 
training in a range of areas. 
 
And certainly we provide funds as well through the government 
to sectoral areas like trucking, clothing manufacturers, etc. And 
those would be the kind of areas where you would have seen 
some direct resources going into growth of particular sectors of 
the economy. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’m wondering, these 
are part-time positions that I total up to 1,500; I gather they’re 
part-time. Or are they full-time during the summer? Or is there 
equivalency of . . . a full-time equivalent that’s employed in this 
program? 
 
And I’m wondering if you could give me kind of a breakdown 
of the type of dollars that individuals would be making? I don’t 
know if it that’s different throughout where they’re being 
employed in the summer. But it would be nice to have some 
background as the dollars that these young individuals can 
make during the summer months. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you for the question. Again 
these are, I think for the most part, pretty good jobs. They are 



972 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2001 

 

summer jobs. About 80 per cent to 85 per cent of the jobs are 
summer jobs. Another 15 per cent of the money has been set 
aside for work placements and whatnot over the winter, which 
would be part-time. But during the summer the jobs are full 
time. 
 
And depending on the employer’s share — and I don’t have all 
that information yet because projects are just being approved as 
we speak — the wage rate over the summer would be between 
6 to 8,000, I think would be sort of an average. And there may 
be some that go higher and some that go lower, depending on 
whether it’s a graduate student or the nature of the work. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. 
Deputy Chair, the minister had mentioned there’s been a flood 
of applicants for the . . . and I don’t remember if you gave me a 
number. I’m wondering what the criteria is. I’ve not had a 
chance to see the criteria, and I have had people that have asked 
me about where they could apply and how. And I’m wondering 
what the criteria is and how somebody can make an application 
for summer employment, or if it’s too late already. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Just to tell you what the differences are. 
For the Public Service Commission, actually ever since the 
previous government where many people complained about 
patronage with summer hiring, we instituted a lottery system 
where actually the system, based on the qualifications that are 
coded in, pumps out the name of the youth that will be referred 
to a job. And that’s within the Public Service Commission. 
 
The Crowns have their own process for hiring which I would 
have to check into. But the community organizations and 
whatnot, they’ll be doing that through their own local 
associations. We don’t do their hiring for them; they do their 
hiring themselves. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I don’t know if I can use that as an 
answer to take back to the people that have asked me about it or 
not, is throw their name on a piece of paper and put it in the 
wind today and where it falls, maybe they get a job. I don’t 
know. 
 
I don’t know if you answered the criteria of what’s needed, like 
. . . and I know it might be specific to each individual. But I 
think a youth that’s trying to get a job for the summer, they 
don’t really care what department it may be in. But if there’s a 
criteria that they must meet before they can even apply for the 
job, it would be interesting to know that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The way the system works is the 
employer identifies the key skills that they’re looking for and 
then you match it up with the key skills of the applicant, who 
are also coded into the system. So it’s very much skill driven, 
both from the point of view of the employer and the employee. 
 
And I would beg to differ on one point. I do think young people 
care what kind of jobs they get, and I don’t think they’re in 
school just to amuse themselves. I think they go there because 
they have a career objective in mind. And I think they’re much 
more focused than we were actually when we were younger. 
And perhaps I can’t speak for yourself, but I think today’s 
youth have very much an idea that they want a career. 
 

And one of the things that caused the flood of applications was 
posting the actual job descriptions on the Internet, and people 
were then able to pursue jobs that related very directly to their 
education. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Well I 
would agree to disagree with you on one item because although 
there’s people that are very interested in career paths, if you 
have a career path that’s entrepreneurial in nature, where would 
you get the job within this program to do it? 
 
And I also know a great number of young individuals that yes, 
they would like a career path but I’ll tell you their prime interest 
of the day is to get some money to go back to school, so they’ll 
take it in any sector at all. That’s one of the reasons we’re 
filling some rural jobs. 
 
And I guess that comes back to a question, and I don’t believe 
you’ve answered it as yet, is how many of these jobs would be 
broken down — out of the 1,500 — that you would consider as 
rural jobs? And by rural, I mean rural — not Swift Current or 
Yorkton, not just Regina and Saskatoon as the urban centres — 
jobs that are actually in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I will be looking carefully at the 
information as it comes in, because I think this is one of the 
design questions about the program: are we sure that there’s an 
equitable sharing of these jobs around the province? That was 
certainly one of the criteria of going into the program and we’ll 
have to see by the data that we get back whether that criteria 
was well met. But it certainly was our intention that all of the 
province would be well represented. 
 
And certainly as far as the regional parks, all of those jobs 
would be outside of the urban areas. The community-based 
organizations exist around the province. Certainly government 
departments exist around the province. The post-secondary 
institutions, those may well be more centred in the urban areas. 
But I would say, overall, we would hope to see a good 
representation around the province. And I fully expect you to 
hold me accountable to that as we move through getting some 
of that information back. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I’m sure — thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — I’m sure, Madam Minister, you can count on that, 
that we will do our utmost on this side to hold accountable. 
 
But it strikes me as odd when we say that the jobs . . . You’ve 
given me a breakdown of the jobs in general terms, but do we 
not know what the individual jobs are? I gathered that from 
your remarks. We haven’t hired in some cases because we don’t 
know what the jobs are. 
 
Is there not a breakdown of the specific jobs or did we just say 
roughly, oh let’s hire 300 people for the Crowns and worry 
about where we’re going to put them later. Do we have a 
breakdown? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll just remind the member that 900 of 
the jobs I cited are not under our control — either from the 
point of view of proposing the jobs or hiring for the jobs — so 
there would be a very large percentage of these jobs, about 
two-thirds, where people like regional committees and whatnot 



May 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 973 

 

are making the decisions about who gets these jobs; not only 
who gets them but which organizations are approved for their 
proposals. 
 
So all of this decision making is out of my hands, but in the 
areas that I mentioned on the first list when we talked about 
community organizations, regional parks, conservation areas, 
post-secondary institutions, Crown corporations, and executive 
government. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, again I’m . . . been involved in many organizations. It 
just seems odd when you say it’s outside of your control. 
 
Here we form a ministry that comes under you but not in your 
control. It really strikes me as odd. If it’s the Crown 
corporations, then why isn’t the program through Crown 
corporation? It’s kind of a distant service. Here — I’ll give you 
money for 300 jobs but now I’m not accountable for it. And we 
just finished discussing and debating whether we’re going to 
hold you accountable, and here, right off the bat, well I’m not 
accountable for the government or the Crown jobs. 
 
It strikes me as a little odd, with you as the Minister of Youth, 
Culture and Recreation and have no input or say into the 
majority of the 1,500 jobs that are coming about. That strikes 
me as a little odd. 
 
Is there direct discussion between yourself and the other 
ministers as to how this is going to be handled? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — When the program was first designed, 
there were several criteria. One, that these should be jobs that 
did have some kind of a career link, that they should be around 
the province, that they should be hiring a diverse workforce, 
that they be run by organizations who can be accounted on to 
provide the level of support and training needed by the youth. 
 
Now I think the Regional Parks Association would take 
exception to you saying that I should interfere in their hiring 
processes. When they apply for a project or a series of positions 
that they’re allocating, they refer to the criteria the government 
has set out, and they’re responsible to report back to us in terms 
of the criteria that we’ve set out. 
 
Certainly all the money would have to be accounted for; it 
would have to be accounted for that it met the criteria that the 
students were eligible. All of those things. 
 
But at the end of the day, I don’t decide who they hire. The 
Regional Parks Association decides which parks gets the 
priority and which students get the jobs. And I think that’s 
appropriate. I don’t think a minister should be deciding who 
gets a job out in Yorkton or somewhere else. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, taking exception to that is a little bit, a little bit . . . 
maybe an overstatement. I agree maybe you don’t wish to be 
right there and be the person that says: yes, you get the job and 
no, you don’t. 
 
But the fact that I understand is if the money is coming from 
you, I think the ultimate responsibility should be left in your 

hands if it’s your department. Would you agree with that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think I outlined to the member that 
there’s criteria, that the criteria have to be met both in terms of 
the application, the student and how they qualify, the 
organization and whether they qualify, their bookkeeping 
related to the project. So I believe all those accountability 
measures are in place. 
 
And I would certainly share the member’s view that anybody 
who receives government money should be held firmly 
accountable for the appropriate use of that money. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. 
Deputy Chair, we agree on that because somebody has to be 
accountable. And under what you’d explained before, we can 
give them the money and it’s at arm’s-length and they do what 
they want with it. Well I totally disagree with that because, as 
the minister, I believe that you have to remain responsible to the 
money that is coming out of your department. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, I noted in the budget that the budgeted 
amount for culture or recreation financial assistance has 
increased by more than 5 million. A good portion of that 
amount is in the film employment tax credit, and I believe you 
said that this amount reflects an accounting change that was 
previously netted against corporate income tax revenue as 
expenditure. 
 
Can you explain why the change? What precipitated this? And 
did anyone ask for this, and if so, why and who? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I think there’s a few reasons why 
it makes good sense to do this. This information would have 
been included in Finance’s tax information before but we think 
this is better disclosure. It’s more transparent. It stands right out 
as an investment in that area. And for people who are in the 
cultural sector, they have a clearer picture of what government 
resources are being allocated to the sector. So I think it’s just a 
more open and transparent way of accounting for this money. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Madam Minister, I have a couple of 
questions that I have not been able to find any answer to as yet 
and it goes along with the culture and recreation financial 
assistance. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question to the 
minister is the financial assistance to culture and recreation. 
 
Now to me that indicates that if somebody has a cultural project 
within Saskatchewan and they wish to apply for a grant, that 
this monies could or might be available for a cultural program 
of this nature, of something. And I’ll go to specifics after, but I 
don’t want to go into specifics if, in fact, it’s not what the fund 
was designed for. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Any requests that are made in these 
areas are under provincial organizations who make the 
determinations. And if it was for example in the arts area, it 
may well be the Arts Board that was determining where those 
monies went. And if it’s in the sports area, it would be the 
lotteries, Sask Sport Trust that was making the decisions. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. 
Deputy Chair, okay, I have the specific for you. 



974 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2001 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Asking for leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees, and thank you to the member opposite. I’m very 
pleased to introduce to all members of the legislature, in the 
Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Roger Thomas from Nexen 
Incorporated, Wascana Energy in Regina. He’s president of 
Wascana Energy. And ask all members to welcome him to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Vote 27 
 
Subvote (CR01) 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the minister, my 
question is going to be specific. 
 
This would happen . . . there’s two of them happen to be in my 
constituency, and it’s an initiative that has started some time 
ago and it’s called the Metis cultural village of Willow Bunch. 
It’s a program that I believe is now estimated at a million and a 
half dollars to get it going. And a small village of 100-and-some 
people, it’s extremely difficult to get a million-plus dollars. 
 
And I’m wondering if that would fall under one of the cultural 
financial assistance programs that appear to be in this budget? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — What we do, if anyone is looking for 
money for specific projects, is we try to refer them to the 
appropriate funding source. There are different funding sources 
out there and depending on the nature of their project — 
whether it’s capital, whether it’s operating, whether it’s 
business — would be the determination of who you would refer 
them to. 
 
But certainly if you would like us to take a look at this 
particular project and see whether we could recommend that 
they get in contact with the appropriate resource, we could do 
that. 
 
Because as I say, we don’t provide this money directly. There’s 
organizations who are much more equipped to make the 
determination of how they fit within the whole spectrum of 
funding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee report progress on the Department of Culture, Youth 
and Recreation. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Women’s Secretariat 

Vote 41 
 

Subvote (WS01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister, and would she 
please introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s a pleasure 
for me today to answer questions pertaining to Women’s 
Secretariat. The mandate — to work with others to promote 
economic and social change to achieve equality for women. 
And we have strong women working in this area. 
 
Beside me to my left is Joan Pederson, the acting executive 
coordinator of Women’s Secretariat; and behind Joan, would be 
Cheryl Senecal, the senior policy analyst for Women’s 
Secretariat. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Welcome, 
Madam Minister, and to your officials. 
 
I normally like to start the discussion by giving, by letting you 
have the opportunity to tell me what you’ve sort of . . . what 
you’ve done this year, how you’ve progressed and fulfilled your 
mandate. Maybe you can give me an idea of how many 
employees you have, as well, and sort of what’s happening in 
your department. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, the Women’s 
Secretariat works to achieve its mandate by doing a few things. 
The first one is it undertakes evidence-based research and 
policy analysis to support gender analysis of social and 
economic issues. 
 
It would also support the mandate by working with the 
departments and agencies across government to ensure that 
economic and social realities of women are taken into 
consideration in the development of government programs and 
policies — economic security, family violence, single parents, 
pay equity, jobs and training, unpaid work, balancing work and 
family, women in agriculture, employment equity and senior 
women, the Canadian Pension Plan and income security issues, 
services to victims, and sexual harassment, to name a few. 
 
The secretariat would educate and inform the public about key 
issues that affect women’s lives. 
 
It also consults and liaises with community groups, public and 
private sector organizations and individuals; and it facilitates 
partnerships between women’s organizations, the community, 
and government departments and agencies, and the private 
sector. So it tries to fulfill its mandate by playing that role. 
 
Moving on to the key accomplishments for the year 2000-2001, 
we’ve provided a one-time millennium initiative, moms on the 
move scholarship program, that awarded 10 $1,000 scholarships 
to single-parent women enrolled in post-secondary education. 
 
Through the International Women’s Day grant program, it 
provided one-time grants of $500 to 101 non-profit 
community-based women’s groups to support an International 



May 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 975 

 

Women’s Day event or activity. And I know the member 
probably paid attention to the number of groups throughout the 
province who came together to have those events or to sponsor 
a workshop on some of the issues that face women to celebrate 
International Women’s Day. 
 
I know that she was in attendance at the If Gender Mattered 
conference, and that conference was sponsored to present and 
discuss research and policy development relating to advancing 
women’s equality. 
 
We worked with government and community to address 
poverty reduction. And as the member would know, this is the 
second year in a row that we’ve had a reduction in the number 
of children living in poverty in Saskatchewan. The non-market 
work in rural Saskatchewan, housing issues, and gender-based 
planning in the health sector, including the health districts. 
 
There’s the assessment of taxation policy to identify the impacts 
on low-income earners and families, and women’s economic 
independence and security, when we talk about taxation and tax 
initiatives. 
 
In partnership with Aboriginal organizations, the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour, government, and community, we 
provided policy analysis to support strategies addressing the 
economic and social well-being of Aboriginal women and 
families. And of course the year before, to do that, we needed to 
have some strong analysis and launched a profile of Aboriginal 
women to use as the backdrop for that kind of work to be done. 
 
Developed statistical updates on employment, education, visible 
minority women, Aboriginal women, immigrant women, rural, 
and senior women. 
 
As a result of the information gathered in the evaluations of the 
woman’s on-line program, a follow-up forum was held in May, 
2000 so that the recipients from the program could participate 
in skill-building workshops, share their experiences and learn 
from one another, and expand their ability to work on-line. Two 
additional one-day training workshops were being offered in 
April in Prince Albert and Regina, primarily for those unable to 
attend the forum last year and to get the sharing of those 
workshops. 
 
In partnership with government, community, and other 
jurisdictions, we work to support government’s family violence 
strategies and adapted the Money Smarts for Young Women 
from the British Columbia model. And that was distributed to 
the schools. 
 
We collaborated with the federal-provincial territorial 
jurisdictions on policy initiatives that further progress on 
women’s equality, including the release of women’s economic 
independence and security and the federal-provincial territorial 
strategic framework and updates on economic gender equality 
indicators. 
 
So it’s been a very busy year and plans are underway to have 
this year be as full as the last. 
 
The last question that was asked, Mr. Chairman, was: the 
number of full-time equivalents that we have within in 

Women’s Secretariat, and that would be 13. 
 
And I thank the member opposite for the opportunity to give 
that overview on the work of the Women’s Secretariat for the 
year, and a review. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The 13 
employees that you have, could you give me an idea how 
they’re broke down between administration, policy, research, 
communications, and public education? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — At present, Mr. Chair, we have one 
acting executive director who would be considered as in a 
management position. Although some of the areas . . . we have 
five people working in senior policy advisory roles or policy 
development. Some of those, at least one would be, probably 
determined to be management position. We have four people 
working in the area of strategic initiatives consulting, and doing 
the communicating and the facilitating within the communities. 
And we have two who would be in support staff positions. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I notice there’s going to be one full-time 
equivalent dropped from this year’s budget. Can you tell me 
what department that person was dropped from? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — There was a voluntary retirement in 
the support staff area. And I guess that would be then the two 
that we were looking at in support staff. One was voluntarily 
retiring and we didn’t move to fill that position, so that 
represents the full-time equivalent. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I had a number of questions 
that were fairly organized and laid out, but you said something 
in your discussion of what the mandate was of the secretariat 
and you talked about moms on the move. And I’m wondering if 
you can give me more information on that initiative. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair, it’s our belief that education 
is one of the most important ways to help women out of 
situations of poverty. And the moms on the move program was 
a scholarship program to ensure that single-parent women were 
better able to handle their studies and the load of . . . financial 
load on their studies. 
 
It was single-parent women who are among the highest debt 
load . . . or people carrying the highest debt load following their 
studies. And these scholarships were specifically designed to 
reduce that amount of student loan needed. 
 
The single-parent moms who show great commitment and 
determination to improve their lives by advancing their 
education and work potential are the best possible role models 
for others, and we wanted to make certain that they would be 
able to be there and provide a positive example to others. And 
the scholarship was a means to do that. 
 
It was offered in the second year of post-secondary educational 
training for these women. And the program would be completed 
by the fall of 2000 with 10 single-parent women who were each 
awarded a $1,000 scholarship. 
 
On behalf of Women’s Secretariat and Government of 
Saskatchewan, we congratulate the recipients of those 



976 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2001 

 

scholarships and we commend them for their initiative. It’s hard 
work and determination that would help them to get through 
balancing their family load and their study lives. And this was 
aimed to be a debt reduction program for them so that they 
would be able to go out into the workforce and support their 
family, and have less of the load of the tuition and other costs of 
post-secondary education. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I understand, Madam Minister, you said there 
was 10 women that each received a thousand dollars apiece? Is 
that correct? And how was the determination made on who was 
. . . what the criteria was, who was going to be eligible, and . . . 
I guess it wouldn’t matter which, the names of the people, but 
I’m just wondering if you could give me an idea of how they 
were decided, it was decided they’d get the grant. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — The program eligibility and 
requirements, Mr. Chair, were that they must be single parents 
with custodial rights; they must be a Saskatchewan resident 
attending an approved Saskatchewan post-secondary institution; 
they must have successfully completed at least 60 per cent of a 
full course load in the first year of study in the program of their 
choice; they must be enrolled in at least 60 per cent of the full 
course load in the year 2000-2001 school year; and they have to 
submit an application — a one-page outline of how the 
scholarship will benefit them and what their future educational 
and employment goals are, as well as the two reference letters 
to be attached. 
 
The program criteria and recipient selection was based on the 
student’s need, the geographical location, individual 
achievement, and passing grade. Members of equity groups, 
women with disabilities, Aboriginal ancestry also had a priority. 
And individual achievement was also considered. 
 
Then we had an independent selection committee who reviewed 
the applications. Representation on that committee came from 
the University of Saskatchewan, the University of Regina, 
SIAST, and Women’s Secretariat. 
 
To be awarded a MOM (mothers on the move), moms on the 
move scholarship, successful applicants had to complete and 
return two forms: one that verified completing the first year of 
study, and enrolment in the second year of study; and one that 
requested information on the student loans account from the 
individuals. 
 
Now if the member would like, I could get the names of the 
recipients to her and we can provide that to her. Thank you, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I know that there was 10 
women who received the grants. Could you tell me how many 
actually applied? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — These 10 women were chosen out of 
approximately a hundred applications that was received. It was 
a very successful program and an important initiative I believe 
on behalf of Women’s Secretariat. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, the members that were on 

the committee to make the decision on who would receive the 
grant, were they paid anything? And were they all women? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair, the people who were on the 
selection committee were all women who did that in a volunteer 
capacity and were not paid for that participation on the selection 
committee. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, there was . . . the secretariat, 
I know, has some funding available for grants for various 
women’s organizations, and if not grants then partnership 
funding. Could you give me an idea or give me a list of the 
grants or partnership fundings that were given, paid out this 
year and last year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — There are about four pages, Mr. Chair, 
of the names of groups and agencies that receive some funding 
from the Women’s Secretariat. The International Women’s Day 
grants would be separate. 
 
But I think she was asking about in a partnership way and sort 
of . . . I would like to table this for the member, Mr. Chair, so 
that she would have the ability to look at those, rather than read 
them all out; it’s a long time to do that. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I appreciate that. 
Could you give me an idea of what your relationship is now 
with the committee or the group that used to be called Working 
for Women? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — In March 2000, cabinet approved the 
development and implementation of new funding mechanism 
for community-based organizations delivering specialized 
career and employment services to specific client groups. 
 
Following the initial request for proposal, recommendations for 
funding have recently been approved by the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. 
 
As a part of this new CBO (community-based organization) 
strategy, Working for Women was not successful in obtaining 
multi-year funding to deliver services to multi-barriered clients 
in Saskatoon. 
 
The department had developed a process for evaluating 
proposals and used specific criteria, and all proposals were 
assessed on the same set of criteria. 
 
The needs of women were incorporated within the broader 
theme of multi-barriered, and we believe those agencies 
receiving the funding through the program would provide 
suitable selection of employment-related services to assist 
women in obtaining employment. 
 
It’s not saying that we don’t recognize the valuable work some 
community-based organizations do, but we remain confident 
those organizations who receive the funding, along with 
Canada-Saskatchewan career and employment offices, will be 
able to provide the appropriate career and employment services 
to meet the needs of women. 
 
So this agency, established in 1980 through federal grants from 
the employment outreach program of Employment and 



May 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 977 

 

Immigration Commission, had been funded over the past two 
years but would not receive the funding for this program in this 
year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I’m not sure if I understood. 
Did you say the Working for Women has only received funding 
from the Women’s Secretariat for two years? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — This is a program through 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. And the 
transitional funding had been provided to Working for Women 
until the end of June 2001 to assist them in assessing their 
continued viability and research alternative sources of funding. 
 
So through the Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 
department, I believe that was their only source of funding. 
Consequently their funding will go till June 2001 to see if 
there’s any continued viability, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. I guess just to 
clarify then, they only received funding from the secretariat for 
two years? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — To be clear, this initiative is based in 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. And they have a 
new strategy that they’re developing with community-based 
organizations to deliver specialized career and employment 
services to specific client groups. 
 
As a result they put out criteria they would follow for women’s 
groups to access the funding in this area. So this is not 
something that comes out of Women’s Secretariat, but it is 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training based. 
 
Over the past two years, Working for Women was funded 
through Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training to 
provide career planning, computer training, assertiveness 
training, and job-finding clubs. 
 
Now they did not submit the kinds of reports that had been 
asked for in a timely manner, and the department couldn’t 
adequately assess the outcomes. And they’ve been doing that 
with groups who have been coming forward and going to be 
doing the work in this area. 
 
So transitional funding was given until the end of June 2001, to 
assist them to assess their continued viability and research 
alternative sources of funding for the organization. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, through the Women’s 
Secretariat, even though the funding has been given through 
post-secondary skills and training, this organization or group 
has been in the province for a number of years and has been 
doing a considerable amount of work. I’m wondering if you’re 
going to be keeping in contact with them and determining if 
there is some other way that you can be enhancing the work that 
they’re doing and the very valuable work that they’re doing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Women’s Secretariat has been in 
communication with them and working with them to determine 
what their future would be. And that’s in progress, and 
discussions are still occurring, Mr. Chair. 
 

Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I know that there’s another 
program available where there’s grants for, I believe it’s $500 
given to a number of recipients. Can you give me an idea of 
what these are for, the criteria for those grants? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — In my overview of the department’s 
work this year, I did mention the International Women’s Day 
grant program, and this would be the area that I believe the 
member is questioning. 
 
It was one-time grants of $500 to non-profit community-based 
women’s groups to support an International Women’s Day 
event or activity. Many of the groups in the community go 
about doing their work and don’t take time to either outline 
what that work is to the community or to recognize the work 
that strong women provide to their community. 
 
So in some communities, there’s a recognition event. In others, 
there was just a celebration of what women are able to achieve 
that would be able to have them be strengthened and go forward 
in the year ahead. And others had International Women’s Day 
celebrations that would invite the community in. 
 
At the university, there was a program here that had women 
involved in different programs and supports to students at the 
university — those kinds of activities and events. 
 
There were many, many applications, and we were able to offer 
about 101 of those this year, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, can you tell me how you 
determined who would receive the grants out of the very many 
applications you received? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Basically the Women’s Day grants, the 
women’s groups had to profile their work to address equality 
issues. They had to be an event that would increase public 
awareness about the history and significance of International 
Women’s Day to the broader community. And applications for 
grants were used to support this event or celebration or 
contribution that they would make to Saskatchewan women. 
 
The applications for grants were processed as they were 
received and when all the necessary information was obtained, 
the groups were notified either by phone or by a letter to say 
that they were awarded a grant and could plan their programs 
accordingly. 
 
And the selection was done by that information being provided 
to Women’s Secretariat. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, so then the 13 women that 
are working within the secretariat, I guess, they’re . . . probably 
the two support workers and the four strategic initiative people 
involved would have to sift through these 2 or 300 applications 
and decide who was going to receive the grant. Is that correct? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Yes. Mr. Chair, the committee did 
have representation. Two of the women that would work among 
the community groups would have an understanding of the 
work that has been accomplished, would be looking at the 



978 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2001 

 

applications along with a support staff person, and they made 
recommendations that would be given to the senior person in 
the Women’s Secretariat who then would choose the final 
recipients. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So, Madam Minister, then these three or four 
people went through these 400 . . . or 300 grants and they would 
decide after reading the very complex application that had to be 
. . . that was filled out, they had to determine what criteria and 
decide this is the person who will receive a $500 grant and this 
one isn’t. 
 
Is this . . . was this a complex way of deciding how . . . if you’re 
going to receive the money? How was the actual decision 
made? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chairman, all of the women’s 
groups were given the chance to submit a criteria form that said 
yes, they were a non-profit women’s group, here’s the work that 
they were going to do, here’s how they would spend the money, 
and they would comply with the criteria for the grant. 
 
And Women’s Secretariat had $50,500 that they could spend on 
that program. So when we received the applications, we would 
have the individuals that we talked about go through those and 
make sure that they met all of the criteria, and the grants were 
then given out on the first-come, first-serve basis. 
 
We couldn’t meet all the requests, but those women who got in 
the information who met all of those criteria, if we received 
their applications, received the money. When the money was 
gone, the program was gone as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I believe you just said that 
you received this grant on a first-come, first-serve basis. So all 
the . . . if you weren’t one of the lucky people to have got your 
application in immediately, then you weren’t going to receive 
any of the money. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Many groups took advantage of the 
program and sent their applications in. And there was lots of 
time for them to prepare that and make certain that they had the 
information prepared to meet the criteria. 
 
So the selection committee then looked at the application and 
would make certain that the group met the criteria — 
non-profit, working in a community, here’s the event they were 
planning, if it was going to do the things that we outlined. And 
then yes, they were then given on a first-come, first-served 
basis until $50,500 was used. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I would understand that in 
each department it must be difficult to decide who would be the 
most worthy recipient. I’m sure that lots of the people that filled 
in their application a couple of days later or received . . . or was 
received in your department a couple of days later because of 
Canada Post may have had a very valuable proposal, 
suggestion. 
 
But it would seem that a determination to spend $50,000 on a 
first-come, first-served basis must be something that’s a 
difficult decision to make in a department like yours where you 
only have 13 staff and definitely a small amount of money. 

I would think that there must some individuals in the province 
felt like they didn’t have much of an opportunity to get funding 
that could have been available. Is this decision going to be 
re-looked at next year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Any time you have an amount of 
money and a program with many people who want to take 
advantage of that program, the selection process is always 
difficult. So we did say when they received the information that 
it would be allocated on the basis of those people who 
submitted their applications first who met the criteria. 
 
And then we gave a good length of time to not have people say 
well, we didn’t have time to get our application in, or, oh, we 
just found it at this time. We gave a good length of time for 
them to be able to submit to the program. 
 
Once in a while when you’re looking to the women in the 
community and you want to have them be able to take some 
time to celebrate accomplishments . . . And the women that 
work within Women’s Secretariat work with the community 
groups and organizations would know that there’s once in a 
while you take a chance to look and reflect on the work that’s 
being done, but to provide those women out there who are 
doing the work the strength to carry on and to celebrate 
International Women’s Day, not for us to lose sight of what that 
day is all about and the importance of that day. 
 
So this was the year that we determined that we would do that. 
There’s no indication that this is going to be an ongoing 
program for every International Women’s Day, but we wanted 
to highlight that this year and this is the way we did that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, it really wouldn’t matter 
what length of time you gave them to send their applications in 
if it was a first-come, first-serve basis. The first people in there 
are going to get their . . . are going to get chosen. So I would 
think that this is something that you would really have to 
reconsider if you’re really going to look at who it’s going to be 
benefiting the most. 
 
Madam Minister, I was interested in hearing you saying that the 
committee . . . that your secretariat looked at assessment and 
taxation as one of your mandates this year, one of the jobs you 
worked on. We all know that with the many discussions that 
have been brought . . . carried on in the House in the last six 
weeks, that assessment and taxation is a huge issue. 
 
Can you give me an idea of what the secretariat felt women’s 
influence on assessment and taxation would be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — The Women’s Secretariat would look 
at any new policy development or program in the area of 
finance as they would any other department. And not so much 
the ongoing assessment, or assessment issues through 
municipalities who make those decisions, but the decisions that 
are taken by the provincial government. 
 
And the member opposite would know that there were a 
number of tax changes contemplated when we . . . dealing from 
the federal government’s tax forms, and we had an opportunity 
to address some issue areas by what initiatives we would 
undertake in that review. 



May 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 979 

 

And so once the changes were being looked at, the committee 
— of course, the tax committee — did its work and Finance 
was developing the options and the things that they would do to 
implement that report, we would then be able to assess and 
analyze what kind of an impact that would have. 
 
So, for example, once the tax changes are fully implemented, 
approximately 55,000 low-income seniors, single parents, 
minimum wage earners, and working families will no longer 
pay provincial income tax. Once the provincial income tax 
brackets and personal tax credits are fully implemented, they 
will be protected from inflation. And this is particularly 
important for low-income earners. 
 
The expansion of the sales tax base to include some goods and 
services that were previously not taxed would be offset for 
low-income families by the provincial sales tax credit. 
 
Two-parent families will receive up to $264 per year, while the 
single-parent family would receive $209 per year. The child tax 
credit offered for the first time in 2001 helps all Saskatchewan 
families with the cost of raising children. It’s worth $1,500 per 
child and does not restrict the number of children that can be 
claimed. By 2003 the tax credit amount will be worth about 
$2,500 per child. 
 
Now what we would do as a secretariat when we look a the tax 
initiatives and how Finance is developing their strategies in 
response, our personnel would be at the table with them 
discussing how that would impact — how the changes will 
impact and how you protect those most vulnerable in our 
community from the tax changes and the tax shifts. 
 
And so they would determine then the kind of phasing-in of 
certain initiatives or what we could do to support, as I said, 
income of seniors, single parents, minimum-wage earners and 
working families. And we would have our say in those 
initiatives. 
 
Now of course then, the final decision on how that would be 
taken and what would be put in place would be the budget 
deliberations, Mr. Chair. But we would have the ability to have 
a women’s lens on those tax changes and the shifts of taxation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, I am pleased to 
hear you say that after you gave me the rundown of the changes 
in taxes that were going to happen this year, that it wasn’t 
something that your small department had to analyze, because 
I’m sure there must be more personnel available than just in the 
secretariat. 
 
But what I wanted to know is what your department had to say 
about some of these changes in taxes. Like for example last 
year you had the expansion of the PST (provincial sales tax). 
I’m sure that your department, your women’s department, must 
have been very concerned with the idea that single moms are 
going to have to pay expanded PST on a number of issues. 
 
Do you have any voice in these kinds of changes? What do you 
say to cabinet and to the Finance minister when he says that 
we’re going to smack women hard again when it comes to some 
of these changes? How do you make an impact? 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. On a broader view, I would say that if you were going 
to contemplate an across-the-board reduction of 20 or 25 per 
cent, Women’s Secretariat would be at the table and say, well 
then recognize this gives those people who have the most 
benefit in our communities the biggest benefit of a tax 
reduction, and the least amount of benefit to the lower incomes 
and may have impacts on programs and services. 
 
So if Finance were talking about back there at the table and they 
would point out to Finance the implications of that kind of a 
move on those who are the greatest in need in our communities. 
And therefore when we were having the Tax Review 
Committee and looking at what and what would not occur, we 
would give an analysis of how that would have an impact on the 
community. But we would also have a broader view of what we 
do as government to help those who are in greatest need. 
 
And hand in hand with that would come the redesign of 
Saskatchewan social assistance program to better meet those 
who are most vulnerable families in the community. There 
would be the Saskatchewan Child Benefit in combination with 
federal children’s benefits to remove children’s basic benefits 
from welfare and assist low-income parents with the costs of 
raising their children. So that would be another way we would 
have a role to play in that in a broader view. 
 
The Saskatchewan employment supplement is a monthly 
payment that supplements income earned by low-income 
parents from wages, self-employment, and child spousal 
maintenance. So the lone parent women that are leading about 
69 per cent of those households would benefit from that kind of 
a program. When we’re looking at one, we don’t just do it in 
isolation of all of the other things we would do to support 
women. 
 
And of course if there’s one area that’s being recommended to 
expand or broaden the PST, we would give an analysis of how 
that would impact on low-income families or single-parent 
families. And we would be saying that the offsetting of that — 
when we talk about the tax credits, those kinds of things — the 
PST program, rebate program would also be part of the analysis 
of that. 
 
So it’s not one in isolation of many other factors, but we look at 
the broad nature of that and say that if there are going to be 
these changes, how we can protect those most vulnerable in our 
community from those changes. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, while I appreciate 
the fact that your voice is there when it comes to looking at 
changes in taxes and the impact it’s going to have on women 
and especially single moms that are raising families, and I’m 
sure that they’re hoping or praying right now that your voice is 
going to be heard when it comes to the impact on their lives 
when it comes to utility rate increases that we’re going to be 
feeling in the next little while. 
 
I understood you to say that when you’re looking at . . . your 
mandate is to look at the broad picture and to have a voice in all 
areas. And I think that there’s going to be many . . . many 



980 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2001 

 

families in this province are going to be hurting badly and 
expecting you to . . . hoping that you’re going to have some 
voice around the table when it comes to making those changes. 
 
Madam Minister, last year, was there any unfilled positions in 
the Secretariat? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Yes. Mr. Chair, we have Joan acting as 
the executive coordinator, the executive . . . That position, since 
Faye Rafter left, has been filled in that capacity, and so we 
would be looking at eventually going out to fill that position. 
And there’s one vacant position in the senior pay equity adviser 
capacity, and we would be looking to fill that position as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So I understand then that last year the 13 staff 
members was actually 11 for a percentage of the year to try to 
fulfill . . . justify the mandate that has been given to you by this 
government. I guess it’s big shoes to fill. 
 
Madam Minister, can you give me an idea how much you spent 
on minister’s travel in the past fiscal year and how much of it 
fell into the other category? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I may have misunderstood the 
member, and I’ll try and answer it this way. I believe she’s 
asking about ministers responsible for Women’s Secretariat — 
might not necessarily be this minister, but the previous minister 
who had the portfolio before me — would be $2,153.77. 
 
And that would be to attend federal-provincial territorial 
meetings of ministers responsible for the Status of Women. 
They would generally have one meeting that would lead up to 
the full ministers’ meeting, a sort of a pre-conference — share 
information, know what information they would want to go 
back and gather before that conference — and then they would 
attend the conference of all of the ministers per year. So that’s 
that category. 
 
And then, other — I’m assuming you would mean support 
people that go along. Is that what . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Okay, so the total travel expenses for everyone who would be 
involved to support the minister or to represent Women’s 
Secretariat through the year, because Joan would also go to 
conferences where people who are in that role would come 
together, and the total amount of money then would be 
$22,813.72. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Could you give me an idea, Madam Minister, 
why so much of the travel money would go under the category 
other? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Well the opportunity for ministers to 
get together are the two opportunities that I mentioned. 
 
And then on an ongoing basis support people would come 
together, so there would be conferences for the person who 
would be now in Joan’s position. So there would be some travel 
for Joan, or Faye Rafter at the time, who would support the 
minister, or go to meetings of equivalent responsibility in other 
jurisdictions, and then would take — probably depending on 
what the nature of that meeting was, what the topics of 
discussion were — would take someone who was a senior 
analyst in that area or someone who worked in that area who 

would be able to provide support to them. 
 
And so those are the people who would then travel along with 
the senior executive of the Women’s Secretariat. So that’s why. 
 
Most times there’s a pre-conference, or I believe the minister 
goes to the meeting to determine what are some of the topics or 
initiatives that they’d like to support on an annual basis, and 
then goes to the full federal-provincial territorial ministers’ 
meetings. And throughout the rest of the year, the other officials 
do those kinds of meetings. 
 
For example, the If Gender Mattered conference, we would 
have had women from . . . who are leading women’s 
secretariats in other provinces, plus probably some of their 
women that work in pay equity analysis or policy analysis come 
with them. And they provided good information to us and we 
were able to share our information with them. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, and, Madam Minister, so maybe I 
misunderstood the way the categories are broke down because it 
sounds like other must be travel just for the minister and . . . I 
mean travel is just for the minister and other is for other 
members. 
 
My real question is why wouldn’t you put travel under travel, 
whether it belongs to the minister or the support staff or the 
deputy minister? You’re telling me that $2,153.77 is under 
travel, but $22,813 is under other. If it’s travel, why doesn’t it 
just go under travel? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — That’s probably why I mentioned to 
the member I wasn’t quite certain how she was asking the 
question. 
 
The total travel, ministerial and support people, the total travel 
is $22,813. That includes the minister’s travel. But the 
opportunity for the minister to travel is to get together with 
other ministers responsible for the status of women. And there 
are two that I mention. There are about four to six other 
meetings for the executive officers of the secretariats, and they 
meet in various places and around various topics of discussion. 
 
And then those people who would also take their policy 
analysts would go as well. 
 
But the total envelope of travel — and I thought she asked 
about ministerial travel and then other people travelling, and 
that’s why I broke it down that way — but the total envelope is 
the 22,000-some dollars. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In the expenses 
under the term travel . . . under the term other, what is in there 
besides travel? What other expenditures are considered other in 
your department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair, are we talking about in the 
Estimates document, what means other? What’s in the other 
category? 
 
I guess I could tell the member that of the expenditures for the 
Women’s Secretariat, the breakdown would be like this: 
$690,000 — salaries. Of course that’s the main component of 



May 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 981 

 

the secretariat because that’s what we do. We’re in places to be 
the lens of women into the departments. So our most . . . most 
of our expense is salaries. 
 
The next expenses would be under office and equipment, and 
that’s about $90,000. 
 
Communications — the printing and the advertising and the 
getting the information out to women is about $66,000. Meals 
and travel for those times that they travel, about $49,000. 
 
There’s a sharing of the cost of operating my office as the 
minister responsible, which is about 6 per cent, and that totals 
$27,000. 
 
There’s the International Women’s Day grants that we talked 
about; the scholarships we talked about; $28,000 in the area of 
partnerships. 
 
The special initiatives, there were two this year — PATHS 
(Provincial Association of Transition Houses Saskatchewan), 
$48,000; and the women’s health centre, the Prairie Women’s 
Health Centre, 10,000. 
 
And then there’s postage of $5,000 and rent of $75,000. And 
that’s the total budget for Women’s Secretariat. 
 
So of that, I guess I’m not certain how they broke that down for 
expenses and other. But I guess it would be anything that 
wasn’t the salaries that I gave you the information on. It would 
be the salaries and then other, and I’ve read those out to you 
today. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 
 
 


