















































Hansard: April 04, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 355 
 April 4, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions on behalf of citizens of the Humboldt 
constituency who would like to ensure that their 
community-based ambulance services are retained. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The petitioners are from the town of Cudworth, Aberdeen, 
Saskatoon, and Prud’homme. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise, Mr. Speaker, 
to present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
conversion of paved highways to gravel. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel, commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents, and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from the community of 
Briercrest. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again on behalf of the people 
in Swift Current and area concerned about their regional 
hospital. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition’s been signed by people from 
the city of Swift Current, from Pennant, from Morse, and from 
Kyle, as well as Vanguard. 
 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of residents of the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are concerned about their ambulance service. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And this is signed by the good citizens of Radville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from concerned citizens that are 
worried about the cuts at the Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, these concerned citizens are not only from 
the constituency of Wood River; they’re from Assiniboia, 
Mossbank, Crane Valley, Limerick, and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition dealing with ambulance services. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 

And the signatures to this petition come from the communities 
of Wynyard and Mozart. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 



356 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2001 

 

The centralization of ambulance services; 
 
Swift Current’s request for a new hospital; 
 
Plans to revert highways to gravel; 
 
And the level of services and care at Pioneer Lodge. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 17 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: what was the total 
administrative costs incurred by the government for the 
2000-2001 fiscal year for the Saskatchewan farmland 
property tax rebate program? 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 17 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: how 
many vehicles will SGI, SaskTel, and Sask Water be 
purchasing in the 2001-2002 fiscal year; and how does this 
compare to the Crowns’ vehicle replacement program of 
previous years? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my real pleasure today 
to introduce to you and through you to the entire Assembly two 
very distinguished guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First I would ask the Assembly to join me in welcoming Mr. 
Peter Irniq, Commissioner of Nunavut. Mr. Irniq has 
distinguished himself as a parliamentarian, an educator, and a 
communicator. He has taken a very active role in shaping the 
cultural future of Nunavut. And I want, on behalf of 
government and the people of Saskatchewan, to extend our very 
warm welcome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many members will know that Mr. Irniq was guest 
speaker this morning at the Saskatchewan Prayer Breakfast and 
I sincerely regret I could not be there, Mr. Speaker, the first 
time in many years. I am told by those who were there his 
presentation was very moving. And I appreciate very much that 
Mr. Irniq has left with us a copy of The Nunavut Handbook. 
 
I would ask all members to join this very distinguished visitor 
to our gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would 
like to join with the Premier in welcoming the Commissioner of 
Nunavut, Mr. Peter Irniq, to the Legislative Assembly this 
afternoon. 
 
I had the privilege this morning of sharing breakfast with the 
commissioner at the breakfast where he spoke this morning. I 
learned that in his early life he grew up in an igloo. And of 
course in my limited Saskatchewan experience I think I’ve built 
a couple little tunnels through the snow, but I didn’t get as far 

as you did, sir. 
 
And we welcome you to Saskatchewan and wish you all the 
best as you serve your people in Nunavut. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the other very 
distinguished visitor in your gallery, sir, is a visitor that really 
needs no introduction in this House. I’d like to welcome His 
Honour, Mr. Harley Olsen, who has played an important role in 
the life of this province through his work as a public servant, 
through his work in the field of agriculture, and through his 
work in many volunteer organizations. 
 
And we know that he and Her Honour continue to shape the 
future and the culture of our province. And I’d like us to 
welcome Mr. Harley Olsen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I too would like to join with the Premier in welcoming 
Mr. Harley Olsen. I hope that you enjoy the proceedings this 
afternoon. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I also want to introduce in your gallery a very 
well-known educator in the province of Saskatchewan, 
someone who has served this province for many, many years. 
I’d like to introduce Mr. Fred Herron who is sitting in your 
gallery. And we know that Fred has been a visitor to these 
galleries many a time in the past and we want to welcome him 
back. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to join with the member opposite in welcoming Mr. Fred 
Herron to this Legislative Assembly. 
 
We do know that he is a distinguished educator, a distinguished 
communicator, a distinguished lobbyist. But most importantly, 
he is a distinguished constituent of Saskatoon Southeast and I 
welcome Mr. Herron. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join 
all members in regards to welcoming Commissioner Peter Irniq 
to the legislature. 
 
As an Aboriginal person, it is good to see important Inuit, 
Metis, and First Nations leaders make it in very key positions 
throughout the governance of territories, provinces, and 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very important to recognize the language of 
the Inuit people which is Inuktitut and to recognize that as an 
important part of it. 
 
So I would like to as well welcome him in the Cree language 
and say Ta Waw to the legislature of the province of 
Saskatchewan, Haw egosi. 



April 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the Assembly, I’d like to introduce 
somebody in the east gallery that’s very near and dear to me. 
It’s the hard-working person of the Huyghebaert family that 
keeps the potholes filled on the way into our little ranch. Would 
you please welcome my wife Phyllis. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 
to introduce to you, and to this House through you, 55 students 
from Centennial School in the northwest corner of the city, part 
of my constituency, and their teachers Jim Harrop and Jean 
Flett. 
 
I would like all of you to join in welcoming these students here 
and I’m looking forward to meeting with them later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west 
gallery I note that we have a visitor today, Jeremy Morgan, 
formally of Saskatoon Wanuskewin Heritage Centre, now head 
of the Arts Board in Regina. So he’ll be one of these 
ambassadors of all the good things happening in both cities. 
And I ask everyone to join me in welcoming Mr. Morgan to the 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I would also to the rest of the Assembly like to 
welcome Mr. Jeremy Morgan, the executive director of the Arts 
Board here to the Assembly today. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity of meeting him a couple of times and 
have found the information that we’ve shared very useful in my 
benefits. So I’d like to welcome him here and hope he enjoys 
the proceedings today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to ask the members to welcome the person sitting in the 
gallery, Elizabeth Smith, who is our financial officer at the 
Department of Justice and is taking a well-earned six-month 
leave of absence. She says she’s going to play and work. I don’t 
know whether this is play or work. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we don’t often see the dedication of public 
servants coming to this Chamber on their day off. But I’d like 
you all to join me in welcoming Elizabeth. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

More Doctors for Rural Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Even more 
good news for Saskatchewan. 

Saskatchewan’s health care system is thriving. Three new 
doctors have made their way to rural Saskatchewan. A 
27-year-old doctor has made Unity his new home. And right 
next door a husband and wife doctor team has decided to plant 
their roots in Macklin. The addition of these new doctors to 
both Macklin and Unity will have a positive impact on each 
community respectively, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are new doctors settling in all over rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, and this government is committed to maintaining 
that trend. Our health care system is strengthening as I speak. 
We have the best health care system, Mr. Speaker, and we plan 
on keeping it that way. 
 
We are attracting young, educated people to this province, 
making a solid foundation to build our future. And that future 
will be a prosperous one, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon’s Open Door Society 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of all 
members of the Assembly, I would like to extend sincere 
apologies for remarks made yesterday in the House by the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) member from Regina Dewdney. 
 
Insensitive comments regarding an individual’s lack of 
education or inability to read are disrespectful, unprofessional, 
and showed deplorable lack of regard for rules of this 
Assembly. 
 
(13:45) 
 
The members of this House recognize the hard work of 
Saskatoon’s Open Door Society. As citizens of this province 
who welcome people from all walks of life, we are also aware 
that there are those who may have difficulty in reading and 
writing and know English only as a second language. 
 
Respecting individuals’ differences makes each of us unique. 
Learning to communicate, no matter what the method, is what 
allows us to become aware of others’ cultures, traditions, and 
ways of life. In doing so, we celebrate our uniqueness. 
 
While we cannot take back the remarks from yesterday, we can 
offer the humblest of apologies for his lack of sensitivity. We 
wish Saskatoon’s Open Door Society continued success in its 
operations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Arts and Culture 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
somewhat overlooked in recent coverage of the provincial 
budget is this government’s commitment to Saskatchewan arts 
and culture, which is substantial and unequivocal. 
 
As the Finance minister said, the role of our arts and cultural 
communities is a critical part of our vision of the future, just as 
it was in 1948, Mr. Speaker, when the first provincial Arts 
Board was created here in Saskatchewan. 



358 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, a budget is more than an accounting of revenues 
and expenditures; it is also a tally sheet of society’s character. 
And this budget recognizes the richness and diversity of the 
Saskatchewan spirit as it is expressed by our artists, writers, 
actors, musicians, painters, moviemakers, and makers of crafts 
— richness and diversity indeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are substantial funds for the arts stabilization 
program, for a cultural industries development strategy, for the 
Saskatchewan Recording Industries Association, and for the 
Saskatchewan Craft Council, as well as ongoing support for the 
Arts Board and SaskFILM. 
 
This is good news for the arts, Mr. Speaker, and another way 
the government is connecting to the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Skills Canada Competition 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
“Skills Work” — this was the motto of this year’s annual Skills 
Canada competition. The event took place last Thursday, 
Friday, and Saturday in Moose Jaw. 
 
Over 40 young people represented Nipawin’s L.P. Miller 
School. Trades, technology, and careers were explored in an 
Olympic-style event where students competed for medals under 
the watchful eye of many of industry’s leaders. They were 
judged on many criteria including creativity, accuracy, and 
skill. Five major areas that include about 30 skills were tested. 
 
Nipawin and area students entered into 22 events, Mr. Speaker, 
and came home with 28 medals. It is probable that Nipawin was 
the best-represented town per capita of any place in Canada. 
Nipawin’s skills coordinator, Mr. Tim Paetaku, was selected as 
the Skills Canada Saskatchewan secondary teacher of the year 
for his efforts in establishing and promoting Skills Canada. 
 
Mr. Paetaku acknowledged the support of school board and an 
enthusiastic community as a major factor in L.P. Miller 
students’ successes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of the House join 
with me in congratulating the students of L.P. Miller School 
and Mr. Paetaku for all of these tremendous accomplishments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Science Centre Climate Change Workshop 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
inform the House that over the next two weeks, SaskPower will 
be sponsoring more than 300 students from elementary schools 
in rural Saskatchewan to visit Regina and participate in 
Saskatchewan Science Centre’s Hot Science: Climate Change 
workshop. 
 
These students will be introduced to the science of global 
climate change and learn about the issues and solutions relevant 
to individuals. We all know that climate change is a pressing 
issue and raising awareness about ways to combat that and that 
individuals can reduce greenhouse gas emissions will play a 

major role in meeting this challenge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you and other members of this Assembly to 
join me in welcoming these students, their parents and teachers, 
as they visit Regina and their Science Centre. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Wins in Amateur Sports 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to commemorate 
the efforts of a number of amateur sports enthusiasts and teams 
in Swift Current over the past couple of weeks. This past 
weekend, Mr. Speaker, the Swift Current Pee Wee Mustangs 
won the Provincial A Tier II Championship. The Pee Wee 
Mustangs beat Melfort in the final, Mr. Speaker. The Mustang’s 
coaching staff includes Coach Larry Johnson, the assistant 
coach is Lance Vachon, the manager is Cindy Slusar, and the 
trainer is Mark Marshall. 
 
On the weekend of the 17 and 18, Mr. Speaker, the Swift 
Current Under-12 Girls Indoor Soccer Team captured the 
provincial championship. That’s the first Swift Current soccer 
team ever to win a provincial title. Congratulations to the team 
and to the coaching staff, Dale Perry and Anita Evans for their 
efforts in that regard. 
 
And that same weekend, Mr. Speaker, in Swift Current, the 
Swift Current Bantam Tier II . . . (inaudible) . . . Eliminators 
won the provincial championship on March 17 and 18 in Swift 
Current. They defeated Kindersley in the final, Mr. Speaker. 
And a note, in the game that won the tournament for them, one 
of the goal scorers was Bobbi-Jo Slusar, Mr. Speaker, and I 
mention her not because Bobbi-Jo is a girl but because she’s a 
great hockey player. 
 
Congratulations to the players and the teams in Swift Current, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Makwa and Makwa River Lions Clubs Donation 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Minister, the spirit of this province 
is alive in rural Saskatchewan. The Makwa Lions Club and the 
Makwa River Lions Club received recognition for their 
generous donation of vehicles to the Canadian National Institute 
for the Blind on March 19 of this year. 
 
The Makwa Lions clubs have been helping the blind for as long 
as they have been in existence. Over the past 10 years, these 
clubs have been able to donate two Cavaliers, and a 2000 
Caravan to the CNIB (Canadian National Institute for the 
Blind). This is an amazing feat, Mr. Speaker, as the combined 
membership of these two clubs is only 45 people. 
 
Out of the five vehicles in use by the Saskatoon CNIB office, 
three have been donated by the Makwa Lions clubs. The 
members of these clubs are hard-working and generous people 
in their community, Mr. Speaker. They truly demonstrate the 
spirit of Saskatchewan. 



April 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 359 

 

I too would like to recognize the efforts of these fine 
Saskatchewan citizens and commend them on a job well done. 
It is people like this that make Saskatchewan the best province 
in Canada to live, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tribute to Volunteer Firefighters 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to pay tribute to some very brave men and women whom we 
often neglect to think about except in emergency situations. I’m 
talking about the thousands of volunteer firefighters that look 
after hundreds of volunteer fire departments throughout the 
province. 
 
This past weekend, Mr. Speaker, many of these men and 
women gathered in Balgonie, a town in my constituency of 
Regina Wascana Plains, to attend a Volunteer Firefighters 
Association spring training symposium. The event drew close to 
150 delegates and gave the volunteers a chance to practise their 
rescue and firefighting skills and provide them with an 
opportunity to share and knowledge and practices with each 
other. Courses included search and rescue, wild-land 
firefighting, vehicle firefighting, and fire investigations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, volunteers are the foundation for many services 
we know and trust here in Saskatchewan. Volunteer firefighters 
deserve that much more credit for their efforts as they risk their 
lives to save others on every call. 
 
I would like other members of the Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating Saskatchewan’s volunteer firefighters in all of 
their efforts. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Funding for Municipal Governments 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question again is for the Minister of Municipal Government. 
 
On Monday the Saskatchewan Party moved a motion that 
would stop the NDP from forcing property tax increases on 
Saskatchewan families. Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we asked the 
Minister of Municipal Government to support our motion, but 
the minister refused to listen. He refused to listen to us and he is 
refusing to listen to municipal taxpayers across Saskatchewan. 
Instead he chose to support the NDP’s plans to grow the size of 
government and ignore municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has had 24 hours to think about it. 
Will he stand in this House today and support the Saskatchewan 
Party motion to hold the line on property tax increases, or does 
he continue to support the NDP’s plans for bigger government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I am 

appalled, as I’m sure all the people of this province are. The 
budget that was presented that will help communities 
throughout this province — throughout this great province of 
ours. Saskatchewan’s a great place to live. 
 
I’m appalled that the members opposite would ask us to not 
have 104 more people looking after forest firefighting, 
monitoring forestry activity and testing water initiatives. I’m 
amazed that they would not allow us to supply 88 full-time 
people to help work and rebuild our highways, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Municipal Government may be buying the NDP’s 
song and dance but municipalities aren’t being fooled. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has been getting letters from all over 
Saskatchewan supporting our proposal to increase municipal 
revenue-sharing grants instead of increasing the size of the NDP 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I quote the city of North Battleford: 
 

. . . supports our amendment and is hopeful that the 
government will accept the proposal. 
 

The town of Langenburg, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . unanimously supports the Sask Party proposal for a $30 
million increase in municipal revenue sharing. 
 

The village of Aneroid, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We are definitely in support of your amendment calling on 
the government to provide another additional 30 million in 
revenue sharing this year. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what the municipalities are saying. They 
support our proposal. Will the minister table all the letters he 
has received in support of the NDP’s plan to ignore 
municipalities and grow the size of government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, once again, what do we have 
in communities that support local communities? We have 
services that are provided by working people, Mr. Speaker. Are 
the members opposite suggesting that we cut 60 people out of 
Social Services who help in the development of young people, 
who look after people that are in trouble, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ninety-one and a half persons in the justice system . . . They 
keep calling for additional help in law enforcement and in the 
areas of justice. This is happening, Mr. Speaker, under one of 
the best budgets that they’ve ever seen. That’s why they find it 
difficult to accept the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 



360 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2001 

 

minister isn’t going to table any letters from municipalities 
supporting his government’s plans because he doesn’t have any. 
 
Municipalities have been paying their fair share of the 
responsibility, keeping the provincial budget balanced. Now the 
municipalities are saying it’s time to share the load. 
 
I quote — the town of Ituna, the minister . . . one of the 
minister’s towns: 
 

Without an increase in revenue sharing, our municipality is 
faced with no choice but to increase property taxes. 

 
The town of Craik: 
 

Municipalities tightened their belts to help balance the 
budget, now it’s time to share the wealth. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is tabling letters from 44 
municipalities supporting our proposal to increase revenue 
sharing, instead of increasing the size of government. 
 
Will the minister table all the letters he has received that is in 
support of his NDP government’s plan to increase the size the 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I’m amazed that the 
members opposite don’t recognize the positive impact that has 
been . . . that we have had on rural Saskatchewan as far as 
provincial disaster assistance programs. 
 
Our 911 programs, the Centenary Fund programs, and we have 
numerous of those that invest money in our small communities 
throughout this great province of ours, Mr. Speaker. The 
provincial disaster assistance program has been increased 
substantially, Sask 911 operation — this is all money that goes 
into our rural areas, into our rural communities to continue to 
make this a great place to live, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was in Humboldt to celebrate their becoming a city last 
Sunday and do you know what, Mr. Speaker? Everybody was 
upbeat, their spirits were up, and they were very happy to be 
living in this province, because they believe in themselves, they 
believe in this province, and they believe in their communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, Mr. 
Speaker, these municipalities are saying you haven’t been there 
to help them. That government has downloaded for 10 years 
and hasn’t been helping them. 
 
Maybe the minister, Mr. Speaker, has to hear more from the 
municipalities. The village of Broderick: 
 

We hope that you are successful in persuading the 
government to amend their 2001 provincial budget, instead 
of adding 570 new government jobs. 

 
RM of Reford: 
 

We feel we do not need another government department to 
the tune of $30 million. We need less bureaucracy, less 
taxes. 

 
RM of Saltcoats: 
 

We support the Sask Party’s proposed amendment to the 
2001 budget calling on the province to provide an 
additional 30 million in municipal revenue sharing. 

 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we need is less government and lower taxes. 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Municipal Government listen 
to the overwhelming voice of municipalities in Saskatchewan 
and support our party’s motion to increase revenue-sharing 
grants instead of increasing the size of that coalition 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the question I would ask the 
members opposite is who would they attack? Who would they 
go after in the public service? Who would they go after to 
eliminate the jobs that are necessary to maintain our 
communities, the health in our communities, our health care 
system . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, please allow me to quote 
from a recent clipping here — April 4, 2001 — from a 
well-known, respected columnist in this city: 
 

From a political standpoint, (and I quote) it . . . sound(s) 
good for the Opposition to say . . . the government could 
have given $30 million to property owners . . . (if it were) 
not hiring the extra 570 bureaucrats outlined in the budget. 
 
. . . (however that argument) is both reckless and borderline 
irresponsible. 
 
To begin with . . . to imply that these new . . . hirings are 
nothing but pencil-pushing bureaucrats . . . is unfair . . . we 
are talking about . . . 86 forest firefighters; 86 highways 
workers who are filling potholes; 46 more jail guards . . . 
(Mr. Speaker). 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liberal Position on the Budget 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also for the 
Minister of Municipal Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is the minister ignoring municipal 
government, he’s ignoring his own election platform. All week 
the minister has been defending the NDP’s decision to expand 
the civil service. But that’s not what his party and his leader 
were saying back in 1999. The Liberal leader said his party 
would save $24.7 million by eliminating 300 government jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happened? What happened to that promise? 



April 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 361 

 

Why are the Liberals defending 570 new civil servants when 
they promised to cut 300 government jobs in the 1999 election 
campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, just on that note — 
they’re asking those questions — I wonder just out of curiosity 
how many employees were added to the Saskatchewan Party 
caucus office in the last year and a half since the election? They 
don’t complain or say anything about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And while we’re talking about the Liberal Party platform, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to just reiterate, in 1999 our platform said 
highways were a major priority. The coalition government this 
year . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would like to hear the 
response. Order. The minister will continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — This year, Mr. Speaker, the coalition 
government is making a $950 million investment in highways 
over the next three years — to speed up the twinning of the 
western portion of the Trans Canada, upgrade 800 kilometres of 
thin membrane highways. It takes people to do that work, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s what those people are going to do to make 
our communities a better place to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to quote directly from the 1999 Liberal election platform. It 
says: 
 

A Liberal government will save 24.7 million dollars by 
eliminating unnecessary middle management jobs, said the 
Leader of the Liberal Party. And this means we will 
eliminate about 300 jobs out of a total of almost 10,000. 
 

That’s the facts that the minister talks about, Mr. Speaker. The 
Liberals, you know, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals don’t even have 
to go that far. They could save $30 million by just holding the 
line on the size of government and then they could use that 
money to hold that money on property taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our amendment is more in line with the Liberal 
platform than anything the Liberals have done in the past two 
years. 
 
My question is for the Minister of Education, the Leader of the 
Liberal Party: will you support the Saskatchewan Party 
amendment to hold the line on property taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly myself and the Minister of Municipal Affairs will not 
be supporting the Sask Party amendment. 
 
And certainly the budget program that we have put forward has 
been well received by the people of Saskatchewan. The 
highway spending has been well received. The new spending in 
education has been well received. The new spending in 

technology has been well received. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a good budget for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And when we talk about platforms, I would like 
to remind the members opposite about their platform for 20 per 
cent reductions in personal income tax, and more for highways 
and education and health care and social services — frozen. 
And off-loading of property taxes to the tune of $60 million by 
their platform, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s amazing how 
quickly the Liberals have abandoned their own platform and 
have joined the NDP platform. They were going to eliminate 
300 government jobs. The Liberal leader, I believe he called 
them hacks and flacks. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they were going to 
eliminate 61 jobs in the Premier’s office. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, you know what’s happened since 
1998 in the Premier’s office? We see an additional 11 people 
working in Executive Council. That member said he was going 
to cut all the hacks and flacks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people have been waiting for almost two years to 
finally see the Liberals make their mark on this government. 
This Friday it could be the day, Mr. Speaker. The Liberals will 
have the opportunity to finally stand up to the NDP and hold the 
line on the size of government. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is: will they vote to support our 
amendment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — As stated previously, Mr. Speaker, 
we will not be supporting the amendment by the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
And I’ll remind the members opposite that as recently as a few 
days ago the member from Kelvington-Wadena stated about her 
Liberal philosophy and what she was doing within the 
Saskatchewan Party. Well I can tell you for a fact, Mr. Speaker, 
that not one single Liberal policy has been implemented from 
that side, but from this side we’ve had significant 
improvements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to just provide one example, to provide just one 
example, when Mrs. Joan Kortje came in here with a 
wheelbarrow full of petitions and I accompanied her into this 
rotunda, what we talked about then was speeding up, 
accelerating the twinning of the Trans-Canada west. This was a 
promise that I made to Mrs. Kortje at that time, and we have 
met that promise in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals have totally 
abandoned their own policy, and they’re only listening to the 
NDP. They’re not listening to municipalities. They’re not 
listening to taxpayers. They’re not even listening to their own 
party. The only people they listen to are their political masters, 
the NDP. 



362 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2001 

 

No wonder they’re in single digits in the public support polls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberals finally have the chance to show some 
independence. They can stand up to the NDP by providing fair 
funding to municipalities to hold the line on property taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask the question again. Will the ministers who 
currently are in the Liberal Party, will they support the 
amendment on Friday of this week? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, as stated earlier, we 
will not be supporting the amendment and the reasons are 
obvious. We have had full participation in developing this 
budget. The coalition government is a government of 
co-operation, of collaboration, and it’s something that they 
would not understand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we brought forward our budget and we talked about 
the increased spending in Education, when we talked about the 
increased spending in Highways, when we talked about, when 
we talked about a first-strike support with regard to forest fires, 
when we talked about the improvements in corrections workers 
in Social Services, all of these things are very much, are very 
much a positive for the people of Saskatchewan. And we will 
be supporting the budget of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are for 
the Minister of Labour. Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked the 
minister why four management employees at the workmen’s 
compensation board were fired and if they were paid severance. 
The minister wouldn’t answer the questions in the House. And 
outside the House the minister told the media he was not 
nominally responsible for the board. Then when he couldn’t 
take the heat, he ran away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: is he or is he not the minister 
responsible for workmen’s compensation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — I thank the member for that question. And 
let me explain the difference between a government line 
organization, a line department, and the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. 
 
In a line department taxpayers clearly fund and ministers clearly 
have a line responsibility. With the respect to the arm’s-length 
Workers’ Compensation Board, Mr. Speaker, the situation there 
is that employers fund the Workers’ Compensation Board 
totally, and the Workers’ Compensation Board does require 
legislation for which the Crown has a minister responsible for 
that legislation. 
 
As such, my responsibility is to make sure that there are three 
members of the board and that the Workers’ Compensation 
Board is functioning effectively and within the law. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, last year during budget estimates 
the Minister of Labour answered questions about WCB 
(Workers’ Compensation Board) and WCB officials joined the 
minister in this House to help answer the questions. 
 
The new Minister of Labour signed the order in council 
granting Stan Cameron $150,000 in severance. The minister 
appoints the board of workmen’s compensation. This is much 
more than a nominal responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On March 21, the minister received a memo from Peter 
Federko, which states: the WCB released without cause four 
out-of-scope employees on January 31; these were all top 
management positions such as the manager of financial 
resources, and benefits and compensation administrator. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, how is it that four top officials 
from WCB can be fired without cause? Why were these people 
fired? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can confirm that 
there were . . . in fact that letter of March 21, which I shared 
with media yesterday, that I received that letter March 21. 
 
I want to, with respect to the four individuals, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to say that they were released from the employment of the 
Workers’ Compensation Board without cause. As such, the 
terms of their release remain covered under a confidentiality 
clause which is common business practice; it is very common 
under British common law. 
 
This is a normal practice and because of the confidentiality 
clause, Mr. Speaker, between the Workers’ Compensation 
Board and the four individuals, I cannot divulge the terms of 
their severance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I have to wonder if the minister 
has a clue about what is going on over at workmen’s 
compensation board. 
 
The minister signed an order in council granting the 
ex-chairman a huge severance package. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to know if the minister’s also attending the dinner being 
held in Mr. Cameron’s honour. 
 
We heard that next Monday both Workers’ Compensation 
Board offices in Regina and Saskatoon will be shutdown for 
several hours during the business day. The workers from the 
office in Saskatoon will be bused to Regina and everyone will 
enjoy a dinner at the Delta Hotel for Mr. Cameron. We assume 
this will be paid by the WCB. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the minister aware of this dinner? Can he 
explain why it is being held and who will be paying for it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 363 

 

Hon. Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, isn’t it interesting, the 
members opposite are going to attack a nearly eight-year 
veteran, the Chair of the Workers’ Compensation Board, who 
served that board honourably for nearly eight years. 
 
Mr. Cameron left the Workers’ Compensation Board due to ill 
health, Mr. Speaker — ill health — and the best that those 
members can come up with is a scurrilous attack on his person. 
I find that just awful, awful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Cameron . . . I’ll deal with Mr. Cameron in 
terms that the members opposite might understand. Mr. 
Cameron has an illness that precludes him from returning to his 
full-time work as Chair of the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
What we did, Mr. Speaker, is found a way to allow Mr. 
Cameron to retire and for us to appoint a new Chair which we 
will be doing in due course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, it makes you wonder if the 
ex-chairman of the workman’s compensation board left for 
health reasons, why did he receive the severance pay, why is he 
not receiving workman’s comp? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Workers’ Compensation Board is funded by 
the businesses of Saskatchewan. They have questions about 
why four top management officials were fired and the chairman 
left, and no one is giving them any answers. 
 
Now they are hearing that WCB is throwing a big farewell 
dinner for Mr. Cameron. Mr. Speaker, who is minding the 
shop? The minister can run but he can’t hide. Are the premiums 
businesses are paying to WCB to operate being used to throw 
this farewell party? 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is WCB throwing a farewell 
dinner for ex-chairman who was paid a severance package of 
$150,000? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, Stan Cameron, who became 
ill and unable to proceed as chairman of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board, could have received three years of 
long-term disability pay and that would have been more 
expensive than the retirement allowance that the Workers’ 
Compensation Board arranged with Mr. Cameron. That’s point 
one. 
 
Point two, had Mr. Cameron been off on long-term disability, it 
would have been very difficult to appoint a new chairperson of 
the Workers’ Compensation Board. I hear the members 
opposite say, oh. They would have us paying more money. 
Under any other scenario, Mr. Speaker, they would have a more 
expensive separation for the former Chair. 
 
This is their attack on a gentleman who cannot complete the 
terms of his contract because of illness, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I wonder, while we’re at it: what would the cost be if all of the 
civil servants that you members would have . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I would like to, before we go on 
to the next item, thank all members for their valiant attempts at 
using the proper procedure and addressing their remarks 
through the Chair. But I would ask the minister in his last 
remark to check his statement because I think he failed to do so 
and remind him to do that next time. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 208 — The Saskatchewan Property Rights Act 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading the Bill No. 208. The Saskatchewan Property Rights 
Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 8, The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2001 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 9, 
The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2001 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
stand up on behalf of the government and table responses to 
questions no. 9 and 10. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 9 is tabled. The 
answer to question 10 is tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



364 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2001 

 

as I was discussing yesterday about the rear-view mirror view 
of this particular budget, Mr. Speaker, while the minister may 
have entitled it Connecting to the Future, it is the future that he 
sees in his rear-view mirror. 
 
There’s a lot of things, Mr. Speaker, similar between this 
budget and the budget of the government from the 1980s. In 
both of these cases, Mr. Speaker, they’re unsustainable. 
 
In this particular case we have a government that is spending 
more money than it’s bringing in. Under everybody’s 
terminology, Mr. Speaker, to do that is to run a deficit. Now 
that doesn’t mean, Mr. Speaker, that there is going to incur 
more debt but that simply in this fiscal year the government is 
spending more than they are collecting. And that, Mr. Speaker, 
means that you cannot carry that forward for very many years 
until your savings account is used up. 
 
Well what we have in this province, Mr. Speaker, for a savings 
account is now called the FSS, or as we like to term it, Mr. 
Speaker, the fancy slush fund. 
 
Now the minister opposite says that he can’t possibly utilize 
these funds to any great extent, that he can’t draw these funds 
down because the province has to have in its hand a rainy day 
fund for emergencies. 
 
Well, you know, I kind of wonder, Mr. Speaker, what the 
minister means by the rainy day fund for emergencies. What 
does he constitute as an emergency? 
 
Is too high a burden on property taxes that people are starting to 
not pay their property taxes because they can’t afford it, too 
high of a burden? It would seem that the minister opposite 
doesn’t believe that is a cause for a rainy day. 
 
It doesn’t seem, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Finance 
believes taxes that are completely out of line in the areas of 
income taxes or corporate taxes, in comparison to our 
neighbours, is any cause for concern or crisis or for utilization 
of the rainy day fund. 
 
It seems, Mr. Speaker, that the minister doesn’t believe having 
the longest waiting lists in health care to be a cause for concern, 
that that would constitute a rainy day fund . . . the need to 
utilize the rainy day fund. 
 
So what does constitute a rainy day for the Minister of Finance? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I went looking in historical documents to 
see what this minister might think of as a rainy day. So I looked 
back, Mr. Speaker, into two documents. One of them is called 
Moving Forward Together, the Saskatchewan Estimates for 
1999-2000 or the budget, Mr. Speaker, for the year 1999-2000. 
 
At this particular point in time, the fancy slush fund, Mr. 
Speaker, had a different name. It was called the Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority. And at that particular point in 
time, in 1999, in the budget, the minister pulled $485 million 
out of the Liquor and Gaming Authority, Mr. Speaker, a 
substantial withdrawal from that fund, in comparison to the 232, 
$39 million that he’s pulling out of the fancy slush fund this 
year. 

What kind of an impact did that have on that particular fund? 
The minister is saying that he can’t possibly pull out any more 
money out of that fancy slush fund; that he has to keep it for the 
rainy day. 
 
Well if we look at A Plan for Growth and Opportunity, 
Saskatchewan Estimates, 2000-2001, Mr. Speaker, the budget 
document, which shows the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority retained earnings this time. 
 
The other book didn’t list retained earnings but this one does. 
The estimate for 1999-2000 was to draw that fund down to 
$190 million. This year the minister is saying he can’t possibly 
go lower than $500 million in the fancy slush fund, but in 1999 
in the budget process he was prepared to go down to $190 
million. 
 
And then in the forecast, Mr. Speaker, the forecast for 
1999-2000 it lists no money in retained earnings for the Liquor 
and Gaming Authority. So I have to ask: if you’re prepared to 
draw down that entire fund, which is suppose to be for a rainy 
day, what was the rainy day? 
 
Mr. Speaker, 1999 was an election year. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
what this government thinks of as a rainy day. Whenever 
there’s an opportunity for the public to review the performance 
of the government opposite, indeed, Mr. Speaker, that is a black 
day for the government. That is a true rainy day. And for that 
reason, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance had no problem 
spending his entire rainy day fund. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the same thing is true today. It’s not because 
the Minister of Finance wants to be fiscally responsible. It’s not 
because there is a need to have those monies available for a 
rainy day. Mr. Speaker, the reason is, is that minister wants to 
retain those funds for the election year. That’s the only reason, 
Mr. Speaker, that those monies are not being allowed to be 
utilized. Not to increase the size of government, Mr. Speaker, 
but to create an economic climate in this province that will 
allow this province to grow. 
 
When we compare ourselves to our neighbouring jurisdictions, 
every year, Mr. Speaker, they have job growth; we do not. They 
have more people moving into those provinces; we have people 
leaving. It’s because of the governing philosophy of the 
members opposite that only, Mr. Speaker, only government can 
do it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, around the world it’s being proven that 
government is more of an impediment than they are a developer 
of business. The best thing government can do is step aside and 
let people develop the economy and grow. And government’s 
role is to be a regulator, not an owner, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Choices that this government could have made, Mr. Speaker — 
let’s take highways. Mr. Speaker, they’re proposing to hire 72 
new employees. While there certainly is a need, Mr. Speaker, 
for work in the highways area, everyone in this province knows 
and understands the critical mess that this government has 
created in highways over the last 10 years. Critical mess, Mr. 
Speaker. 



April 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 365 

 

Citizens are going out and fixing their own highways because 
this government has been ignoring them too long. But what’s 
the solution this government proposes? To hire 72 new 
employees. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, hopefully the employees that are already 
there in Highways are working. Hopefully those people have 
the equipment necessary to carry out their duties. If that’s the 
case, Mr. Speaker, then we’re going to have to go out and buy 
more equipment to provide equipment for the 72 new 
employees that they’re proposing to hire. How much money, 
Mr. Speaker, once you pay the salaries, once you buy all this 
new fancy equipment, is actually going to be left to put asphalt 
on a highway? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it looks to me like there’s not going to be a lot of 
extra money left to do that with. It’s all going to go into 
employees and equipment and not on to building highways, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In hiring 72 new employees, if you drive around the province, 
Mr. Speaker, in the wintertime our highways are getting cleaned 
off. You know, they’re doing a good job, Mr. Speaker; they’re 
clearing the highways off. 
 
I know that when Andy Renaud was the minister of Highways 
at one time, he was going to slow down the clearing of snow on 
the highways in the wintertime. But the first storm that hit, 
everybody complained bitterly to the minister and he changed 
his mind and carried out snow cleaning both during the week 
between 8 o’clock in the morning and 5, after 5 o’clock, and on 
weekends, after people complained. He wasn’t going to do that 
initially, but after he received a lot of complaints, Mr. Speaker, 
he did. 
 
So what are you going to do with those 72 new employees in 
the wintertime, Mr. Speaker? The roads are already being 
cleared of snow; they’re not going to be laying asphalt in the 
wintertime. So are they just going to sit there? What are they 
going to do? 
 
Mr. Speaker, a much better, much better thing to do would be to 
take that money going to hire new employees, going to buy a 
new shovel for them, and hire the contractors that are already 
available in this province, put them to work all summer long, 
building highways, rather than simply new shovels . . . buying 
new shovels for them, Mr. Speaker, and we would get a lot 
more work done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is more, as I said earlier, more 
about bigger government and less about providing services to 
the people. The Minister of Finance was very exuberant on the 
budget day, Mr. Speaker, in talking about health and education 
and highways. But, Mr. Speaker, the minister has 
turn-of-the-century health care in mind. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
turn of the 19th century that we’re having in this province. 
 
A large areas of this province have the same health care they 
did when the pioneers arrived, Mr. Speaker — no health care. 
And we saw this same sort of thing happening with some of the 
other areas that the minister was bragging about. 
 
He’s standing up there, Mr. Speaker, and saying that’s progress. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems the minister’s idea of progress is a 
two-storey outhouse. I’ll give you an example, Mr. Speaker, 
he’s talking about highways and saying, we are going to take 
alongside our thin-membrane highways, we’re going to build a 
good gravel road. So we’re going to have twin highways, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan style — thin-membrane for some 
people and gravel for the rest. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is simply rear-view mirror thinking. 
That’s going back to the last century, Mr. Speaker. It has 
nothing to do with the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as was discussed today in question period, the 
government has a choice that they can make. They can continue 
down their road of bigger government, spending dollars in that 
area, or they have a choice. They can help out municipalities, 
both rural and urban, in controlling their property tax increases. 
 
If the government carries on in the direction they are seem to be 
bent on going, then the net result will be for most municipalities 
— city, town, small cities, rural — is the property taxes are 
going to have to go up. Because the government’s increasing all 
of their other costs. 
 
When you drive the city bus down the street, the fuel taxes are 
going up. The cost of fuel has gone up — not necessarily the 
tax — the cost of fuel has gone up. Your cost of natural gas has 
gone up; your cost of telephone is going up; your cost of power 
is going up. There’s only one area, Mr. Speaker, that those costs 
are recovered from and that’s the property tax base. All of those 
things are going back to the property taxpayer. 
 
And it doesn’t matter, Mr. Speaker, whether you live in 
Elphinstone, whether you live in Wascana Plains, whether you 
live down at Coronach, or you live at Pinehouse, your taxes are 
going to go up as a result of this government’s decision. 
 
A wrong decision, Mr. Speaker, but the opportunity is not too 
late to change that. The government, or government members 
individually, could vote to support the amendment being put 
forward by the Saskatchewan Party to roll that back, Mr. 
Speaker, and to provide the funding to municipalities rather 
than simply growing government. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, has also basically forgotten 
agriculture. They signed on to a farm program that they refused 
to participate in the development of; simply signing on to an 
extremely flawed program that was in place before because they 
wouldn’t even sit to negotiate with it, that one. We have been 
waiting over eight long years, Mr. Speaker, since this 
government destroyed the last long-term safety net program we 
had in this province. They keep promising it, Mr. Speaker, but 
every year they break that promise to agriculture and they fail to 
develop a long-term safety net program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of my other colleagues wish to have a 
chance to talk about their critic areas and their constituencies. 
Clearly this budget is headed in the wrong direction, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s got nothing to do with the future. It’s all about 
going back to Allan Blakeney’s 1970s, Mr. Speaker. The future 
in their rear-view mirror is not good enough for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



366 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment and not the 
budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. What an 
unexpected and pleasant opportunity to address you and the rest 
of the House today about this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is full of good news in many things 
that I want to talk about today. In particular focusing in on the 
city of Regina, some of the good news for my constituents, 
some of the good news for my university — the University of 
Regina — and some very positive things that we are looking at 
in terms of the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that impresses me most about 
this budget is how it builds on the many successes that we have 
seen over the past several years and much of the hard work that 
has been done by Saskatchewan people to turn around the 
finances of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can take a look at this budget as making a 
significant investment in our economy, a significant investment 
in our people, and a significant investment in Saskatchewan. 
 
I think one of the things that’s most interesting about this 
budget is the fact that it receives support both from business and 
from labour. I’m not sure what exactly it takes in terms of, in 
terms of an ability to get both business and labour on side but 
we have been able to see great success that way. 
 
I was very pleased to read the comments by Marilyn Braun of 
the Federation of Independent Business saying that what this 
budget will do — and I’m quoting Ms. Braun saying: 
 

What this will do is encourage small firms to grow and 
expand. And that is something we’ve recommended to the 
government and it’s apparent that they were listening. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard this time and again from people 
over the last week, or at least over the weekend. And I’ve had 
the opportunity to meet with my constituents to hear them say 
that people think the government heard them. They believe that 
we listened to what they were saying. 
 
In my riding I can tell you the number one issue people mention 
to me time and again are taxes. Mr. Speaker, the Finance 
minister said at the very start of his budget speech that this 
budget continues with the massive record tax cuts that we 
introduced last year. That’s something we have to be very proud 
of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We were able to proceed in this direction, able to proceed in 
this direction, Mr. Speaker, because of the wise financial 
management and the decisions of those ministers previously 
who had introduced budgets 
 
And I want to recognize the former minister from . . . of 
Finance from Saskatoon Idylwyld, who of course has done a 
great deal in terms of making sure that the work . . . that this 
budget was able to proceed both in terms of the tax cuts and in 
terms of the reinvestment in public services — both in terms of 

the University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan in 
Saskatoon. And I think it’s a testament to that. 
 
I was particularly pleased also, Mr. Speaker, to see my former 
boss, Ed Tchorzewski here on budget day. And I know that he 
had a very big smile on his face at the end of this budget, 
knowing that a lot of the work that they put in, in the early part 
of the ’90s through some very, very difficult days of having to 
get the books balanced, having to get the budget spending under 
control, that those days had begun to pay off. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about education, Mr. Speaker, in terms 
of the support that we have been able to see for our universities. 
It is very important I think that we take a look at the fact that 
today we are spending nearly twice as much on education as we 
are on interest payments. That’s a very significant, that’s a very 
significant investment. And I think it does say that the time that 
we have spent reducing debt, the time that we have spent in 
terms of reducing income taxes, the time that we have spent 
investing in public services is paying off, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
something that I am very proud of. 
 
I don’t think it’s any secret to members in this Assembly that 
my interest is primarily on the business side of this budget; that 
I have a great interest in seeing us reduce income taxes to 
encourage both investment in public services, but also 
investment by the private sector in our economy. And this 
budget does that. 
 
The continued cuts in income taxes, the fact that we are able to 
see, the fact that we are able to see that Saskatchewan receives 
the smallest amount of its budget from income taxes of all the 
provinces in the nation, I think speaks very well to how we have 
been able to move forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is no small measure that we have been reading 
in the newspapers over the past several days . . . And I have a 
clipping here, in front of me, from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix 
of April 3. The headline reads “High marks for Saskatchewan 
budget.” Sub-headline is “Prudence earns praise from the TD, 
Scotiabank.” 
 
Now these are not exactly the reddest of organizations. These 
are not exactly the group that you would think would 
immediately leap to the defence of an NDP government. But 
both of these banks — and in fact today, the Royal Bank — 
speaks highly of the work that has been done in terms of the 
investment of this budget and how it will allow our economy to 
grow. 
 
The Royal Bank was said to be bullish in terms of our approach 
today. They talk about the fact that we are looking at more than 
3 per cent growth in our economy, growth in a great number of 
sectors not the least of which is oil and gas sector, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’m particularly pleased to see some of the movement 
forward in terms of our oil and gas strategy. 
 
I talked to some during my response to the Throne Speech 
about how I was pleased that we were investing not simply in 
the oil and gas sector through a royalty strategy and a fair 
taxation strategy, but that we were also investing in things like 
the Petroleum Technology Research Centre at the University of 
Regina, which will allow these companies to continue to partner 



April 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 367 

 

with government in terms of moving forward in economic 
development. 
 
I have talked to some about the investments that they are 
making in terms of energy conservation; and we look at the CO2 
project in Weyburn, which I think members on both sides of 
this House are particularly proud of. 
 
These are areas, Mr. Speaker, that we are seeing that this 
government is helping business move forward. We are able to 
see these things progress and our budget moves forward on a lot 
of these. 
 
(14:45) 
 
One of the things, Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk a little about 
today, because it has been certainly dominating the discussion 
in question period, are some of the investments that we are 
making back into public services. 
 
Over the past five years that I . . . almost six years now, that 
I’ve had the pleasure to represent the people of Regina South in 
this legislature, we have seen a great progress in terms of the 
finances of this province. When this government first took 
office in 1991, it’ll be no secret to people that the government 
of the day that we had replaced was spending nearly a dollar 
and a quarter for every dollar they brought in. Nearly a dollar 
and a quarter for every dollar they brought in. 
 
The result was a massive, massive debt hanging over this 
province. I believe at its peak we were paying nearly $875 
million a year in interest payments alone on that debt. If you 
can imagine, Mr. Speaker, that was more money than we spent 
to educate the young people of this province. We’ve spent that 
simply to pay the bankers for the money that the party that we 
replaced rang up. 
 
And the members opposite have used some form of voodoo 
economics to try and show that the debt, in fact, has increased. 
This is not true. The debt of this province has not increased, Mr. 
Speaker. And it doesn’t matter by what indicator you use, it has 
gone down. 
 
This year the debt of this province will drop by another, I 
believe it’s $200 million, thanks to wise investments on the part 
of this government. We have seen that the debt of this province 
has gone down as a percentage of GDP (gross domestic 
product). I particularly like that indicator because it says two 
things. One is that the actual level of debt is dropping; the 
second is that our economy is growing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was a young person at university when the 
opposition’s predecessor were in power, when Grant Devine’s 
government was here. I can tell you that there was a sense of 
pessimism on those campuses. I can tell you that there was a 
sense of concern that the economy was in the tank. 
 
The response of the party in government at that point, and I 
know the member for Estevan, who has great affection for the 
former premier Grant Devine, will be appreciative of this. Their 
response, Mr. Speaker, was to bring in a tax regime in 1990 that 
saw an increase — an increase — in the sales tax. Not only was 
it an increase in the actual amount that it went up, to 7 per cent, 

but they decided that they would apply it to everything. 
Harmonize it completely, following in that great economist, Mr. 
Brian Mulroney’s view that they would lay on . . . by increasing 
the consumption taxes that somehow this would spur on the 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it simply didn’t work. It did not work. When we 
came into office, I was happy to in 1991, join this government’s 
staff in terms of working to restore some of the fiscal health to 
this province. 
 
The work that was done was difficult work. I had the 
opportunity to work for Ed Tchorzewski when he was the 
Finance minister, and I can tell you that the decisions that 
members on this side made were tough ones. Tough ones not 
simply in terms of being tough medicine, but tough on the 
individuals who were making them. 
 
I think about these people today as I stand in this House and 
talk about this budget because I think that it was a lot of the 
foresight that they had and the ability to build I think a common 
interest among Saskatchewan people that we wanted to dig 
ourselves out of this debt. We wanted to dig ourselves out of the 
trench that the Tory government of the day had dug 
Saskatchewan people into. Part of that trench served as a schism 
between urban and rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think that this was something which caused great concern for 
many of us. 
 
There was a sense of divide and conquer in their budgets. There 
was a sense that you could only give to one by taking from the 
other. I think we all know, Mr. Speaker, that that is simply not 
the way that we want Saskatchewan to proceed. 
 
This budget today that the Minister of Finance introduced is a 
good budget for urban people, it is a good budget for rural 
people, it’s a good budget for working people, it’s a good 
budget for farmers, it’s a good budget for Northerners, it’s a 
good budget for seniors, it’s a good budget for students, it’s a 
good budget for young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a good budget because it’s a balanced 
budget; it’s a fair budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — One of the great successes of this budget, 
Mr. Speaker, I think comes in the fact that we today are able to 
reinvest in many of the public services the Saskatchewan people 
have asked us for over the years. 
 
I want to just review very briefly some of those investments. 
We heard a great deal, and in fact the amendment before us 
today proposed by the Leader of the Opposition, I believe, is 
that we should eliminate — eliminate — that part of the budget 
which would see that reinvestment in public services. That we 
should pass a motion in this House, a rider on this budget in 
essence, to fire the additional people that this budget would hire 
to provide community services. 
 
Well these are not the big, nasty, evil bureaucrats that they think 
sit in ivory towers around Regina, Mr. Speaker. I’ve yet to meet 
anybody who is that. But the members opposite certainly 



368 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2001 

 

present that in question period and present that in terms of their 
approach to the media. 
 
I’m not sure how these 88 new full-time positions that are going 
to deal with forest fighting are big, bad bureaucrats. I’m not 
sure why the members opposite would oppose us making an 
investment in those new 88 full-time positions. I’m not sure 
what it’s going to translate into because we all understand that 
there’s not many forest fires in the winter. Most of those 
positions will hit the ground this summer as we start to look at 
how we deal with forest firefighting. 
 
The forest fire situation, I want to say to my colleague, the 
minister for SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management), I have been very pleased with the new approach 
that has been taken in terms of a rapid response for us, both 
employing northerners but also being able to get into those fires 
to protect our forests on a much faster basis. And I think that we 
are seeing a great, great success there. 
 
This is not only an investment in forest firefighting, this will not 
only be an investment in the people in the northern part of this 
province who will be employed to go and fight those fires — 
this is a support to our forest industry, Mr. Speaker. And we 
need to understand that, that businesses in this province rely 
also on public services in order for them to have a good 
environment in which to conduct their businesses. 
 
And I think all those members opposite need to do is to go and 
talk to Weyerhaeuser or talk to any of the forest companies in 
the North, and you will hear them say that one of the single 
most important things that the Government of Saskatchewan 
provides to them is decent forest firefighting protection. And 
they say that because we are protecting their opportunity to go 
and create jobs and to create wealth. That’s part of what we do. 
It’s one of the successes of SERM; it’s one of the successes of 
the way that we organize our public services. And the 
businesses will support that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s an additional 86 full-time employees to 
work on highway construction. The members opposite spent all 
of last term, all of last session, asking us what we were going to 
do in terms of the highways. 
 
This budget comes forward with a plan to invest over $900 
million over the next three years in highways. It is an 
investment in terms of maintenance of our highways; we will be 
dealing with advanced twinning of the Trans Canada Highway, 
which is particularly important to those of us in the southern 
part of this province. 
 
I can tell you while the Trans Canada Highway barely skirts my 
riding — I think I have the east-bound lane in it; no actually I 
have the west-bound lane that runs in my riding, the east-bound 
lane, I think, is in the member for Wascana Plains’s riding — 
we have a great interest in being able to see that this highway is 
able to move forward because it’s important to the economy of 
our province. 
 
It is no surprise that the city of Regina speaks at great length 
about the need for us to protect Highway 1 and move forward 
with enhancing it so that we are able to protect that east-west 
route. 

I think that it’s unfortunate that the federal government was not 
able to come up with a north-south entrance for us under the 
new approach to NAFTA (North American Free Trade 
Agreement) in the highway system, so we’re not able to have a 
portal directly into the province. 
 
But what we do know is that there is a portal in Winnipeg, 
south of Winnipeg in Emerson. We know that there is one in 
Alberta where truck traffic will move up from the US (United 
States) into Canada. That necessitates us to deal with the 
Highway 1 situation. Because that truck traffic, Mr. Speaker, 
will come up from the United States from the trade corridors 
there, will move across our province, and will allow businesses 
to take better advantage of those transportation routes. 
 
We need to make sure that that investment is protected. We 
need to make sure that the money is there to advance our 
highway system. We need to make sure the Highway 1 is safe 
— not only for the truckers but for the citizens who travel on it 
back and forth to visit family and friends in other provinces, 
and perhaps even take a vacation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s part of what this budget does. And it’s 
something that I’m very proud of. We’re also making an 
investment in terms of resurfacing many of the highways that 
currently are twinned. And I use as an example, Highway 11. 
 
I’m not sure if the members travel much between Saskatoon 
and Regina on Highway 11, but it is a very heavily used route. 
And I am very pleased that we have announced that we will be 
resurfacing a great amount of that highway this year. 
 
That’s money in this budget. That’s money that will be done not 
only by private sector companies, but will also be done by 
government employees — those same evil bureaucrats that the 
members opposite seem always fit to attack. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is I think an important thing. One of the 
reasons we have made an investment to hire more people in the 
Highways department for construction and repair is because in 
our discussions with the highways builders, they have told us 
that they did not want us to ramp up too quickly because they 
feared what? — they feared the companies from out of province 
would come in and take the work. 
 
Could we more aggressively twin our highways? Yes we could, 
but we know that the jobs would not go to Saskatchewan 
people, Mr. Speaker. We know that the risk of this — and this 
is not from us saying it, not the NDP; this is the road builders 
saying it — they know that the risk is that we would see 
companies come in from Manitoba, companies come from 
Alberta, to compete with them for that work. 
 
And I think that this is something, that this is a very creative 
and positive approach because it invests in Saskatchewan 
people and in Saskatchewan’s road builders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another great . . . another issue of significant 
importance for our reinvestment, and particularly important to 
Regina, is the investment in 71 new full-time employees, 
full-time equivalents, to deal with the correction . . . with the 
correction system. 
 



April 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

 

The Regina Correctional Centre, Mr. Speaker, is under great 
stress. We understand that both in terms of its capital needs but 
also in terms of the stress it puts its workers under. These 
investments, these additional 71 full-time positions will help 
deal with some of the pressures that these employees have been 
feeling in terms of overtime. 
 
I think as members opposite if they . . . or all members in this 
House, if they happened to watch CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) news last night would have seen a very interesting 
— I guess you don’t call it article — a news items, feature 
documentary almost, on the correction systems and some of the 
pressures that are in it. These are very stressful positions. 
 
We know that here in Regina at the Regina Correctional Centre 
there are unique circumstances. Some of these 71 new, full-time 
positions will help to deal with that, will help to support these 
employees so that they have a safer environment in which to 
work. 
 
That’s a reinvestment I’m proud of. I don’t believe that these 
are just big, bloated bureaucracies. These are people that are 
necessary to protect the public safety. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing that’s important for us to take a 
look at is our ability to respond in those areas where officers of 
this Assembly have pointed out that we have been deficient. 
 
One such investment clearly is that which was pointed out in 
the Child Advocate’s report and our need to respond with an 
additional 60 full-time equivalent positions in terms of child 
protection. We are all aware of some of the very 
heart-wrenching, heart-wrenching cases that have been brought 
forward where we have seen children slip through the cracks 
because we have not been able to have that investment there. 
Where we have social workers overworked. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a shame and it is something that 
this Assembly has dedicated time debating. It is something that 
now this government has responded to in a very positive and 
proactive way. 
 
I could continue going through the list, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
I’m not sure that it serves any purpose other than to highlight 
the fact that these 570 full-time positions are not big, bad, scary, 
bloated bureaucrats. These are people who work in our 
communities and provide services the Saskatchewan people 
have called for. 
 
And yet the members opposite have in front of us today an 
amendment which would roll back all those positions. We have 
to assume that by their amendment what they’re saying is we 
don’t need to protect those forests. That we don’t need to put 
those additional resources into highways — that the highways 
can wait. That we don’t need to fix the safety problems that we 
have that the unions have pointed out time and again at the 
Regina Correctional Centre. That we don’t need to look after 
those children who may be at risk as a result of the caseloads 
being too high in Social Services. 
 
(15:00) 
 
That’s the impact of the amendment to this resolution and that 

is why we cannot — should not — support it. A reinvestment in 
public services can be a positive thing. A reinvestment in the 
people who work in our communities is a positive thing when 
those people are in the front lines. That’s what these 570 
positions deal with. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, could we have simply buried it in the 
budget? Certainly. Could we have not made a big deal of it? 
Could we have hidden it? Could we have found some other 
way? Probably. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we believe that 
people have a right to know what their money is being spent on. 
To this day, I could not tell you what those billions and billions 
and billions and billions — and I could say it 12 to 15 times — 
those billions of dollars that the members opposite rang up 
when they were in government, I couldn’t tell you what it went 
to. 
 
Because I look around and I say, what were the public services? 
What did they invest in? We had a situation that wasn’t 
sustainable — a dollar and a quarter in spending for every 
dollar they took in. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, today I have to say, and I know business 
points this out and other people point it out, we should be more 
aggressive in paying down the debt. We have taken a balanced 
approach in this. We responded when people said that they 
needed tax cuts. We did that. We responded in every one of the 
last five budgets by reducing taxes — taxes for people, taxes for 
business. 
 
Why? Because it was good for the economy. Why? Because it 
was good for our families. That’s what we did, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
We have gone and we have reduced the debt. We have reduced 
the debt as a percentage of the GDP, we have reduced the debt 
in real dollars. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s something that we 
have to be proud of. Those reductions have allowed us to 
reduce our interest payments so that today we spend twice as 
much on education as we do on interest. Much different when 
we took office when the interest payment sucked up more 
money than we could spend to educate our children. 
 
Today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are making a third set of steps 
that are necessary, and that is the reinvestment of our public 
services. 
 
As I talked to people around my constituency over the weekend 
about this budget, they tell me that they are . . . well to be very 
honest, well they tell me they’re pleasantly surprised. That this 
is a side of the NDP government that they hadn’t seen in a long 
time and they’re very pleased that we have been able to move 
forward to terms of those reinvestments. 
 
I would be remiss . . . I don’t want to spend a great deal of time 
— I know there are other members who have a great deal to say 
today and in the days ahead. But I do want to say that I am 
pleased with the investments we are also making in terms of 
infrastructure in our universities. 
 
The University of Regina is a very important institution to 



370 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2001 

 

Saskatchewan. We are very lucky to have two excellent 
world-class universities here in our province. There’s no doubt 
that the University of Saskatchewan as a full-service university 
is extremely important in terms of the work that it does to 
educate Saskatchewan people in all professions. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m particularly pleased in the investments 
we made in the past budgets in things that’ll allow our scientific 
community to move forward, like the synchrotron. Investments 
that we are making, I can tell you, in terms of changes to 
student aid. 
 
As a former Student Union president at the U of S (University 
of Saskatchewan), it’s something near and dear to my heart that 
we are able to provide financial assistance to people from all 
classes or all walks of life to be able to go back to university, go 
into the universities, and retrain, re-educate, and move forward 
into very successful, productive careers. 
 
The way that the universities have established themselves I 
think speaks well in that we are able to have here, in Regina, a 
discrete set of programs which assist also in terms of our 
economy growing. The investments that we have made over the 
past few years in the research park here in Regina are very 
important. And I think we’ve taken a look at what has happened 
in terms of the Innovation Place, the investments that were 
made 20 years ago at the University of Saskatchewan — and 
continue to be made — are very positive. 
 
I believe that in the next decade we will see our investment 
today, the seeds that we’ve planted at the University of Regina 
— it’s not an Innovation Place research centre — research park, 
you’ll see that bear fruit too. 
 
Those investments are not competing with Saskatoon’s 
Innovation Place. They are not competing with investments 
elsewhere. What they are doing is allowing this university to 
establish itself in a niche area that is of great interest to 
Canadians. 
 
Take for example the work that’s being done at the Toronto 
technology research centre. Take for example the fact that we 
will have Canada’s centre for greenhouse gas study. That’ll be 
here in Saskatchewan. That’s an investment we are pleased to 
support through our capital spending. That is something that we 
will continue to support in terms of providing research and 
educational opportunities to Saskatchewan students, and indeed, 
Canadian students. That’s part of what we are doing here in 
Saskatchewan. It’s one of the things that Saskatchewan people 
can be proud of. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, people will often ask why do we need 
such a big investment in our universities? I say simply take a 
look back at the work that has been done, the investments that 
were made many, many years ago in terms of agriculture at the 
University of Saskatchewan. Take a look at the work that was 
done by folks like Seager Wheeler and look at how that has 
supported our economy today. 
 
It’s interesting, when I was a Student Union president, one of 
the very big investments that happened at the time was an 
investment in the College of Agriculture building. I think it’s 
interesting to note that it was one of the first times that the 

Hutterites put money directly into the universities. They did it 
even though they don’t send their people off to the university. 
They did it because they understand the research that is being 
done there helps them move forward in terms of farming. I 
think all of us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, can be proud of the work 
our universities are doing. 
 
When I look at Saskatoon, I see the successes that are spinning 
off today as a result of that and how it’s made our economy 
stronger. When I look at the research park which is down the 
street from me, I know that in 10 or 15 years a new member for 
Regina South — perhaps the same member for Regina South — 
will have an opportunity to stand and talk about the great work 
that it’s doing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I won’t take a great deal more time today, 
except to say that I will be voting against what I consider to be 
a mean-spirited amendment which attacks working people and 
attacks the services that Saskatchewan people have been asking 
for. And I will be voting for the budget that has been presented 
by the Minister of Finance that reinvests in Saskatchewan’s 
people and our economy. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — It’s an honour today to stand before this 
Assembly and enter the debate about the budget on behalf of the 
innovative people of Watrous. 
 
I’ve listened intently to this debate so far and I’m quite willing 
to give credit where credit is due. I am very impressed that the 
government is adding money in education, highways, 
agriculture, and health. All of these areas are of critical 
importance to our province and all of these areas were in dire 
need of increased funding. 
 
I’m also willing to give the government credit in another area. 
And they’ve managed in just over two short weeks to 
completely overwork a new phrase. and I have no doubt they 
will continue to use it to nauseam in the weeks and months to 
come. The phrase I mean is gloom and doom. There has not 
been one speech given by a member opposite that the phrase 
has not been used. So they do deserve credit for their lemming 
mentality, their lack of originality, and their mindless parroting 
abilities. 
 
So as not to disappoint them allow me to quickly shed my doom 
and gloom philosophy on the four major areas of spending in 
the budget. For health, there’s been years where they’ve ignored 
the problem. If they’re not willing to fix it or even recognize 
that there are problems, then they are going to have to keep 
throwing money at it. 
 
In the areas of education, highways, and agriculture, I will 
repeat, additional funding was essential so it was good to see it 
in the budget. 
 
But I hardly think the members opposite should be patting 
themselves on the back too hard for their efforts. It’s the same 
reasoning as the little child that keeps going to the cookie jar 
and taking out cookies and when he has taken out the last one 



April 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 371 

 

he realizes that there will be none left so he returns it and says, 
what a good boy am I. Well, I’m sorry. The fact that the budget 
has been increased after nine years of cutbacks is hardly 
something to be proud of. 
 
The SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) stated 
some time ago that it needed a $32 million increase just to 
maintain the status quo. So with a $33 million increase to our K 
to 12 education system, they will be able to maintain the status 
quo, and the 1.7 million that they receive over and above what 
they requested will, hopefully, cover the increased expenses of 
their power and energy . . . 
 
If it does, then maintaining the status quo will be a real breeze 
for our school boards. And in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we 
call that progress, NDP style. 
 
Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, is a very important industry to the 
Watrous constituency. We’ve spoken numerous times in this 
House about the NDP government tearing up the GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) contract and leaving the farmers 
with no effective safety net. 
 
The farmers have defended their position at times by saying that 
GRIP was just too costly to maintain. And in 1991 and ’92, 
there were bad years for our agriculture producers. The grain 
prices were not great and in areas the yields were very low. 
 
But the NDP government promised to look for another more 
sustainable program. And they even went so far as to put 
together a Farm Support Review Committee. And the Farm 
Support Review Committee tabled a report in 1994 that 
contained three recommendations. And what did the 
government do with that report? Absolutely nothing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So why would we do anything to protect the future of this 
industry? Unfortunately that was the time that they should have 
done something. It was the time that they should have taken 
action. 
 
The producers were doing relatively well. The revenue was 
allowing them a profit margin that they could live in. So had the 
government implemented a safety net during those years, it 
would have accumulated a surplus in the good years which 
could be drawn down from today. 
 
But the NDP government had no long-term vision then and it 
has no vision now. And the members opposite can call it gloom 
and doom if they like. But, Mr. Speaker, in the Watrous 
constituency I call it reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on March 26 the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley spoke about a book by the name of The Last 
Battle. And he spoke about the ending of the book and how it 
illustrated the difference of viewpoints amongst different 
groups of people. 
 
And he compared this illustration to the difference between the 
members of the government and the members of the official 
opposition. He came to the conclusion that the members of the 
opposition were convinced that there was no hope for 
Saskatchewan, no possibility. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I too would like to use a comparison today, 
and it’s similar to that of the member opposite, but it comes to a 
slightly different conclusion. I have mentioned numerous times 
in the House that I have three daughters. 
 
When the oldest two were quite young, I used to marvel at their 
unique and very, very different personalities. The oldest was a 
delightful, dreamy kind of child, who only saw the positive 
things in life, who would always be taken by surprise if 
something negative confronted her. The second was more of a 
realist. She was a perfectionist who was very task-orientated. 
 
One time when I was driving with the two girls, they were 
sitting by their respective windows and they were watching the 
ditch go by. And my oldest one commented, look, Mom, look at 
all the flowers. And the second one quickly chirped in, yes, but 
they’re surrounded by weeds. 
 
I was not appalled by my daughter’s negativity, nor did I 
reprimand her for talking about doom and gloom. She saw the 
flowers, but she also recognized a potential threat to those 
flowers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I love Saskatchewan and I love Saskatchewan 
people. And I can assure you that all the members of the official 
opposition have the same sentiments for our great province. But 
my job, as a member of the official opposition, is to put forward 
concerns of the people of the Watrous constituency and hope 
that the government will listen and will address those concerns. 
That is the purpose of the official opposition. 
 
But let’s imagine for a moment, and I’m sure the members 
opposite will help me out here, that we had a day in House that 
the official opposition did not do their job. The member from 
Melfort-Tisdale could stand up and bellow across the floor, as 
we all know he does so well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week, a young gentleman from my 
constituency was in a motor vehicle accident and was rushed to 
the Melfort hospital where he was immediately stabilized. And 
from there he was taken by ambulance to Saskatoon, and he 
was admitted immediately and a surgeon was waiting for his 
arrival, along with an available operating room and a full O.R. 
(operating room) staff. The young man was operated on within 
minutes of his arrival and he’s doing great. 
 
Mr. Speaker, could the Minister of Health kindly tell the 
members in this House how this happened? 
 
The minister could stand up and reply, Mr. Speaker, I would 
gladly like to tell the member opposite how this happened. It’s 
because the young man ate fruit salad every day and he is in the 
best of health. And I’m quite proud to say that he’ll mend 
nicely. 
 
The question could be followed by the member from 
Kindersley. He could say, Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, one of my constituents 
phoned and said that he’s one of those producers that we keep 
hearing about somewhere, that has a negative income, and he 
doesn’t know how he’s going to pay his increased power bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I assured him not to worry. A $25 cheque is on the 



372 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2001 

 

way to help him out. So he should just take his mind off his 
worries, check his high-speed Internet, see what the prices are 
like on the CWB (Canadian Wheat Board) Web site. Mr. 
Speaker, the guy still seemed a little depressed, so could the 
Minister of Agriculture please tell us here today what other 
good news we can give this producer. 
 
(15:15) 
 
The Minister of Agriculture could reply certainly, Mr. Speaker, 
I would be more than delighted to give this producer more good 
news. Due to the vision of this NDP government he can seed 50 
acres to grass, Mr. Speaker, and he can buy himself a cow. Mr. 
Speaker, if he milks that cow he will cut down on his grocery 
bill, and in this province we call that value added. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the headlines the next day could read: The fruit 
salad is an answer to Saskatchewan’s health care. And drink 
milk — value-added diversification ends agriculture crisis in 
Saskatchewan. And we could all feel good and go home to our 
constituencies. Somehow I don’t think that would be effective 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition has a job to do. Both sides 
of the House can see the flowers, and we believe in 
Saskatchewan and that is why we’re all here. The potential of 
this province is astounding, and the potential of the people in 
this province cannot be measured, but we’ve got to recognize 
the weeds, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve got to have the ability to 
recognize what is holding this province back, and we’ve got to 
fix it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to have a vision. If there are no 
problems, if everything in this province is just good news, then 
why is our population growth stagnant? Why is a third of the 
out-migration of this province in the age group of 15 to 24 
years, and over half of the age group, 15 to 34 years? Why are 
we the only province in Canada that showed a net job loss in the 
last year, according to StatsCanada? 
 
Why is our health care waiting list significantly longer than 
other provinces? And perhaps the most important question is, 
why is this NDP government remaining naive ostriches, and 
totally in denial of those real statistics? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, since the session’s began, I’ve been 
called mean-spirited, I’ve been called hard-hearted, a 
trash-talker, and on Monday night I think I was even called a 
duck. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been told that the NDP 
government are the only ones who care about social programs 
and the quality of life for all of Saskatchewan people. I’ve even 
had that shouted across the floor to me since I began speaking 
today. We have to care about all Saskatchewan people, not just 
the rich. 
 
Well Mr. Speaker, I would like to tell the members opposite 
two things. You do not have to be a socialist to have a social 
conscience. And you do not have to worry about the quality of 
life for the rich in this province because the handful of 
six-figure income earners that are left in this province, the ones 
that are not working for the government, probably won’t be 
here for long if we continue down the path that we’re going. 
 

Do I think social programs are important? Absolutely. Do I 
think publicly funded essential health care is important? 
Definitely. 
 
But how are we going to continue to fund education, health care 
and social programs if we continue to tax the people out of the 
province; if we continue to have red tape, fees, rules, 
regulations and laws that do everything possible to discourage 
the growth of a private sector economy? How are we going to 
continue to finance social programs if the number one employer 
in this province is the government? If more people in this 
province are taking out more than they’re contributing, how can 
we sustain that for years to come? 
 
We have a diminishing private sector in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, and we need to get past the Robin Hood mentality or 
our private sector will deplete to a crisis level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency assistant recently phoned 40 
businesses in the Watrous constituency. Most of those 
businesses could be categorized as medium-sized businesses. 
They would employ between 10 to 80 employees. And the 
question that she asked them was when did they establish? 
 
Mr. Speaker, only two businesses have opened their doors since 
1991. That is two out of 40. Watrous is not a remote area. 
Watrous is our centre of Saskatchewan. It is the core of our 
province and only two out of 40 phone calls were to businesses 
that established since 1991. 
 
With the diminishing working age people and diminishing 
businesses and subsequently diminishing job opportunity, how 
in the world does this government plan to maintain our publicly 
funded social programs, health care and education that they 
believe they’re the only ones that care about? 
 
This budget spent money and it spent money in areas where it 
was desperately needed. But it didn’t address the problems of 
this province and it’s not going to be sustainable for the future 
of our province. 
 
Someone needs to explain to this government that job creation 
does not mean that the number one employer is government. 
Five hundred and seventy new employees. They should be 
ashamed. And they explain it by saying that they’re front line 
employees. And if they are, I applaud that. 
 
However, everyone had to tighten their belts — from our 
farmers to our education system to our municipal governments 
to our health boards — but not our NDP government. They 
could have looked within their departments, streamlined their 
departments, and found the funding within their own 
departments to hire those very front-line workers that we so 
desperately need. 
 
Thirty million dollars extra for government. Thirty million 
dollars spent for people that will be taking more out of the 
government budget than will be contributing back in. 
 
And yet the members opposite sit and sanctimoniously accuse 
us of Alberta envy, as if Alberta was a distasteful, disgusting 
place on this earth. And I suggest to them, Mr. Speaker, that 
they suffer from Alberta blindness. And I think it is totally 



April 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

 

irresponsible on their part not to look at Alberta and not to look 
at all the provinces of Canada and examine what they’re doing 
right and what they’re doing wrong and learning from that. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when you look at Alberta’s budget 
you’ll notice the revenue page is laid out similar to ours with 
one major difference. When you look at our numbers, you have 
to add three zeros because the numbers are in thousands of 
dollars. When you look at Alberta’s numbers, you have to add 
six zeros because their numbers are in millions of dollars. 
Basically it’s a difference in revenue from 6 billion to 19 
billion. 
 
Well, hello, that’s just a little bit more than a minor difference, 
Mr. Speaker. And the government’s excuse that the difference 
is solely due to oil revenues is wearing a little bit thin. 
 
Are they doing something right? I think so. Are they more 
likely going to be able to sustain social programs and publicly 
funded services than we are? I suggest they are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget has little to offer the people of the 
Watrous constituency. Hopefully it will keep the doors to the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals open — but we’re not sure. 
Hopefully it will address the major potholes on highways 15 
and 20 — but we’re not sure about that either. 
 
The people of the Watrous constituency have been ignored for 
so long by this NDP government that a little bit of hope is all 
they have left because they certainly have no trust in their 
government. The people of Watrous will not see any cuts to the 
PST (provincial sales tax), any cuts to gas tax, or any cuts to 
their income tax, but they will have increases to their power 
bills and to their energy bills. And in all good likelihood, due to 
the lack of the NDP vision and lack of support to our municipal 
governments, they’ll see an increase to their property taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the current school year the Watrous 
constituency had more students enrolled at the U of S than any 
other constituency in this province. When these students 
graduate, are they going to find that the number one creator of 
new jobs in this province is our own government? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a sustainable environment in which to 
grow our province. The direction that this government is 
heading is just plain wrong. 
 
So if the members opposite are so disturbed by our gloom and 
doom dialogue, then I suggest they start to govern with 
responsibility and start working for the Saskatchewan people — 
all the people of Saskatchewan — instead of building an empire 
of bureaucrats. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that I will not be 
supporting the budget; however I will support the amendment 
put forward by my colleague from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I rise in this House today to support the budget 

because, Mr. Speaker, I believe we’ve got the best budget in 
Canada. And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I believe we have the 
best Finance minister in all the free world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, my message is a message 
of optimism and confidence. The people of Saskatchewan want 
their government to be confident and they want their leaders to 
be confident. And I tell you today on this side of the Assembly 
the coalition government has been deflecting constant criticism 
from that opposition side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they 
have no plan. 
 
And a moment ago the member from Watrous was talking 
about the cookie jar. Well let me refresh the memories of the 
people of Saskatchewan. When they were in power, Mr. 
Speaker, not only did they take all the cookies, but they took the 
mills that were associated with making those cookies and they 
took the fields that grow the flour to make the cookies, and they 
took the cookie jar, Mr. Speaker. So when they talk about 
cookies, Mr. Speaker, they’re the cookie monsters right across 
the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Furthermore, they talk about Alberta 
envy — Alberta envy, Mr. Speaker. They talk about Alberta 
envy. They accuse us of being Alberta blind. Well I want to tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, after eight balanced budgets . . . count them, 
eight in a row, balanced budgets, something that they’re 
immune to. Eight balanced budgets. 
 
I want to show reference to this budget 2000 article in the 
Regina Leader-Post. And it does an across Canada analysis of 
what Saskatchewan costs all the families. And what I want to 
point out, Mr. Speaker, to their beloved Alberta — health 
premiums in Calgary is $816; health premiums in 
Saskatchewan is zero. 
 
Mortgage costs in Calgary is 8,691, Mr. Deputy Speaker; in 
Saskatchewan it’s $5,503. Home heating in Calgary, $1,913; in 
Saskatchewan, $1,087. Electricity in Calgary, 1,458; in 
Saskatoon, 836. You look at telephone costs: 289 in Calgary; 
Saskatoon is 282. Auto insurance: 1,909 in Calgary; in 
Saskatoon, 996, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 996. 
 
So you look at the difference. In Calgary the cost of living is 
17,264; in Saskatoon, it’s 14,526. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to present this particular information 
to those members across the way, and especially the member 
from Rosthern who keeps bad-mouthing Saskatchewan and 
saying that Saskatchewan is a bad place to live. 
 
We don’t have Alberta envy on this side. They want to move to 
Alberta? I say time and time again: there’s the highway, see you 
later. We’ve got a province to build, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve 
got a budget that builds the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this budget talks about 



374 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2001 

 

transportation, talks about technology, talks about a wide 
variety of challenges that we have. And I just wanted to for one 
second talk about some of the educational support that we have. 
 
This budget makes the largest investment ever in Education, 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, it’s $1.1 billion, 
Mr. Speaker. That is good news — 1.1 million. School 
operating grants up 40.8 million to attract and retain the best 
teachers; 21 new elementary and 21 new secondary community 
schools in rural and urban Saskatchewan; high-speed Internet. 
Mr. Speaker, the list goes on. 
 
And I want to send this list over to the member from Rosthern 
so she knows exactly what’s so positive about Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to show this letter from . . . this letter, Mr. 
Speaker — don’t take our word, I got another letter here — and 
the letter is from the Canadian Association for Community 
Education. And it’s a letter addressed to myself, certainly as a 
member of this government. It says, quote: 
 

Thank you for caring about our children and for expanding 
the community school program for at risk and Indian and 
Metis children and youth in our province. 

 
It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I am so proud to say that I come from a province that puts 
our children first. Providing service to those who are most 
in need is appreciated more than you will ever know. 

 
(15:30) 
 
And that’s an unquote, Mr. Speaker, and I’m done, I’m finished 
there. And this letter is coming from Fay Stupnikoff who is a 
counsellor at the Prince Albert Northcote . . . Sorry. She’s the 
president of the Wesmor Community High School, and of 
course, that’s in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to send this letter over to the members 
opposite, the doom and gloom members. 
 
Now I told people in Saskatchewan, you don’t have to take our 
word for us that this government’s on the right track; this 
coalition government is making things happen — making things 
happen — $960 million in Highways spending for the next 
three years. Oh that’s not good enough for that side. 
 
The greatest income tax cut in the history of Saskatchewan’s 
politics — oh, that’s not good on that side. Massive injection 
into the health care system — oh, that’s not good on that side. 
Education — 1.1 billion — it’s still not good that side. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what are you guys about? What are you guys 
about? Tell us: what is your plan? You get up every day in the 
Assembly and you rant and you rave. The bottom line is you 
have not got a plan. What is your plan? What is your plan? No 
plan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll say this. This budget — this budget — 
has all the components to build a brave new Saskatchewan. And 
I say to those folks across the way: every error that has negative 
impacts, they created. And I say shame on them. Shame on you 

guys for doing that. They should never ever create division in 
this province, but that’s how they thrive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve got lists and lists and lists of what the budget 
does. And again, if the members opposite want me to share 
them with them, I most certainly will do that. 
 
But the most important message I have today, Mr. Speaker, is 
about the budget itself and what it says. We have a brand new 
leader and the brand new leader’s making a bold statement as 
part of this coalition government. And that statement says it is 
now your turn Saskatchewan, we’re going to invest into you. 
We’re going to invest into the roads, into the kids, and into 
schools, and the list goes on and on and on. 
 
And I say very carefully, Mr. Speaker, what is their plan? What 
is their plan? They have no plan. They never had no plan. And 
every day they get up in the Assembly and they pick something 
out of the sky. Oh, the sky’s going to fall tomorrow, Mr. 
Minister of the Environment, what are you going to do about it? 
 
Well let’s wait for that to happen. The sky’s not going to fall. 
The sky’s not going to fall at all. And I would urge the people 
of Saskatchewan to believe in your province — to believe in 
your province, to believe in your children, to believe in your 
community, so we’re able to build together as a government and 
as the people of Saskatchewan a bold and brave new future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how many more times I’ve got to tell 
the folks throughout my constituency and the province of 
Saskatchewan that we’ve got one terrific budget, one terrific 
team, and one terrific future, and that they should not listen to 
the doom and gloom. And what’s so shameful, Mr. Speaker, 
about this budget is not that it’s good; what’s so shameful is 
those folks out there are writing to all the people and they’re 
saying, oh, this is what’s bad about it. 
 
Well the doom and gloom I say to them is resist — resist that 
doom and gloom because we have to have confidence in 
Saskatchewan. And this side certainly does. That side wishes 
they were Alberta. Well as I mentioned, move to Alberta, we’ll 
see you later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, very important. In northern Saskatchewan, SERM 
now has a budget of $130 million, Mr. Speaker. A 30 per cent 
increase from two years ago. And how we’re using that money, 
Mr. Speaker? We’re talking about safe drinking water. As my 
colleague from Melville says we’re talking about protection of 
the forest and monitoring of the forest. We’re also talking about 
fire management — very, very good. We’re talking about 
SARCAN. 
 
We’re talking about all these support systems out there for the 
people of Saskatchewan and that’s where the money’s going. 
And what’s wrong with that? Well they’ll get up and say, well, 
there’s something wrong somewhere, we’ll find it. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re going to find it. 
 
And I also say shame on those folks. Shame on the folks across 
the way for saying that those people you hired are 
pencil-pushing bureaucrats, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that is 
far from the truth. Those people are coming off the 
unemployment lines. They’re beginning to work. And those 



April 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 375 

 

working people pay taxes. 
 
Shame on them for attacking the working people. The working 
people have a right to work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Shame I say to them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you go down the list, Mr. Speaker, you go down the list. 
And the most impressive, the most impressive message people 
caught throughout the whole province was when the Minister of 
Finance got up and said, in 1993 when he took over the mess 
after a couple years, we’re paying more on interest than we 
were on education. And today the progress, eight years later — 
eight years later, Mr. Speaker — it’s now double what we spend 
on education as opposed to the interest. Now that is progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And I look across the way on budget 
day, Mr. Speaker, on budget day when the Minister of Finance 
was giving up . . . was giving his speech and giving up a lot of 
good information to folks, I looked across the way, Mr. 
Speaker, and body language showed that they were depressed. 
 
And the reason they’re depressed, Mr. Speaker, is because of 
my message from day one when I said to them, you are going to 
admit that this is a good government; and you may not say it, 
but you’re going to admit it. 
 
And last Friday, Mr. Speaker, as we done our budget, I looked 
across the way and there was a long, long line of sorry folks 
that said, geez, these guys are good, these guys are good, they 
know what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. But we know we have a 
lot of work ahead of us and that work will continue. 
 
Now they talk about the coalition government across the way, 
and you look at the makeup of the Saskatchewan Party. There’s 
a coalition of sorts right there, Mr. Speaker. Reformers, do they 
have Reformers in there? Yes, they do. Have they got the 
disaffected Liberals that were thrown away? Yes, they’re gone. 
And have they got PC (Progressive Conservative) members in 
there? Oh yes, they do. There’s Tories in there. And have they 
got Canadian Alliance supporters? Oh yes, they do. They’re all 
in there. 
 
But do you know what happened, Mr. Speaker? The attention 
is, oh, let’s not have the attention on the coalition across the 
way. Let’s have the attention on the coalition this way. Well do 
you know what’s so bloody bad, Mr. Speaker, about this whole 
arrangement? It’s people in Saskatchewan know there’s a 
coalition across the way. And that coalition, I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, never had Saskatchewan’s interests at heart and that’s 
why it’s to their advantage to create doom and gloom and 
division throughout the province. 
 
And we are going to fight back, Mr. Speaker. We’re not taking 
that any more, as the people of the province have indicated to us 
on numerous occasions. 
 
Now I spoke about . . . I spoke, Mr. Speaker, about some of the 
challenges with the health care system. And across the way they 

say, privatize everything. That’s their solution. And we say, no 
way. No way. We don’t believe in that. 
 
We believe that health care has to be affordable to everybody. 
Everybody in the North, East, West, southern Saskatchewan — 
everybody’s got to be covered. And . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well no, no, no. The rich can take care of the better part of 
health care. We’ll look after the rich. That’s their solution. 
 
Well I say to you that on this side of the Assembly we will look 
after every Saskatchewan resident through our health care to 
make sure that it responds to their needs, not to their 
pocketbook, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Now I focused a bit of attention on 
their agenda and I say, you guys today that as always, their little 
honeymoon just ended with this budget on Friday. Their little 
honeymoon is over and the people of Saskatchewan are going 
to quickly learn about that bride over there that’s never going to 
be wed. That bride over there has a lot of hidden things. 
 
Now let’s go back a bit, Mr. Speaker, to another mantra, when 
they talk about privatization, Mr. Speaker. Let’s privatize. Let’s 
sell out the Crowns. Well you know what happens, Mr. 
Speaker, if you sell off SaskEnergy and SaskTel and the likes? 
The cost of operating a home in the province of Saskatchewan 
will escalate. 
 
But the real danger, Mr. Speaker, and the real danger . . . And 
those people across the way, the right-wing individuals across 
the way, they say, let’s sell out those Crowns and we’ll have a 
whole bunch of money to play with. 
 
What happens now if the Crowns become private, Mr. Speaker? 
No more dividends for the people of Saskatchewan to keep 
these costs down. Higher costs. But if you’re a private 
corporation and you have, say, a SaskTel or you have, more 
importantly, a SaskPower, then you will sell your power to the 
highest bidder. That makes economic sense. 
 
So the highest bidder may be somebody from the States. And 
what happens to the service in the province of Saskatchewan? It 
goes down. We’ll have blackouts. We’ll have brownouts. We’ll 
have loss of service. But these guys no, no, no, that’s fine. 
We’re okay, we’ll take care of Saskatchewan. Well I say to you 
that private . . . the Crown corporations will never be privatized 
on this side of the House. And the people of Saskatchewan have 
got to watch out across the way, because their privatization 
mantra will not protect Saskatchewan people at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, very important, very important. The budget sets a 
bold new course. We will fix the highways. That song went 
right through Saskatchewan, and it was such an effective 
message, Mr. Speaker, that it knocked the member off of his 
chair. Now that’s very important for people to know, is nobody 
expected that kind of spending — including the members 
opposite. 
 
Now the most amazing thing as well, Mr. Speaker . . . I’ve said 
it again and I’ll say it again, is that their hero, their national 
hero, Stockwell Day, said, well, we do have a western 



376 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2001 

 

conscience; we elect Western Canada. So I’m going to stop at 
the Regina airport. I’m going to say hello for an hour or so. 
Then I’m going to meet with the Sask Party guys. The member 
from Kindersley was supporting me last time in this leadership 
race. He’s my buddy. 
 
And the member from Arm River was supporting the other guy 
— what’s the other guy’s name? I forgot his name; he’s gone 
— Preston Manning. And the Leader of the Opposition was 
saying, oh, Preston’s a good guy. Well the Leader of the 
Opposition lost. The member for Kindersley forces won that 
side, so they all backed up Mr. Day, and as a result, Mr. Day 
was their national hero. 
 
And what does he do when he comes here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? He comes to Regina, what does he tell them? There’s 
no subsidies. No subsidies. Mr. Manning said that too. There’s 
no subsidies for farmers. No subsidies; zero. But nobody 
showed the attention to that fact, they all said no subsidies. But 
these guys say oh no, no, no, that’s not what he meant. Well 
why don’t you guys echo what your national leaders have said 
— no subsidies for the farmers. 
 
Now on this side we put our money where our mouth is. We 
don’t hope that some national leader will come along and save 
the day. We’re taking a leadership role and, Mr. Speaker, 
agriculture — we’re moving forward. We’re moving forward. 
We’re going to bring back them flour mills and bring back them 
cookies, Mr. Speaker, because the people of Saskatchewan want 
us to. 
 
So I say to you today that privatization . . . the fact that the 
opposition over there, they spend left and they vote right. Now 
you can’t figure that out. How do you spend left and vote right? 
And everything that they offer to the people of Saskatchewan, 
they will find out very quickly that the people of Saskatchewan 
will not buy into that kind of thinking — the voodoo 
economics, the snake oil economics, as our Minister of Finance 
likes to say. 
 
And the bottom line is that’s the weakness of the opposition; is 
they try and be everything to everybody, but they just don’t 
know how to balance those numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is a good budget and it’s going to 
continue on. We are proud of Saskatchewan. A lot of successful 
stories in this province, a lot of successful stories. And I say to 
the members opposite, perhaps it is time that you sent up that 
white flag and say yes, this is a good government, that coalition 
government is getting things gone. Look at the spending. Look 
at the stats. These speak for themselves. 
 
And I tell the people of Saskatchewan, to both their hearts and 
to their minds, that that bride that we almost wed, well, the 
honeymoon’s over. The real facts are going to come out, the 
real facts are going to come out that that particular bride . . . 
Perhaps we should not have had those cookies in bed, Mr. 
Speaker, because that will be a crumby bride. And that’s where 
I think the problem is, is people will soon find out, after the first 
night with these guys, that is not what the people of 
Saskatchewan want nor what the people of Saskatchewan 
deserve. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to budget advice and it comes to 
managing this province, the last place that I’m going to go look 
for advice is from the opposition. Thanks, but no thanks. We 
took your advice and that resulted in $15 billion in debt — 15 
billion. 
 
We are not going there for financial advice. We will not go 
there for financial advice. I had to say it twice so they 
understand. 
 
And that’s why today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s why today in 
the constituency of Athabasca, there’s good news in the budget. 
For SERM, there’s good news in the budget. For environmental 
protection, good news in the budget. For income tax, for 
highways, information technology, for students, Crown 
investments — the list goes on and on and on. 
 
And I know, and I know, Mr. Speaker, that across the way, 
based on the body language last Friday, they’re saying: geez, 
these guys are good, they’re good. 
 
But we know we got to get a lot better, make sure that all of 
Saskatchewan buys into the program because it is going to be a 
good program. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pride, on behalf of 
the constituents of Athabasca and the entire staff members of 
SERM — many of whom are doing some very good work in 
water quality testing; good support of the communities out there 
in environmental protection and forest protection and the list 
goes on and on — that I stand today very proud, very proudly in 
support of the best budget that this good Finance minister has 
delivered over the past eight years. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
may I say how much I appreciate this opportunity to participate 
in this budget debate, and the operative word is opportunity. I, 
however, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will attempt to limit my remarks 
to the budget. I won’t be offering up a dissertation on cookies as 
the member from Athabasca. 
 
This in fact is an opportunity for me to say you’re welcome to 
the new Premier, who is participating in his first budget as the 
leader of the government. And after listening to this 
government’s fiscal plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have no choice 
but to say you’re welcome because this is a very predictable 
piece of work. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I predicted exactly what would be 
in it when I addressed the Assembly during the Throne Speech 
debate. At that time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I predicted that this 
government had lost its way and that it was about to revert to 
the old NDP default position — bigger government, more 
spending, all of that as the tonic to solve our problems. And the 
budget address, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in fact confirmed those 
suspicions. 
 
This government has no vision for the future so it’s looking 



April 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 377 

 

backwards for answers. If nothing else, Mr. Speaker, the 
government has found its way back to the ’70s. We’re back to 
the future. Mr. Speaker, this government is a Commodore 64 in 
a Pentium world. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the issues facing this House and 
this province cannot be solved by invoking the old images of 
the good old days. Our problems and the opportunities that 
present themselves will require a bold, new direction not some 
worn out political manifesto that has been a total, unmitigated 
disaster. 
 
In the last 30 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Canada’s population 
has doubled, Alberta’s population has tripled, our’s has 
stagnated — just like the government opposite. And what is that 
government’s answer to that sad reality? Another 570 
employees. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can’t help but wonder if the Minister of 
Finance even read the material in his own budget documents. It 
quotes analysts who say economic strength is the result of lower 
taxes and growing consumer spending spawned by tax cuts. 
These analysts do not say more government spending is at the 
heart of any economic success. In fact they say just the 
opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, less intrusive government spurs 
the economy. 
 
So what does this government do in the face of the advice 
contained in its very own budget document? It does exactly the 
opposite. It increases spending and hires another 570 people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has missed the entire point of the 
exercise. Instead of reading its own tea leaves, it reverts to the 
tried-and-true socialist dogma — more and bigger intrusive 
government. In fact, they in one fell swoop have reversed nearly 
a decade of budgetary balance. This is the first budget in nearly 
a decade where expenditures have exceeded . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — With the indulgence of the member and leave 
of the Speaker, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to 
take this quick opportunity to introduce Messrs. Daniel Malik 
and Ted Flett. They’re with the Queen’s Park legislative intern 
program. They’re here to study us, they’re here to see how we 
do our business for the people, and I just wish them well with 
their time here and encourage the members of the Assembly to 
do the same. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the first 
budget in nearly a decade that has expenditures exceeding 
revenues. Welcome to the socialist utopia — spend today and 
spend again tomorrow. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this government will try, they will try, they 
will try and tell us that these excessive expenditures are 
reasonable because we are using our savings to balance the 
spendthrift ways of this new administration. That, I guess, is 
supposed to make it better. But I wonder who the minister’s 
really kidding when he utters such nonsense. He tries to make it 
look like he has a surplus budget — he doesn’t. This is a deficit 
budget. Whether he covers the shortfall out of cash or he incurs 
debt, the result is the same, Mr. Deputy Speaker — the 
province’s balance sheet is diminished. 
 
We get to hold on to some extra debt, roughly a quarter of a 
billion dollars worth, instead of paying it off. So let’s not kid 
ourselves by saying this is a balanced budget. It’s not. And all 
of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just to reaffirm the government 
members’ socialist credentials. And a quarter of a billion dollars 
is a lot of money, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Last year this same Minister of Finance thought a quarter of a 
billion dollars was enough money for the Highways department. 
It’s enough money to increase the energy rebate by 25 times if 
he so chose. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the price of having 
socialism restored in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — And what will we have to show for all of 
this government expansion? Well we’ll have the pleasure of 
being advised by Mr. Dennis Gruending. Wonderful! I’m sure 
everyone is looking forward to that. 
 
And I’m even more sure that the people of Saskatchewan will 
draw great consolation and comfort in the revelation that a 
defeated NDP Member of Parliament will be working on their 
behalf; earning a big pay cheque as they bounce down our 
crumbling highways or as they wait in pain for a spot in 
surgical ward. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has lost its way. That 
became abundantly clear in the leadership race that chose our 
new Premier. The party opposite has discarded any sense, any 
sense whatsoever of fiscal restraint. Within days of his 
selection, the new Premier put his stamp on government by 
spending more money than the government will take in, and 
that in the face of record revenues. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, this is not a government with an eye to the 
future. This is an outfit with its course firmly charted on 



378 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2001 

 

heading right back to the bad old days as ideology prevails over 
reality. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, this government is the problem. It has no 
vision; it has no plan. Its best strategy for economic growth is to 
put political hacks on the payroll. And now they want to make 
the problem bigger by making the government bigger. 
 
They have increased their spending in virtually every 
department. The members opposite make a lot of noise about 
the new spending in health and education and highways, but the 
reality is they are spending increasing amounts all across 
government. And that spending is out of line, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, with every other measure that we recognize and know. 
It exceeds inflation. It defies the reality faced by so many 
people in this province. As our farmers watch their incomes 
erode, the members opposite inflate their expenditures and 
bring their buddies onto the payroll. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not only a disgrace, it defies the 
Saskatchewan reality. When families in this province are 
cutting back to make way for increases in electrical and gas 
rates, this government is headed the other way. It’s spending 
more money than it takes in. It’s increasing spending, while the 
people it’s here to serve are coping with rising utility bills, 
approved by the members opposite. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, the only people this government is in touch 
with is the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. And we now 
know what the government’s number one priority is, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — helping their friends in the big unions. 
When the head of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities was complaining that rural Saskatchewan was 
ignored in this budget, the head of the SFL (Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour) was crowing about how wonderful it 
was. And no wonder. There are 570 new workers, government 
workers, to pay union dues to the SFL and its unions. 
 
If nothing else, Mr. Speaker, at least we know that the 
government’s priorities are. They’ve made that abundantly 
clear. It’s the typical socialist mantra, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Big 
government is good; so a bigger government, a more expensive 
government, must be better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know all too well how this government has lost 
touch with reality, and how it’s mired down . . . it’s being mired 
down, and with the big unions, and that they’ve thrown their 
support behind the new Premier, and how that has taken them 
completely off of track. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would also be incumbent 
upon one to also ask where the Liberals are in this coalition, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I understand it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the Liberals are in fact going to support this growing 
monstrosity of government, when during the election campaign 
they in fact promised to reduce government by 300. And if I 
remember the words of the Leader of the Liberal Party at the 
time correctly: going to be reducing government by something 
in the order of 300 hacks and flacks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well what happened to the election promise? Where are they 
now? They’re right in bed with the NDP, voting right along 
with them, supporting bigger government, more government, 

and more intrusive government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the mayor of Porcupine Plain, I saw 
how this government ignored the needs of this province’s 
municipalities, and how at one point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
attempted to obliterate them completely through their forced 
amalgamation scheme. And how they always put the interest of 
their political supporters ahead of local government. 
 
Local governments have been put in an untenable position, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They have had their revenue sharing cut back, 
and they have had to make some pretty scary decisions. 
Decisions that were very, very difficult. But, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I think we all in this House realize that they made 
those decisions. They understood that that was their role, their 
responsibility, their way to contribute to the well-being of the 
province. 
 
And what do they get for that co-operation? What do they get 
for that effort in this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Absolutely 
nothing. As a matter of fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just 
received a letter from my hometown of Porcupine Plain, the 
town of which I served three times as mayor, and they were 
responding to our amendments on the budget. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to read this letter into the record. The 
letter goes as follows: 
 

Dear Mr. Bjornerud: 
 
While the province basks in revenues from PST, fuel tax, 
personal and corporate income tax that have increased from 
660 million in 1978 to more than 2.7 billion, the 
revenue-sharing pool has shrunk 60 per cent, from a high of 
68 million in 1988 to its current 27 million. 
 
The province forced municipalities to tighten their belts and 
to increase property taxes to perilously high levels to help 
compensate for decreasing federal transfers and high debt 
charges. However, now that the federal transfers are on the 
rise and the province’s fiscal house is in order, 
municipalities that were asked to share the pain, get to see 
no gain. 
 
My council was very disappointed with the lack of 
commitment to municipalities in this year’s budget, the 
same municipalities that through the delivery of essential 
services, provides the core of a quality Saskatchewan 
lifestyle. 
 
My council supports the Saskatchewan Party’s proposed 
amendment to the 2001 provincial budget calling on the 
provincial government to provide an additional $30 million 
in municipal revenue-sharing grants this year. Thank you. 
Yours truly. 

 
Signed Barry Warsylewicz, town administrator, town of 
Porcupine Plain. 
 
(16:00) 
 
I think it’s very, very obvious, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if we 
don’t get some assistance for our municipalities in this budget 
and if the government members opposite and the Liberal 



April 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 379 

 

members of the government don’t support our amendment, 
taxes are going to go up. People will see their property taxes 
increase and it will all be entirely the fault of that government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can see through the members opposite. They 
know exactly what they’re doing and we know it too. Mr. 
Speaker, they see the writing on the wall. They know what’s in 
store for them in the next election and they’ve resorted to the 
lowest form of politics — pork-barrelling. 
 
They’re spending hard-earned tax money on padding union 
membership lists. They’re spending hard-earned tax money to 
hire their buddies. And they’re leaving the citizens of this 
province out in the cold to fend for themselves, to cut their own 
budgets, while the government opens the tap on this new 
spending for all their buddies. 
 
That’s the new vision, Mr. Deputy Speaker, offered by the 
government members opposite. Let’s take care of our own 
because we don’t have much time left, is what they’re saying 
with this budget. They have put their own partisan interests and 
political payoffs ahead of the interests of the people that they 
were sent here to serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cat’s out of the bag. This government can’t 
hide any longer. We’ve seen their true stripes, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and it’s not a pretty picture. They’re spending like 
drunken sailors. And what will we have to show for it at the end 
of the year? Well, Mr. Speaker, we will have Mr. Gruending in 
Regina, organized labour is the new elite, and all of that is 
clearly on display for everyone to see. The big unions who 
backed the winner during the leadership campaign are now 
calling the tune. 
 
Sadly, the people of this province are the ones who are paying, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I suppose they consider that quite an 
achievement. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in good conscience, I cannot support this 
budget. But I will be supporting the amendment that recognizes 
and respects our third level of government and the people they 
serve. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is 
indeed a thrill to stand and speak to this budget, this wonderful 
budget for the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I can’t 
help but feel somewhat sorry for the poor souls stuck in the 
opposition benches where they’re going to be stuck a long time. 
It must be, Mr. Speaker, very, very painful. 
 
This is a group that says, gee, there haven’t been tax cuts. 
They’re saying, haven’t been tax cuts. Well it kind of flies in 
the face of what happened January 1, 2001, which is January, 
February, March — it’s not a hundred days ago — three months 
ago. January 1 this year, the flat tax in Saskatchewan was 
eliminated. It’s gone. Gone. Who introduced the flat tax? They 
did, Mr. Speaker. They did when they were in government. 
 
January 1 the debt-reduction surtax was eliminated. Gone. 
Gone. January 1 this year, the high-income surtax in 
Saskatchewan — gone. Who introduced those three hated 

taxes? The Tories on the other side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have tax reductions happening in record 
amounts this very year. We have a wonderful budget that 
continues to build, continues to build on the successes that we 
have enjoyed for a number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard people say, and I hear it in my 
constituency, I hear it when I’m around the province, this 
wonderful province of Saskatchewan — people say there are 
areas that concern them hugely. 
 
One of them has been highways. We’ve listened. In fact we 
drive these highways, and frankly it’s hard to maintain 
highways when you have so much money going to interest on 
the debt and other things like health care and education and all 
of the needed services. 
 
Couple that with rail-line abandonment and the resulting 
increased heavy traffic flow, the grain that’s shifted from rail to 
our highways, mostly . . . I shouldn’t say mostly, but much of it 
goes on our tertiary highway system, the thin membrane 
system, and it was just never, ever designed for B-trains or 
heavy traffic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this budget, what have we got? Highways and 
Transportation, more than 311 million being spent on Highways 
and Transportation this year. That is very, very close to a 25 per 
cent increase in expenditures for Highways. Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t know how you’d describe this as anything other than 
fabulous news for Highways. 
 
Couple that with the commitment we have to do even more in 
Highways. We have a commitment, Mr. Speaker, that Highway 
1 West is going to be twinned by the fall of 2004 all the way to 
the Alberta border. That’s been a long-standing sore spot with 
many people and we’re delighted that we’re able to accelerate 
the twinning of that highway. 
 
Primary pavements are going to be upgraded to a 20-year 
lifespan. Regional pavements are going to be upgraded to a 
25-year lifespan. And 800 kilometres of thin membrane surface 
road is going to be upgraded to granular pavement. Northern 
roads, highways, and airports are going to be improved. There’s 
other safety improvements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, great news for Highways. A great budget where 
we have seen the budget increase by nearly 20 . . . well 24.7 per 
cent. I’ll call it 25 per cent. Small wonder, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
painful for members opposite. You don’t hear them talking 
much about highways these days. They know that we’re on that 
file. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hear members opposite saying, on the one hand, 
you should spend more. On the other hand, they’re saying, you 
should do more tax cuts. Then we have the member for Carrot 
River Valley stand up and say, but you’re really in deficit. 
 
And then what do they say other days — but you should spend 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. That has been the mantra from 
many of the members opposite. You should spend the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund in its total. They call it a $500 million 
election slush fund. This is what members opposite call the 



380 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2001 

 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund that we’re using this year, Mr. 
Speaker, using some of the money out of the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. 
 
And I can tell you, we’re using some of the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund next year as well. We’ve been able to save up in the bonus 
years, the great years. We have a savings account that smoothes 
out the dips and the peaks in our Saskatchewan economy. 
 
They would have nothing in that account. They would just have 
us riding a roller coaster every year. This group across the way, 
Mr. Speaker, show their callousness to working people. And 
how do they show it? This very day in question period, what 
were they asking the Minister of Municipal Affairs, my 
seatmate from . . . the member from Melville? They were 
saying, cut the $30 million that we have in this budget. Cut the 
$30 million that was going to be used to hire 570 full-time 
people. They’re saying cut that, Mr. Speaker; don’t provide 
those services. 
 
Well how does this work? How does this work? Highways are 
an issue. We’re hiring people to fix and to build new roads. 
They say fix the roads but don’t hire anybody to do it. What a 
wonderful, wonderful Alice in fairyland world they live in. Fix 
the roads but don’t spend any money; fix the roads but don’t 
hire anybody to do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve hired people in health care — they’re 
included in that 570 people. 
 
We’ve hired people right throughout government services 
including, I’m delighted to say as minister responsible for the 
Department of Labour, we’ve got 10 positions there, and much 
needed positions. And it’ll provide an extra boost for the good 
people in the Department of Labour as they deliver 
occupational health and safety and many other ready-to-work 
programs, and farm safety programs — all kinds of good 
services that the Department of Labour deliver. 
 
And we’ve got good news in this budget. Ten of the positions 
there coming from that very $30 million that they’re saying, as 
early as two and a half hours ago . . . or as late as two and a half 
hours ago, they’re saying don’t spend the $30 million. It’s 
astounding. 
 
Not much wonder it is so painful for members over there. 
They’re saying, Mr. Speaker . . . in fact the member for Carrot 
River Valley said, if we don’t support their amendment — their 
amendment respecting the $30 million — they’re saying the 
taxes will go up. Flies absolutely in the face of reality. Flies 
totally in the face of reality. Because by us sticking with our 
budget, we’ve got $30 million worth of services that are being 
provided to all of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve got highways being fixed. People said let’s fix 
highways. 
 
People said, let’s do some things with respect to education. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m delighted to tell you that we’re doing things with 
respect to education. School operating grants are increasing 
$40.8 million this year alone — $40.8 million. It’s the biggest 
increase the Department of Education has seen, I believe, ever. 
With some of this money too, Mr. Speaker, we’re doubling the 

number of community schools. We’re expanding it to 42 new 
. . . we’re going to establish 42 new community schools, 
including elementary and secondary schools, in both rural and 
in urban Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are things that connect schools and 
communities, gives young people a place to go after hours, 
gives the whole community a focal point. It’s a wonderful, 
wonderful, forward-looking step, and I’m delighted to say that 
we provided the money in this budget for education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health — always, always a major concern of 
Saskatchewan people. I know it’s a concern of mine. I suspect 
health care is a concern of literally all 1.025 million 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, for example in cancer care, the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency this year alone is getting a 22 per 
cent increase in its funding — 22 per cent. Astounding. This is 
a budget that is going to help a significant number of us. I pray 
that it never has to help you or me, or any of our family or 
friends; but the reality is, it may well. But a 22 per cent increase 
for people that really need the help. And that is going to be used 
so that we can provide the latest treatments and the therapies, 
and to enhance existing services. I think that’s money really 
well spent. I know that’s what my constituents have shared with 
me; they wanted money there. 
 
We’re going to be providing a second air ambulance plane. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, not much of a secret that that plane isn’t so 
much for people in Regina. This is really a plus for rural 
Saskatchewan, a huge plus. So we’ve got the second air 
ambulance plane in this year’s budget. 
 
We’ve expanded programs to ensure that Saskatchewan 
children will have the best possible start in life, and we’re 
helping them to develop into healthy and productive adults. 
There’s a big boost in the health budget. We’re going to be 
screening at-risk mothers, and really going after that particular 
file. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what a great budget, and I am so proud to be 
standing here in support of it. As I mentioned, taxes having 
gone down . . . let me just put that, taxes having gone down, 
into a bit of context particularly for the members opposite. 
 
(16:15) 
 
In 1992 Saskatchewan had the second highest rate of taxation. 
People were taxed second highest in the entire country of 
Canada. Today we’re the fourth lowest taxed people in all of 
Canada. We have done this by, as has been pointed out 
repeatedly by members on the government side, we’ve done 
this by delivering eight successive balanced surplus budgets, 
Mr. Speaker — eight in a row. We’ve systematically reduced 
the debt. As a result of that, the interest payments on the debt, 
or the mortgage if I can describe it, the sorry-Tory mortgage, 
the payments on that sorry-Tory mortgage have been reduced. 
In fact it’s remarkable, the Minister of Finance pointed out I 
think in his budget speech; if not, it was somewhere else. 
 
To put it into context, frame this, Mr. Speaker, in 1994 we were 
spending, for every dollar we spent in education, we spent a 



April 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

 

dollar on interest on that sorry-Tory debt — dollar for dollar, 
dollar for dollar, dollar for dollar. It was actually more . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I thank the hon. member for Swift 
Current for sharing that — it was actually more that we spent 
on interest. Let’s not make too fine a line — dollar for dollar. 
 
Today in this budget, the Minister of Education was able to 
announce that we are spending virtually $2 on education, 
virtually $2 for every dollar that is spent on interest on that 
sorry-Tory debt, Mr. Speaker. So we’ve shifted and are able to 
double our commitment to education in Saskatchewan. 
 
This is something we are very, very, very proud of and want to 
continue to make improvements in that line. But the only way 
you’ll do it, Mr. Speaker, is if you don’t go back, if you don’t 
go back to having foxes in charge of the chicken coop, if I can 
describe it that way. We have to be vigilant. We have to be 
vigilant with public finances. 
 
It’s an obligation that we owe to our constituents on the 
government side, we owe it to the people of Saskatchewan, we 
owe it to our children and the future of Saskatchewan, the 
future citizens. We cannot, we cannot start becoming reckless, 
as members opposite would have us do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, budget day — I noted from my chair while the 
minister was delivering his speech — when it got to agriculture, 
it was really interesting. All of a sudden, the opposition faces 
got real long and they got real sad. Now what was it about the 
agricultural portion that made their faces long? I think it was the 
35 per cent increase in agricultural funding, and their 
disappointment that we were on that file. That our Minister of 
Agriculture, the Deputy Premier, is on that agricultural file big 
time; that we recognize the importance of farming in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to say on that, Mr. Speaker, there’s never, there 
truly is never enough that we can do. That’s a hard reality. I 
wish it were different. I wish it for some very personal and 
family reasons, but I wish it for all of the people in rural 
Saskatchewan. I do sincerely wish there was more that we could 
do on all of those areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what a great budget, what a great budget. We have 
introduced tax cuts for small business, having cut the rate from 
8 to 6 per cent. Next year, January 1, the amount that is covered 
of income goes from $200,000 to $300,000. That’s going to 
capture even more small businesses with even more good news. 
We’re helping the very people that deliver the jobs in 
Saskatchewan. The job growth is largely in small business. Mr. 
Speaker, this budget addresses those very businesses and I’m 
just, just really pleased. 
 
There’s been changes to the personal tax form. The tax credits 
have been raised, and I’m sure other members have spoken 
about that, Mr. Speaker. So in the interest of time I’m not going 
to go there. 
 
I want to close by just saying how very, very proud I am to be 
part of the government that has delivered its eighth successive 
balanced surplus budget that is driving interest costs down. And 
a government, Mr. Speaker, that is listening to the people of 
Saskatchewan, whether they live in Regina Coronation Park, 

my constituency — anywhere else in Regina; whether they live 
in Melville, Saskatoon, Kindersley, Marengo — anywhere in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. We’re listening and we’re acting. 
 
This budget listened and it reacts and it’s acting in the best 
interests of all of the people of Saskatchewan. I am very, very 
proud to be supporting this budget, and of course in opposition 
to the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to rise in the House again today to reply to the 
budget speech that was delivered last Friday by the Minister of 
Finance. It was very interesting. 
 
As I listened to him deliver the budget this year, Mr. Speaker, 
he had a couple of coin words that he used over and over and 
over again, which I’m going to touch on in a little bit. But it’s 
also similar to what he had to say last year when he spoke on 
the budget. And I remember him calling it, before the budget, 
you just wait, this is going to be a historic budget. He used 
historic I don’t know how many times. I don’t have the speech 
in front of me and I wish I did. But he talked about how it was 
such a historic budget. 
 
Well it was historic, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was a historic 
budget because it . . . for trying to sell it on tax cuts; it was a tax 
increase; they expanded the PST. The budget went south on him 
last year. So it’s very, very interesting when we stand in the 
House today and we listen to the Minister of Finance talk about 
his budget. His budget wasn’t historic last year and he knows it. 
And it’s really interesting how he never used that term again 
when he dealt with this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The terms that he used in this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was 
— and if I could do it — now that’s progress. Or maybe it was: 
now that’s progress. And he talked about progress. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I went through his budget address. And I read 
through it page per page. And do you know how many times he 
used that phrase — now that’s progress — Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? How many times? Does anybody got a guess? 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he used “now that’s progress” 15 
times. And I read it in the speech, the budget address, that’s 
how many times he used it. And I really find it interesting, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that he would have used that term over and 
over and over and over and over again. 
 
And you know why he used that term over and over and over 
again, is because if you say it long enough, if you tell yourself 
enough times, now that’s progress, you’re going to believe. And 
it wasn’t progress, but that’s what they believe, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
But you know, I want to ask the Minister of Finance and really 
wish that he would have used that about 6,700 more times last 
year. If he could have used that 6,700 more times last year, he 
might of kept the 6,700 people that left this province, because 
of that government, back in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



382 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2001 

 

Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, so if he could say it a 
few more times, maybe he could get those people believing that 
they should belong in this province and not leave the province. 
Because the only one that he convinced, now that’s progress, 
are the members on that side of the House. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s another issue when it comes to 
population. Some of the numbers that have just recently been 
released, is that there’s 500,000 people born in Saskatchewan 
living outside this province right now. Do you know what that 
would do to our tax base? If you kept that 500,000 people in 
this province paying taxes, then I would applaud you when you 
say now that’s progress. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
Minister of Finance had missed the mark on that many, many 
times. 
 
Like in my reply to the Speech from the Throne — when I 
looked through the Speech from the Throne, which I thought 
was a flop and that’s when we needed to flip the House — I 
looked at the Speech from the Throne and I tried to pick out 
some of the things that I thought were very positive. And there 
was the odd positive issue in the Speech from the Throne. 
 
And I will say honestly, that when I go through this budget 
address there are some positive things in the budget address and 
I do want to touch on those. I do want to touch on those because 
he did hit the mark on a couple of issues. 
 
But it’s really interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we go 
through some of the things that this administration has done 
over the last two years, year and a half to two years, with the 
influence of the Liberals — because they have influenced this 
government so much, you know, it’s really amazing — but if 
we look at some of the things that they’ve done in the last year 
and a half that I’ve had to applaud them on, it hasn’t been 
Liberal influence that’s created that. It’s been this party. It’s 
been the Saskatchewan Party right here that have influenced 
that government far more than the two Liberal members sitting 
on that side of the House. 
 
If I remember, in the last provincial election we talked an awful 
lot about a provincial audit . . . or sorry, a health care audit 
when we wanted to look at the health care system. And instead 
of throwing a pile more money into it, we wanted to look at it 
and see what is wrong before we throw a whole bunch more 
money into it. It didn’t make sense to keep throwing money into 
a bottomless pit when they couldn’t explain where the money 
was going in the first place. So we called all election to do some 
sort of a health care audit. 
 
Now I’m not sure that the Fyke Commission is going to hit 
exactly all the issues that we wanted, but at least they listened to 
what we had to say and implemented it. It’s one of the better 
plans they’ve had in the last year and a half and it came from 
this side of the House. But I will compliment them on 
implementing it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We talked a lot about taxation and income tax and that type of 
thing in the last provincial election and they have started to try 
and get their mind around decreasing tax. 
 
Now I’ve had letter after letter and phone call after phone call 
into my constituency office and showing me how, here’s my 

pay stub last year and now in this historic budget that’s tax cut, 
tax cuts and here’s my paycheque this year. And they had no 
more take-home pay this year than after the historic budget that 
that minister released. 
 
Some of the people that phoned into my office said, boy I could 
use a lot less of those historic budgets and I’d be a lot better off, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But they are. They’ve listened to us. They’ve listened to us and 
they’re trying to get their heads around tax cut. Now he’s 
yelling from his seat, the Minister of Finance is yelling from his 
seat that, oh they’re not comparing apples to apples, but they’re 
comparing January to January. It’s similar months, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The other issue that comes up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the Rate 
Review Committee. We talked about a Rate Review 
Committee. We said that in the last provincial election, and I 
have to applaud the government because they introduced it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And the Rate Review Committee has had a bit 
of work cut out for them in the last year and a half with some of 
the increases and they’re going to have more work cut out for 
them as we look at a possible increase in SaskEnergy rates of 
40 per cent. 
 
You know, at this point they yell . . . they comment from their 
seats on the opposite side and compare it to Alberta, compare it 
to Alberta. Well let’s wait in six months, if that 40 per cent 
increase goes through, and then see how much they’re 
squawking from their seats, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They think 
that we’ve got walls around us that are going to protect us and 
it’s not the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So those are some of the ideas that we have put forward that it 
influences provincial government. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
when we talk about, as I mentioned at the start, that the Liberals 
have had so much influence on the provincial government and 
we can name probably three of four of the bigger issues that 
they have tackled have come from this side of the House, not 
from the Liberal Party on that side of the House. 
 
So for the Liberal members to think that they have no say if 
they’re on this side of the House, they’d have a lot more say on 
how that government acted as opposed to being muffled and 
stifled like they are right now. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to talk about some of the 
other highlights in the budget because there are some highlights 
in this budget. And as I said when I campaigned, if I thought 
something was good, I have no problem announcing it in this 
House. And so I’m going to run down a couple of things that I 
could find in this budget that really make a lot of sense. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we campaigned on and we still talk about 
increasing this province’s business sector. Small business is a 
main engine to our economy. And I was very glad to see the 
Minister of Finance introduce the cut on the small-business tax 
by 2 per cent over two years, and I applaud him for that. 
 
And, you know, it was very interesting when I hear some of the 
members opposite quoting from some of the different 
newspaper articles. As a matter of fact, it was the member from 



April 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 383 

 

Cumberland that was commenting on Marilyn Braun and the 
Canadian tax federation. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And I looked at the quote that he used in Hansard, word for 
word, and then I went into the paper and I looked at the quote 
that she gave, and they were two separate, totally different 
things. It was very interesting how he cut off the statement of 
the minister . . . of Marilyn Braun, the person from the 
Independent Business. 
 
And what she said is, she said it was a good first step, but that’s 
all it is. They need to take step two, step three, and step four. 
And there’s no plan for that. 
 
So I will give you credit in reducing the small-business tax by 2 
per cent — from 8 per cent down to 6 per cent in the next two 
years. But if you ask small business what they would like to 
see, they would like to see a two- or a three- or a four-year plan 
to get it down to zero so this is a tax-free haven for small 
business. That’s what they want. And that’s what we have 
proposed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will applaud the 
minister, as I said, because he kind of got it right, but not all the 
way. So for that we’ll give him credit. 
 
The second part in the budget that I do have to compliment and 
comment on in the budget was the professionals that can 
incorporate. It was something that we talked about in our 
election platform. It was an idea that we have talked about for 
two years now. And I applaud the Minister of Finance for 
allowing professionals to incorporate — lawyers, accountants 
— to have the opportunity to incorporate. 
 
And I won’t even go any further than that other than to say 
good job, Mr. Minister of Finance, because that is something 
that is needed in this province. 
 
The third area that I want to comment on and compliment the 
Minister of Finance on and the government opposite, is they are 
putting more money into spending. 
 
When I spoke on the reply to the Speech from the Throne I 
talked an awful lot about some of the highways in my province. 
And I related one collision that happened on Highway 35. That 
was after being in traffic safety for 20 years before I entered the 
life of politics, I could honestly say it was a road-related, it was 
a major contributing factor in that collision. Now thank heavens 
no one was killed. 
 
But they are looking at repairing some of those roads. They are 
looking at putting more money into highways, and I applaud 
them for that. 
 
After the budget speech I talked to a number of the people that 
that was going to affect. I talked to some of the road builders 
that I know of, a couple of them that I know quite well, and I 
talked to the Road Builders Association who were here and 
commented on the budget, and they were happy to see that 

money. 
 
But what they really wanted to make sure, and what was very 
interesting when I talked to them is, they were a little hesitant. 
They wanted to know if that money was going to go into 
pavement or is it going to go into more yellow trucks or is it 
going to go into more personnel? Because what we need to fix 
the highways is not more people behind desks, but more 
pavement in the potholes. That’s how you fix the highways, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And so we need the people that are on the 
front lines. 
 
And I talked to the minister . . . I talked to the chairman of the 
Road Builders Association and he was very, very hesitant 
because he knows that they have no problem wrapping up their 
businesses, wrapping up their employees, wrapping up their 
ability to fix highways if this government gets out of the road 
and doesn’t try and stay in front and expand their bureaucracy 
and let the money go to pavement. And that is very, very 
important. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will compliment the government on 
the fact that they have increased the funding in highways, but 
will be watching very, very closely to see if it goes to the 
highways and not to more bureaucracy. Unfortunately I think 
we already know part of that answer as we go through the 
budget a little bit further. 
 
After talking to a number of the constituents in Indian 
Head-Milestone — whether it was out at Milestone at a hockey 
game or at a dinner theatre or whatever it might have been, at a 
farm auction — and I talked to them and I brought up, what did 
you feel of the budget? What did you think of the budget? And 
really, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and Speaker, they really didn’t 
have a lot of positive to say about the budget, unfortunately. 
And I tried to compliment the government and I tried to say oh, 
no, no, no, you’ve read it wrong; I’m sure you’ve read it wrong. 
 
We’ve been able to sit in the House for the last three or four 
days and listen to the members opposite espouse on how 
wonderful this budget is. And I said to them, I said, you know, 
well you’ve got to be wrong because when you listen to the 27 
members or 30 members, counting the Liberals, or whatever the 
numbers are, they kept telling me oh no, it’s got to be a great 
budget. I was telling them it had to be a good budget. And they 
said well really there is nothing there that we can really grab 
onto. 
 
And one of the things that came up over and over and over 
again is that a lot of those people that I talked to run businesses. 
They run their farm, for example. And you know, a classic 
example of a person that is running his farm who sees his 
commodity prices drop, he sees his . . . so it affects his revenue 
stream, he sees his land base dropping, what does he do? Does 
he go hire a whole bunch more employees to manage that farm 
when he sees his revenue dropping and his land base dropping? 
 
But you know it’s interesting when you look at the government 
opposite, when they see their customer base, the population in 
this province dropping by 6,700 people last year, 500,000 
people over the last number of years, when they see — and 
admittedly by this government opposite — that their revenue is 
dropping, they have said it a couple of times, their revenue is 



384 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2001 

 

dropping and is dropping significantly. So what does the 
government do, being the stars of business that they are on the 
opposite side? They increase their bureaucracy. They hire 570 
more people to increase the bureaucracy on a business — if you 
look at it as a business — with population dropping and revenue 
dropping. 
 
There isn’t a business in this world or a business manager in 
this world, that would look at that and say that is a good 
business decision, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, sorry. 
But unfortunately, the people opposite do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look at what they have done, and they’ve talked 
many, many times on how they need all these extra employees. 
And I won’t deny that there are, in some instances, in some 
places, some hiring may have to be done, after looking at the 
department, after looking at the department and redistributing 
and reorganizing, because I’m not sure that all departments that 
we need another 570 employees. 
 
You know and the minister of . . . it’s been said from the other 
side, it’s been said a number of times and I forget exactly how 
many — I didn’t have it written down — how many more 
social workers they’re going to be hiring . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And 60 more social workers. But I want to read 
from a release dated December 17, 2000, December 17, 2000, 
from the Government of Saskatchewan. And what this news 
release says is: 

 
Historic decline in welfare cases. 

 
Historic decline. It goes on, where the Minister of Social 
Services goes on to say: 
 

This decline in caseloads is unprecedented in the province. 
 

It’s unprecedented in the province. In other words, the issues 
and the problems in social services are declining so much that 
we have to hire another 60 social care workers. Doesn’t that 
make sense? Now here it is in black and white. They made a 
historic gain in social services and in welfare cases, so what do 
they do? They hire more people, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, you can go into . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The member will 
continue. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can go on in many, many different situations 
like that, whether it’s highways, whether it’s social services — 
as I said, a historic decline in welfare cases. But you know, Mr. 
Speaker, when you look at what they have done by hiring 570 
new employees, well, let’s just start with the first one, for 
example. Maybe we should just start with the first one, for 
example. 
 
Who did they hire? Well, Mr. Speaker, their first employee out 
of these 570. . . and I’m sure they’re only going to get better 
because Lord knows there’s enough defeated NDP candidates 
out there that they can fill all 570 seats. And you know, Mr. 

Speaker, maybe in all their wisdom, maybe in all their wisdom, 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal content will come out because there’s 
an awful lot of defeated Liberal members out there too that they 
can hire, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to go through this article that was 
written on April 3, yesterday, talking about, “Gruending lands 
on government payroll.” You know, and it says here he’ll now 
earn $5,209 a month as a speech writer for the Premier — 
$5,000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like on the record for people of this 
province to know, I would like on the record for the people in 
this province to know where that person came from and his 
background, because I think it’s only fair that we realize the 
quality of person that this government is hiring. 
 
Let me give him a little bit of background on where this fellow 
is from. He ran in the 1997 election, and guess what happened 
to him by the people of Saskatoon. Did they want him? No, 
they didn’t want him; he lost. Well you know he ran in a 
by-election in 1999 and he got elected for about a year, a year 
and a half, and then he ran in the last federal election but he ran 
in a different constituency, Mr. Speaker. He ran in the last 
federal election. Did the people of Saskatoon-Rosetown want 
him? No, they didn’t want him either, Mr. Speaker. But this 
government does, this government wants him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to give you a little bit of his resumé. Prior to his election 
he had been serving as an aide to the NDP MP (Member of 
Parliament) Dick Proctor. Wow, he’s got some good credentials 
there. But you know what’s even more important, as the Allan 
Blakeney, the former premier of this province, as leading the 
transition team, let me tell you what this Dennis Gruending did. 
He was the author of a biography of the former premier of this 
province, Allan Blakeney. Now boy, that sure qualifies him, 
that qualifies him. He comes from pure red blood. 
 
He’s not only worked for an MP, he’s written a book on the 
former premier of this province, and that’s the first person that 
this government wants to hire of the 570 employees. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if we get a little antsy when they start 
talking about hiring another 569 more, you can see why. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, we really question. And I guess maybe 
. . . I’d better go back to this because there was one more 
statement here I wanted to talk about. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Make sure you get it all. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Might as well . . . Yes, get it all out. Mr. 
Speaker, the House Leader, the Government House Leader — 
and I won’t quote his name even though I guess I could because 
it’s a quote in the paper — but the Government House Leader 
had to say about this member, said: this government has a track 
record of solid, professional civil servants. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s a lot of civil servants that 
would be worried to be compared to that person that they just 
hired two days ago, Mr. Speaker. I think there’s a lot of civil 
servants that wouldn’t want their name mentioned in the same 
sentence as the former author of the premier of this province, 
Allan Blakeney, his biography, Mr. Speaker. 



April 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 385 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues that people have 
talked to me about since the last provincial election — since the 
budget just spent a couple of days ago — and that was one of 
them. It was definitely the biggest story that they came out with 
is that they’re going to hire another 570 workers when 
revenue’s decreasing, when population is decreasing, and the 
only thing that’s getting bigger in this province is your 
government. And that’s what they’re having a hard time dealing 
with. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, they also talked an awful lot 
about taxes to me. Mr. Speaker, I think everybody in this 
province — maybe excepting for the government side — I think 
most people feel in this province in order to grow this province 
we need to attract more people. We need to attract businesses. 
We need to attract a lot more people. We need to double the 
population in this province. Because you can only tax the 
people that we have so much, you know. And what’s happening 
is they’re taxing so much and we’re losing more and more and 
more that instead of increasing the population, we’re decreasing 
the population of our province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I talk to people throughout the 
constituency of Indian Head-Milestone I find that a lot of them 
are telling me that . . . and it’s interesting because I can see this 
comment coming especially from the west side of the province, 
you know from Cypress Hills and Swift Current and all the way 
up, Kindersley, that the PST is a real hindrance in growing this 
province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the PST wasn’t mentioned in this budget. 
And you know I hate to say it but I have to thank the Minister 
of Finance because the last time he mentioned the PST he 
expanded it and brought in another $160 million. You know, so 
I guess we have to watch what we want. But, Mr. Speaker, the 
PST is a huge hindrance in this province. We need to start 
looking at lowering the PST to make us more competitive with 
our neighbours, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(16:45) 
 
The gas tax is another issue that has come up many, many times 
that people are really uncomfortable with, that they’d like to see 
a bit of a break in the gas tax. But there is no mention of that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But probably the biggest thing that came up over and over and 
over again, Mr. Speaker — and I talked about it in the Throne 
Speech, in my reply to the Throne Speech, and I know all 
members opposite would have listened carefully with that when 
I replied — and I was talking an awful lot about the property 
tax in this province. And I was talking about people in Fillmore 
and I was talking about people in Indian Head and I was talking 
about people in Milestone who are seeing . . . they’re on fixed 
incomes staying very close to the same, and they’re seeing their 
property taxes increase. 
 
And municipalities are finding all over this province . . . and 
I’m sure we’ll see a lot of them speaking out more and more. I 
think we had 40 or some letters come in within 24 hours 
denouncing the plan, and supporting the plan that we had of 
how about we forget the 570 employees and give the 
municipalities the money to manage properly? 

But, Mr. Speaker, you know, it’s urban community after urban 
community that is going to be hurt in the next couple of months 
because they’re going to see their property tax increase. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if you had been paying 
attention to the mayor of Regina prior to the budget. And I 
don’t know . . . Well I think I do know now whether the 
Minister of Finance was paying attention to the news and heard 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) prior 
to the budget, because he didn’t. 
 
All of those people lined up right off the bat before the budget 
and said we need to change this transition, this equalization 
payment from the provincial government. It has been declining 
over the last 10 to 15 years . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And 
I heard one of the members opposite say, well, it stabilized the 
last two years. Well when it’s that low, it’s pretty easy to 
stabilize and it hasn’t gone down any more. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, they’re really worried that their equalization 
payments aren’t large enough and they lined up — they lined up 
before the budget speech — and they said, we need more 
money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard many, many times . . . And in fact I 
think almost every one of the members opposite have talked 
about for eight years they’ve run a balanced budget. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, it’s seven years. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Seven years. This year isn’t quite balanced. 
But they’ve run, and they’ve really patted themselves on the 
back, and they’ve stuck their chests out. They’ve done a lot of 
things but, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t balance the budget. Every 
person in Saskatchewan is who balanced that budget for them. 
Every person in Saskatchewan that pays property tax is who 
balanced that budget for you. Not you people. Not you 
members opposite who think that they are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Just to remind the member to address his 
remarks through the Chair, please. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s the first 
time you’ve had to tell me that. I haven’t had an opportunity to 
expound on that before, so I will try and address my remarks 
through you, as is proper. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s the Minister of Finance that has 
. . . that didn’t listen to municipality after municipality, whether 
it was the mayor of Regina, whether it was the mayor of Indian 
Head, whether it was the mayor . . . I know the story just prior 
to the budget when they talked about how many communities 
are struggling with infrastructure problems and the only way 
they’re going to address it is by increasing the property tax, 
unless — unless — this government addresses it in the next 
budget. And, you know, I think of all the stories that were 
carried before the budget speech, that was the one that got the 
most air time. And they’re really hurting. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately this headline says it all here. It 
says “Urban centres shut out.” Shut out of the budget, Mr. 
Speaker. They didn’t get any sort of increase in the equalization 
payment and they really feel that over and over and over again 



386 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2001 

 

this government has balanced the budget on the backs of 
municipalities, backs on the government . . . on the backs of the 
government that is closest to the people. For they have nowhere 
else to turn that decrease in revenue onto but the taxpayer, but 
the property taxpayer, because that’s the only way they can 
generate revenue. And so that’s what has happened. 
 
And I think, as I’ve talked many, many times before in this 
House, of going to tax revolt meeting after tax revolt meeting. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I’m going to have to get those tax 
revolt clothes back on because you’re going to see them spring 
up again come this spring and fall when they see their property 
taxes increase thanks to this provincial government, Mr. 
Speaker — thanks to this provincial government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and you know it doesn’t have to be that way. It 
didn’t have to be that way in this province. This province has all 
the equipment it needs to progress. That’s progress. 
 
But unfortunately, you know, I don’t know, I guess maybe I’ll 
use an analogy of a car that’s not running quite right. You 
know, you’ve got lots of motor under the hood but you just 
can’t get it to go. You know, you step on the gas and the energy 
just isn’t there. And from my experience in motor mechanics, 
which isn’t much, Mr. Speaker, but I do know that perhaps the 
fuel filter is plugged. 
 
And that’s exactly what is happening in this province. That 
government is the fuel filter and it’s plugged and it’s stopping 
the motor from really driving this province, Mr. Speaker. We 
need to change the government because, as one member said 
from our side, there’s a few loose nuts and that’s what’s causing 
the problem in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need this province to grow. And I’ve said it 
before — the only way we grow this province is by increasing 
industry, is by increasing population. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker — although I was not around at the time — but this 
province was at a million people in 1920 or 30, 1930. We had a 
million people in this province. And what do we have now, Mr. 
Speaker? About a million people. 
 
And when you look at the 60 or 70 years of government in this 
province, we have had for the most part a CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) or an NDP government. We’ve had 
a government that hasn’t been very friendly to business. 
 
You know they talk about us having Alberta envy and 
everything else. But you know I haven’t been to Calgary for a 
couple years, unlike a few of the former cabinet members from 
that side. Actually how many? I think there’s three cabinet 
members from that side — there’s Doug Anguish, that’s right; 
and Ned Shillington, yes; and Dwain Lingenfelter, the former 
deputy premier of this province. You know I guess what I 
should do is to talk to them and see what the Calgary situation 
is like. 
 
Because the last time I was in Calgary and I would drive up and 
down some of the streets, and I would look way up and I would 
see all these head offices of Esso and the head offices of Husky 
and all these companies. Was Alberta their first choice? I don’t 
think so. Saskatchewan could have been their first choice if it 
wasn’t for an NDP government that has driven them out of this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has driven money, it has driven 
business out of this province because it wants to control 
everything. If it doesn’t control it, if it doesn’t control it, it kicks 
them out. And that’s what it’s done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s absolutely no reason why our province is a 
have-not province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard many, many times from the members 
opposite, I’ve heard many times from the members opposite of 
how doom and gloom we are. Well, Mr. Speaker, any 
government that’s driven the province into a have-not situation 
doesn’t have a lot to brag about. 
 
We’ve got everything in this province to make it run properly. 
We’ve got the hardest working people in this province. 
 
Actually we’ve got the hardest working people in Alberta. 
They’re all from Saskatchewan, but we’ve got the hardest 
working people there. We’ve got the hardest working people — 
500,000 of them — all over this country that should be in this 
province making it tick. And they’re not here and they’re not 
here for one reason only. It’s not because we don’t have enough 
natural resources, it’s not because we don’t have enough 
business minds — it’s not because of any of that stuff. It’s 
because of an NDP government over the last 40 years that has 
driven people out of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know when you look at other provinces and how 
they’ve expanded and how they’ve progressed, it’s just a real 
shame. And you know we’re not doom and gloom on this 
province at all. The members on this side have no problem 
being positive about this province. We have everything . . . We 
have all the trouble in the world being positive about that 
government. The government is what we’re doom and gloom 
about. The province is what we’re excited about. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned about it in the Throne Speech. 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, there is one party, one party after 
the last provincial election that garnered the most votes; and 
people in this province of Saskatchewan wanted one party to 
run this province, and the most people voted for that party. And 
it wasn’t the party in government. It wasn’t at all the party in 
government. And it certainly wasn’t the party, the Liberal Party 
that are saying that they’re controlling the government. They’re 
driving the strings of government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The majority of the people in this province voted for one party 
and it was the Saskatchewan Party because they knew we had a 
plan for the future. And, Mr. Speaker, I listen to the members 
opposite and they keep saying you have no plan, you have no 
plan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I already talked about it at the start of my 
reply to the budget speech, on the plan that some of the 
members opposite have implemented. We’ve talked about 
doing a health care audit. We’ve hounded and hounded and 
hounded and pushed this government to try and cut taxes. We 
talk about trying to reduce government and allow business to 
take over. 
 



April 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 387 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, the classic example of SaskTel 
getting more into business people’s face. You know, I have a 
number of people that were running security companies in this 
province and what did SaskTel do? Got into SecurTek, and it 
took a number of private business jobs out. 
 
Now if SaskTel got into a new business that nobody else had 
been into and nobody thought of and it increased this province 
— but when it jumps into areas where people are already in 
business, do we need that? You get private industry having to 
compete against the purse strings of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now hear that SaskTel is getting into cable net 
. . . cable television. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a number of 
companies in cable television right now. Whether it’s Access 
Cable in Regina, whether it’s Shaw in Saskatoon, there’s a 
number of cable companies in the province. I can think of two, 
Access and Shaw. And, Mr. Speaker, if you talk to the people in 
those companies, they don’t need to compete against SaskTel to 
deliver their service. 
 
And you know, I think when I talk to a number of people 
around the province, I’ve never heard one of them say, boy, oh 
boy, we’re really lacking cable companies in this province; I 
sure wish the government would get into it. Not once did I hear 
that, Mr. Speaker, in all the travelling I’ve done. 
 
So you know it really deflates the mentality of people in this 
province when you hear government continually getting into the 
face of business. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, when we talk about being a have-not 
province, it’s a have-not province because of an NDP 
government. It’s not a have-not province because we don’t have 
the ideas and the philosophies and the hard work and the 
dedication to this province, Mr. Speaker. We have people 
moving out of this province because they can’t stand the tax 
burden. 
 
In fact, you know, I’d be very interested to talk to those three 
former cabinet ministers of this NDP government, why they 
moved to Alberta. Who were . . . there was Doug Anguish, Ned 
Shillington, and Dwain Lingenfelter moved out of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And yes, I was 
certainly glad to hear that the former premier of the province is 
now working at the University of Saskatchewan and the 
University of Regina. I think he’ll be a real asset to them, 
although I see that now he’s going on to doing a full review of 
the Canada Health Act and what’s going to be taking place 
there. 
 
But you know it’s just . . . you know when we look at it — and 
I hear of anecdotal evidence all the time of people moving out, 
people moving out — and you know, when you look at 
Statistics Canada, the numbers prove out that people are 
moving out of this province because they can’t stand the tax 
burden that this government is putting them under. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just wish for once that they would look at it in a 
different light and say, you know, let’s really do some tax 
cutting; let’s really try and attract business. Let’s really be 

business friendly. Let’s see if we can’t turn this province 
around. And they haven’t. They’ve had a number of years; 
they’ve had 50 years to put it in the mess that it’s in. 
 
And now maybe, Mr. Speaker, I would ask them if they could 
just look at it and say, try and turn it around a little bit. But 
people in the last provincial election believe that we are the 
only party that could turn it around, and that’s why we ended up 
with the most votes in the last provincial election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So Mr. Speaker, you know when we look at employment, you 
know, we’ve lost 13,000 jobs in this province. What’s 13,000 
jobs? There are more and more people out, it’s tax base. And so 
when you lose a tax base you really have a hard time cutting 
taxes, you know, so what we’ve got to do is look at how we can 
attract business. We’ve talked about a number of ways on this 
side by dropping the business sales tax down to zero. We’ve 
talked about more aggressive income tax cuts, we’ve talked 
about a number of issues that I think would grow this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, this House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 pm. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 
 
 


