















































Hansard: June 21, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2003 
 June 21, 2001 
 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by citizens in Saskatchewan who observe that 
commercial greenhouses in Saskatchewan are classified 
differently than agricultural enterprises under the current labour 
standards legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary amendments to The Labour Standards Act to 
recognize the needs and realities faced by commercial 
greenhouse proprietors and employees. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, these constituents come from Biggar, 
Asquith, and Perdue, and I am pleased to present the petition on 
their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petition today is 
from people who are concerned about the Fyke report. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Kelvington health 
care centre be maintained at its current level, offering 
24-hour acute care, emergency, and physician services, and 
that laboratory, physiotherapy, public health, home care, 
long-term care services be readily accessible to users from 
Kelvington and district. 

 
The people that have signed these are from Kelvington, Okla, 
and Lintlaw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with petitions 
of citizens concerned with the terrible state of Highway No. 43. 
The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to call on the 
Saskatchewan government to repair Highway 43 from 
Vanguard to its junction with Highway 4 in order that area 
residents may have access to necessary services without 
endangering life and property. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Your petitioners come from Glenbain, Vanguard, Neville, and 
Aneroid. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the condition of 
Highway 339. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Avonlea and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
petitioners concerned with the need for a new hospital in the 
city of Swift Current and southwest Saskatchewan. And the 
prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 

 
The petition today, Mr. Speaker, is signed by residents of the 
. . . it looks like all of the residents of the Simmie Hutterite 
colony, as well as by residents of the city of Swift Current, 
Herbert, Abbey, and Cabri, as well as Tompkins and 
Shaunavon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to possible reduction of services at 
Davidson and Craik health centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and 
doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Imperial, 
Saskatoon, and Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition of concerned 
citizens from Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency in regards to 
the cellular telephone service: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Spiritwood, Medstead, Glaslyn, Leoville, Chitek Lake, Big 
River, Canwood, Debden, Shellbrook, Parkside, Shell 
Lake, Duck Lake, and Macdowall. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood, Leoville, Canwood, and also from Duck Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 



2004 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from citizens concerned with the 
high cost of energy. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Aneroid. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Citizens of the province petition the Assembly on seven matters 
that are addendums to previously tabled petitions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very honoured to 
introduce some guests to the House today in the west gallery 
and it’s 49 grade 8 students from Forest Grove School. 
 
And the reason I’m so honoured is I only have had . . . this is 
the second school group that I’ve had in the years I’ve been an 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and it’s the first 
one this year. So I’m very pleased to have them here. 
 
I’m looking forward to answering any questions that they’ll 
have later on and have some photographs, and I’m sure they’ll 
be interested in question period. 
 
And as well, my niece and nephew also attended Forest Grove 
School recently, so I know that Forest Grove grade 8 class is 
one of the best classes in one of the best schools in one of the 
best cities in one of the best provinces in one of the best 
countries in all the world. 
 
So I’d ask all hon. members to welcome them here today. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure today to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature Dr. Manana Bakane-Tuoane, the Director General of 
the North West Province, Republic of South Africa. 
 
Today the director, Mr. Speaker, is accompanied by a 
delegation of her senior officials who are seated with her in 
your gallery. This delegation from the North West Province is 
participating in a governance project between Canada and South 
Africa called the Canada-South Africa Provincial Twinning 
Project. 
 
And during their visit to Canada, Mr. Speaker, they are visiting 

the provinces of Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Ontario to 
explore aspects of governance including our cabinet systems 
policy development, and implementation processes. 
 
Now I’m particularly, Mr. Speaker, pleased to welcome the 
director back to Saskatchewan. This is a bit of a homecoming 
for her in that she earned her Ph.D. (Doctor of Philosophy) in 
agriculture at our University of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so, I’d ask all members to welcome the director and her 
delegation to the House this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I too would like to join with the Premier in 
welcoming the Director General of the North West Province of 
the Republic of South Africa, Madam Dr. Manana 
Bakane-Tuoane, to Saskatchewan. And as I understand, back to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re very glad to have you and your officials visit our 
province. And we’re very pleased that Saskatchewan is 
involved in this Canada-South Africa Provincial Twinning 
Project. 
 
I would mention to all members and to our guests that I have 
had the privilege, although many years ago, of visiting her 
country of South Africa — it is a very beautiful land. We 
certainly wish her and her officials well in their responsibilities, 
and also hope they enjoy their stay here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to stand today to introduce to you and through you to 
the Assembly some 30-plus Métis people from Saskatchewan 
who are here today to be in attendance for this second reading 
of The Métis Act, of which they have great concern. 
 
We have in attendance today Darlene McKay — she’s a 
president representing Local No. 7; Jeff Mathieu, representing 
Lily Plain; Brad Umperville, representing 
Canwood-Shellbrook; Wayne Durand, vice-president 
representing Local No. 7, Prince Albert; Doug Fiddler, 
vice-president representing Local No. 109, P.A. (Prince Albert); 
Bob McLeod, president representing Local No. 165, Saskatoon; 
Paul Harper, president representing Saskatoon Métis Local No. 
126; Perry Huton, president representing Local 11A; Shirley 
Ross, representing Longham Local No. 159; Tricia Anderson, 
representing Local No. 269, P.A. 
 
These representatives do represent 75 per cent of the Métis 
provincial membership, and I would like to ask the Assembly to 
give them a warm welcome today and we hope that you enjoy 
the proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join 
the member in welcoming our Métis people from Saskatchewan 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2005 

 

on the gallery and also on this gallery, Mr. Speaker. And I think 
that it’s very important and fitting that on National Aboriginal 
Day, in recognition of the achievements of Métis people, it is 
fitting that we see this, and also the recognition of Louis Riel 
Trail yesterday. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I add my welcome to the Métis people from 
both sides of the gallery, and I ask all members again to 
welcome them. Ta wow. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure today to introduce a number of students 
from the great city of Melfort. They’re students from the Burke 
and Broadway school attending grade 6, and graduating from 
grade 6, I suspect, this year. And they’re here at their year-end 
tour of the capital city. 
 
Accompanying them this afternoon are their teachers, Mrs. 
Atamanchuk and Mrs. Rusling from Burke School. And Mr. 
Skjerven and Mr. Zary from Broadway School. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like you to join me in welcoming the 
students and their teachers very warmly to the Assembly today. 
And I look forward to meeting them after question period. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to members of this Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce some folks seated in your gallery. 
 
First of all is my constituency assistant, Shelley Schroeder. 
Shelly does an excellent job for me at my office in Estevan. 
And also her daughter Denille. Denille is in grade 8. And she’s 
not playing hooky today, Mr. Speaker, she was recommended 
in eight out of nine subjects and she’s on the honour roll at the 
junior high there for maintaining an above 80 average 
throughout the year. So I’d like you to join me in welcoming 
them. 
 
And as well, I’d like to welcome Mr. Bernie Collins. Bernie is 
the former MP (Member of Parliament) for Souris-Moose 
Mountain. I was a constituent of his, now he is a constituent of 
mine and I would like you all to join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
House and our guests today, the five gentlemen that are sitting 
in your gallery, one of whom was just now introduced by the 
member from Estevan, Mr. Bernie Collins. 
 
The other four gentlemen are part of the Central North 
American Trade Corridor. They’re in town to attend the Farm 
Progress Show and I had the good fortune of having lunch with 
them today. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you the president of the organization, 
Steven Pedersen from Minot, North Dakota; Orlin “Bill” 

Hanson from Sherwood, North Dakota; Steve Keim from 
Nebraska; and of course, Larry Norton from Childress, Texas. 
 
And these gentlemen are going to be spending a few more hours 
in the city. With any luck at all we’ll have an opportunity to 
meet with the Minister of Economic Development. And I hope 
that we can encourage more trade activities through these 
introductions and these opportunities in the North-South 
corridor. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would 
like to join with the member opposite in welcoming Bernie 
Collins, the former MP for Souris-Moose Mountain, and the 
delegates with regard to the North American transportation 
corridor. 
 
I would also like to acknowledge that Mr. Hanson is a former 
senator from North Dakota and was intimately involved with 
the negotiations and strategy around the Souris Valley project 
that stopped the flooding in Minot, North Dakota. And they’re 
very appreciative to that. So I’d ask all members to welcome 
him to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to join my colleague from Humboldt and my colleague 
from Cumberland in welcoming all the people, on behalf of the 
constituents of Athabasca, that are visiting here today, with a 
special tribute to the Métis people sitting in both the east and 
the west gallery and I would encourage them all to continue 
making their visit to the Assembly as often as they can. 
 
And as a Métis member of the Assembly it’s a very proud day 
having as many Métis people today as we should have every 
day. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Aboriginal Day 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as Indian 
and Métis affairs critic, I am pleased and honoured to rise in the 
House today to help commemorate National Aboriginal Day. 
Across Canada today Aboriginal people and communities are 
marking this day by holding special events and ceremonies and 
many non-Aboriginal people are truly celebrating with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we owe much to the Aboriginal people of this 
country and of this province. Here in Saskatchewan, Aboriginal 
people, with their customs, cultures, and communities, have 
made many contributions to our province. These contributions 
have helped define our heritage and have added to our diversity. 
 
Today, while the nation proudly recognizes Aboriginal people 



2006 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

and their achievements, we also take this opportunity to honour 
all Aboriginal people in the province. As Saskatchewan moves 
into the next century we know population projections have 
estimated that 50 per cent of the province’s population will be 
Aboriginal by the year 2020. This group of people will be 
young, educated, dedicated, and ready to work. 
 
More must be done, Mr. Speaker, to encourage our young 
Aboriginal people to remain here in Saskatchewan. We are 
counting on them to help our province realize its full potential. 
 
Once again on behalf of all members on this side of the House, 
we extend our best wishes to all of those celebrating National 
Aboriginal Day. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
rise in recognition of National Aboriginal Day. Today is both 
the first day of summer and the longest day of the year. But it 
being summer is not the only reason for celebration; it’s also the 
day of great significance to Aboriginal communities across 
Canada. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we join with First Nations, Métis, and 
Inuit people to celebrate their distinct cultures and heritage, 
their great contribution to this country, in celebrating National 
Aboriginal Day. 
 
Aboriginal peoples throughout Saskatchewan are encouraging 
all people to share in the richness of their culture and history. 
Powwow dancers, hoop dancers, drummers, singers, and 
musicians will highlight the fifth annual celebration right here 
in Regina’s Wascana Park. 
 
Today is also an exciting day for well-known Saskatchewan 
sculptor, Lloyd Pinay from the Peepeekisis First Nation. 
Pinay’s bronze sculpture, paying tribute to contributions of 
Aboriginal people during both world wars, the Korean war, and 
peacekeeping missions, will be officially unveiled at a special 
ceremony in Ottawa’s Confederation Park. 
 
Mr. Speaker, National Aboriginal Day has been celebrated 
across Canada since 1996. I would like to congratulate the 
National Aboriginal Day organizing committee and all the 
volunteers who make this celebration possible and extremely 
enjoyable year after year. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, to all the people of this province, I 
encourage you to get out on this first fine summer day to join in 
the National Aboriginal Day celebrations taking place in your 
local community. It is sure to be a celebration creating a festive, 
informative, and just plain fun atmosphere for everyone. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Grain Elevator Companies 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to speak 
about a couple of new business ventures in the constituency of 
Cypress Hills today. 

Two grain elevators in southwest Saskatchewan will remain 
open, thanks to the efforts of local producers and entrepreneurs. 
 
The elevator in Eastend, formerly owned and operated by the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, has been purchased by newly 
formed Eastend Grain Company Ltd., comprised of four local 
investors. This company’s partnership with Great Western 
Railway Ltd. to move producer cars will certainly be beneficial 
to everyone involved. 
 
Producer cars can now be booked through either the new 
elevator operator or the railroad. Once the car is confirmed, the 
producer can haul the grain to the elevator where it will be 
stored until the car arrives, giving the producer greater 
flexibility. That’s an improvement over what the producers had 
previously. 
 
The grand opening of this new business venture will be held 
Wednesday, June 27. 
 
An initiative to save Frontier’s grain-handling system recently 
became a reality when a group of local investors there were 
awarded the ownership and operation rights for the Sask Wheat 
Pool elevator in Frontier. 
 
The new owners of that elevator incorporated themselves as the 
White Mud Trading Company and opened their doors on May 
28. 
 
There are many benefits, Mr. Speaker, in maintaining a grain 
handling and shipping company close to area producers — not 
the least of which is convenience. Also, a closer location 
reduces the number of trucks on paved roads, reducing the 
amount of strain on Saskatchewan highways. Finally, keeping 
an elevator in a community means keeping economic benefits 
such as jobs in the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate these two groups on 
their commitment to their communities, their entrepreneurial 
spirit, and their foresight. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Advertising at Rider Game 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, last night I had an opportunity to see Saskatchewan’s 
finest in action. And no, Mr. Speaker, I was not at a health care 
centre, which is what the NDP (New Democratic Party) say is 
the best health care in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Rather I was at the football game last night where the Riders 
were playing. And it was a very good game, Mr. Speaker. We 
had an opportunity to see the veterans in action and the rookies, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that wasn’t the most interesting thing to me. It was the 
advertising. People paying to support the Riders. One of the 
ads, Mr. Speaker, was from the Edmonton MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging) services, the service providers to the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders. 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2007 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to wonder why, when as the 
government says we have the best health care in Canada, do the 
Riders have to go to Edmonton to get an MRI. It’s not just the 
Riders, Mr. Speaker, it’s Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
who sends their people to Edmonton to get MRIs. It’s Workers’ 
Compensation from Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that sends 
their clients to Edmonton to get an MRI. 
 
If we have the best health care services in Canada, Mr. Speaker, 
why can’t government organizations, sports, and individuals get 
service here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Signing of Forestry Sector Memorandum of Understanding 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, on National Aboriginal Day 
here is exciting news from northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Last Tuesday on June 12, the province, the forest industry, First 
Nations and Métis representatives, and post-secondary 
institutions such as SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology), SIIT (Saskatchewan Indian Institute 
of Technologies), and GDI (Gabriel Dumont Institute), and also 
the colleges including Northlands were there to sign an historic 
forestry sector memorandum of understanding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the forestry sector memorandum of understanding 
is built on success and strong partnership between communities, 
business, and the education and training sector. This agreement 
provides a true linkage between real jobs and a good, solid 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year the forestry training subcommittee, 
which determines which training is required, received a 15 per 
cent increase in the budget. This increase along with an 
estimated $2 million will give a total of $3 million in training in 
the North. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, along with 300 positions, 300 new jobs 
will be created of which 250 will be filled by First Nations and 
Métis people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new agreement supports Saskatchewan’s 
growing young Aboriginal population. By providing jobs and 
training for youth, we are giving them an opportunity to 
determine their own future right here in this province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Response to Health Committee 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A headline in 
Wednesday’s Leader-Post proclaims “Health hearings put off 
due to low response.” This is a euphemism, Mr. Speaker, 
because of course there was nil response. Nobody showed up. 
 
The ones who really have reason to be put off are the rural 
people with the government deliberately discouraging rural 
residents from expressing their views on the Fyke report by 
scheduling all the hearings in Regina. 

 This, according to the committee Chair, the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview, is to, quote, “force people to focus on the 
big picture in health care.” In other words, the rural people who 
will be the most affected by the Fyke recommendations are, in 
the opinion of the member, unable to see the big picture. What a 
farce! 
 
This is another example, Mr. Speaker, of this administration’s 
callous disregard for the opinions and needs of rural 
Saskatchewan. And this from a Premier who promised to bus 
the cabinet around the province to listen to rural people. It must 
be a Stealth bus because to date no one has seen it. 
 
The whole exercise is a sham. I call on the government to 
apologize and to reschedule the hearing where they ought to 
have been scheduled in the first place — namely in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Jazz Festival 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Once after giving a completely garbled 
answer to a question from a group of students, the famed 
Canadian trumpet player and band leader, Maynard Ferguson, 
said, and I quote, “Trumpet players should play, not talk.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, beginning this evening and continuing until 
the wee hours of July 1, jazz fans from across the country will 
once again have the opportunity to hear a superb line-up of 
musicians. 
 
Musicians who’ll be playing at the 15th annual SaskTel 
Saskatchewan Jazz Festival in Saskatoon with hardly any talk to 
get in the way. 
 
There are at least five venues from concert arenas to small clubs 
where daily we can hear jazz, blues, gospel, world beat music, 
and I understand we are even fortunate enough to have the 
Flying Bulgar Klezmer Band next Thursday. 
 
Something to satisfy every taste, a style to make every finger 
snap and get every toe tapping. 
 
As well, the Saskatoon StarPhoenix community stage in 
Kiwanis Park will be providing free entertainment all day 
nearly every day, compliments of the Saskatoon musicians’ 
union. 
 
The Saskatchewan Jazz Festival is a labour of love by too many 
people and corporate sponsors to list, but as we know, an event 
of this magnitude and quality needs many people working 
behind the scenes. Over 300 volunteers will contribute their 
services. 
 
So our thanks and gratitude to producer Carole Courtney, and 
her staff; to president, Karen Kowalenko-Evjen, and her board 
of directors; and to the hundreds of friends and sponsors 
who’ve donated money and resources so that we, the jazz fans 
of this province, can come and listen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



2008 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Safety of Drinking Water Supply 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. The NDP’s failure to 
manage Saskatchewan’s drinking water supply is causing some 
serious problems. Everyone in Canada is familiar with the 
NDP’s failure to protect the people of North Battleford from 
tainted water. But the NDP’s mismanagement goes far beyond 
the city of North Battleford. 
 
Dozens of communities continue to live with boil-water 
advisories because their drinking water supply is contaminated. 
And now, just days after the people of North Battleford were 
told their tap water was once again safe to drink, the North 
Battleford health district says a chronic shortage of public 
health inspectors could once again jeopardize the health of the 
district’s residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the minister doing about what the North 
Battleford health district says is yet another public health crisis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the 
member is raising is the issue of personnel throughout the 
health care system; and what we know is that there are 
shortages in quite a number of areas which are shortages right 
across the country, and in fact across North America. 
 
So the issue that’s identified by the Battlefords Health District 
around the public health medical officers is a crucial issue, and 
we are working together with the medical profession, through 
the college and through the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical 
Association), around how we look at this particular area as well 
as quite a number of other areas of specialty 
 
And so what we know is that we have to continue to work very 
carefully with the profession when we have these kind of 
shortages, and we also have to look at what kinds of people we 
can train here in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again we see 
the NDP spending their time monitoring instead of doing 
something and taking action. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Party has obtained a letter from Dr. Gerhard Benade, the 
medical officer for the Battlefords Health District. It was sent to 
the Minister of Health, dated July 31, 2001. 
 
In it Dr. Benade warns that the Battlefords Health District could 
quickly lose all of its public health inspectors. According to Dr. 
Benade, and I quote: 
 

I am concerned that the public’s health will be jeopardized 
if the authorities do not address the problems of recruitment 
and retention of these valuable health professionals. 

 
Mr. Speaker, North Battleford has just lived through a drinking 
water crisis because of lax regulation. And now it appears the 
health district could soon have no public health inspectors at all. 

Mr. Speaker, what specific steps is the minister taking to guard 
the public health of the people of North Battleford? And what is 
the NDP doing to ensure Battlefords Health District does not 
lose all of its public health inspectors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure how I’ve 
received a letter dated July 31, 2001, so there must be an error 
in that particular question. 
 
But what I do know is that Dr. Benade is advising the health 
district but also the Department of Health around the concerns 
from that particular district around recruiting more medical 
health officers. 
 
And what has been put in place by the district is a replacement 
health officer who will cover the issues that are of concern as 
they go into their recruiting pattern. Basically this is what 
happens right across the board. 
 
What we do as a Department of Health, and I think basically as 
departments of Health right across the country, is look at those 
areas where there are shortages and see what we can do to help. 
 
We have bursary programs; we have programs that we work 
with together with the medical profession to get the kinds of 
professionals that we need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — A correction for the record — it was May 31 
that the letter was dated, not July 31. My error. 
 
Mr. Speaker, North Battleford’s medical health officer is 
sounding the alarm because he believes the public health is at 
serious risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just last week the boil-water advisory was lifted in 
Meadow Lake. But more than two weeks ago Dr. Benade 
warned the government that there was no . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. It’s getting to be very difficult to 
hear the content of the question and I’d ask for order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — But more than two weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, 
Dr. Benade warned the government that there was no public 
health inspector available to serve Meadow Lake. And Dr. 
Benade is also warning that soon there won’t be any health 
inspectors in the entire Battleford Health District. 
 
In fact just today we have learned that Dr. Benade himself has 
moved to Alberta. Obviously there is a serious problem here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the minister doing to deal with what is 
quickly becoming another serious public health crisis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Dr. Benade had obtained 
employment in Alberta basically across the border from 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2009 

 

Lloydminster in the district that covers from Lloydminster to 
Camrose, right to the edges of Edmonton. He advised the 
district . . . he advised the department many months ago that 
this was what he was going to do. 
 
When this particular issue came up in the Battlefords area, he 
extended his term of employment so that he could be there to be 
part of the crisis that was being dealt with. I talked to Dr. 
Benade personally, and he was very supportive of the kinds of 
assistance that was provided by the Department of Health, by 
the other people. 
 
We need to thank dedicated professionals like Dr. Benade for 
the kind of work that they do. We also thank them for their 
advice and ideas about how to continue to provide this care. At 
this point, that particular district is covered by a backup medical 
health officer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — . . . of Saskatchewan would like to thank Dr. 
Benade for doing his job and sticking with it. We would like to 
know what the government is going to do to create . . . correct 
the problem that we have in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, according to Dr. Benade, the 
public health could be at risk in a lot more places than just 
North Battleford and Meadow Lake. 
 
In his letter to the Minister of Health dated May 31, 2001, Dr. 
Benade says the public health inspector position in La Ronge 
has been vacant for more than a year. In Kindersley it has been 
vacant for nearly two years. In fact Dr. Benade says that fully 
20 per cent of the public health inspector positions in 
Saskatchewan are currently sitting vacant. And at the same 
time, the Department of Environment is actually luring health 
inspectors away from the health districts by offering them more 
money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the same old story. This NDP government has 
mismanaged the province into yet another crisis. To the 
minister: what is the minister doing right now to attract and 
retain public health inspectors in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
do not even want to contemplate what would have happened if 
we would have gone with the budget that those people proposed 
in their ’99 election campaign. 
 
We have increased the budget this last year by 11 per cent over 
the previous year. This includes monies for the districts right 
across the province. And we are going to continue to work with 
the health districts and with the professions involved and to 
make sure that we have the staff that will provide these 
particular services that are needed. 
 
So what we do know is that the only way that we as the people 
of Saskatchewan can sort out these problems is if we work 
together. We’re going to continue to work together with those 

people, and that is the best way to do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have 
more incredible news out of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming. 
We now learn that Liquor and Gaming spent a half a million 
dollars teaching its employees how to get along with each other. 
Boy, that really worked, didn’t it. 
 
They have one Liquor and Gaming employee who was fired for 
doing his job and then wound up suing SLGA (Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority). They have another Liquor and 
Gaming employee fired for raising concerns about improper 
and possibly illegal activities by Liquor and Gaming officials. 
She’s probably going to wind up suing SLGA too. Just imagine 
how bad things would have been if they hadn’t taken this 
course. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of the total chaos, dissension, and 
mismanagement at Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming, will the 
minister be demanding her money back for this course? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
SLGA is offering, through this course, leadership training for 
all the staff. This includes both management and 
non-management employees. 
 
I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that the program is vital to 
developing a corporate culture where employees learn to work 
together. Leadership training is the cornerstone to the 
Authority’s employment equity initiative and its strategy with 
regard to Aboriginal partnerships and Aboriginal employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Authority is committed to strengthening the 
diversity of its workforce to reflect the multi-faceted society of 
Saskatchewan in which we live. With the help of this program, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m confident we’re achieving that goal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to see how many 
graduates there were of that course because things are pretty 
bad over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of all the incredibly stupid things we’ve heard out 
of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming the past weeks, this one 
does take the cake. Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming spent a 
half a million dollars on a course teaching its employees to play 
nice, now, and it still appears the most vindictive, mean-spirited 
agency in all of government. 
 
SLGA fired a veteran RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
officer and tried to ruin his reputation just to avoid political 
embarrassment. They fired another employee for reporting 
wrongdoing and they allowed millions of dollars of 
misspending to go unchecked for years. As a result there are 
now several police and judicial investigations under way. 
 



2010 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, the management of SLGA is a complete disaster. 
Does the minister really think she’s got her money’s worth out 
of this half a million dollar management course? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I would suggest their 
cousins, the Canadian Alliance Party might also benefit from 
this course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
would know that human resource issues are multi-faceted. 
There are 800 employees within the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority and there are many, many more people that 
they relate to through their distribution systems and through 
their partnerships that have been developed with Aboriginal 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To trivialize leadership training and the training within the 
Authority to further the goals of employment equity and 
partnerships with Aboriginal people is indeed a sad state of 
affairs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have said that their are two employees now out of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps if the minister 
would spend less time worrying about the Canadian Alliance 
and more time worrying about her department, it wouldn’t be in 
the mess it’s in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Now on another matter, Mr. Speaker, Liquor 
and Gaming is now refusing to release the SIGA (Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Authority) payee list because they say it may 
interfere with the ongoing police investigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SLGA wasn’t afraid of interfering with Sergeant 
Mike Morrissey’s investigation. They went back and demanded 
their precious cabinet documents back from him. The argument 
is ridiculous. This is public information. This is money that has 
already been spent by SIGA. It is merely a list of people who 
receive money from SIGA during their operating year. I am 
quite sure if the RCMP needed further investigation, they will 
ask for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, have the police specifically asked that the SIGA 
payee list not be released to the public? And if not, why won’t 
they release it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I would not determine 
and Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority would not 
determine what is part of a police investigation or should not be 
a part of a police investigation. 
 

I have mentioned that the annual reports will be released after 
Justice and the RCMP have a chance to review those. And they 
will determine and tell us if this is a part of an investigation that 
they require that information to be handled in that manner, Mr. 
Speaker. And I would respect their opinion in this matter. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Métis Legislation 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs. Mr. Speaker, in recent days the 
Saskatchewan Party has spoken with many, many Métis people 
who have very serious concerns about the new Métis Act. Many 
of those Métis people are here today with us. They are 
concerned that Métis people were not consulted, were not 
consulted with widely enough on this new legislation. 
 
And they are concerned that the Act does not go far enough in 
dealing with issues like accountability, ensuring proper 
democratic process, and the serious problems with recent Métis 
elections. Many Métis people are demanding further discussion 
and input. 
 
Mr. Speaker, later today, I will be moving a motion calling on 
the Assembly to delay passage of this Bill for six months to 
allow further consultation to take place. We could then pass an 
improved Act during the fall session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister support this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask all members in the 
Assembly to please refrain from participating in the 
proceedings of the Assembly. It is a long and well-established 
tradition that we ask that members and members only speak or 
participate in any way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting on the 
member across who says that, in six months . . . She doesn’t 
know whether or not there is going to be a session in six 
months. In other words, she’s trying to kill the Bill. 
 
I think in my discussions, in my discussions, Mr. Speaker, 
people are talking about accountability. And I would say this 
much, we have made some additions in this Bill in regards to 
accountability, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And before that, a lot of people were concerned about getting a 
number of people out in regards to meetings and getting a call 
for getting a petition and so on. And in the Act, there will be 
250 people who can sign a petition. 
 
In order words, minutes, bylaws, audited financial statements 
must be available to any Métis person or any person who 
wishes to see them. A qualified auditor must be appointed to 
conduct, at minimum, an annual audit of records, accounts, and 
financial statements of the corporation. 
 
In regards to the question in relation to elections, I would say 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2011 

 

that we have agreed to hire an outside consultant to review the 
recent elections. 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time is elapsed. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
advise that member that it is their government, their side of the 
House who has the authority to call a fall session. 
 
If they do, that would be great. We can deal with this Métis Act. 
If they don’t, they are killing the Act, not us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, many Métis people, many Métis 
people argue that this Act does not go far enough in a number 
of areas. For example, it does nothing to deal with the serious 
problem in Métis elections. 
 
In the last round of Métis elections nearly 25 per cent of the 
ballots were thrown out, 13 Métis locals were not allowed to 
vote at all, and several directors had their elections overturned. 
The minister has acknowledged these problems and she recently 
initiated a $25,000 study to look at this issue. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, would it not make more sense to at least wait until 
that study is completed before passing a new Métis Act? That 
way the government could take the necessary steps to clean up 
Métis elections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the government put this Bill on hold for six 
months and come back in the fall with an improved Bill that 
deals with the problems in Métis elections; a Bill that is 
reflective of the wishes of the entire Métis membership? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, in regards to The Métis Act, 
all the Métis people that I have talked to would like to see a 
strong Métis Act. I feel that this member may be trying to derail 
the process. I don’t think that she wants to support The Métis 
Act. 
 
What Métis people are telling me is getting the best 
accountability systems — we’ve included a couple already and 
there will be suggestions for more. 
 
But I will tell you; you are simply trying to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I would remind the 
member that all remarks from the members should be directed 
through the Chair. 
 

Taxes on Pasture Land 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Agriculture. This morning the minister announced several 
initiatives designed to help livestock producers during the 
drought being experienced in many areas of our province 
unfortunately. 
 

Many of the initiatives are highly reliant on federal 
participation. Unfortunately, given your track record in securing 
any help from the federal government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Once again, I ask the member to make all his 
remarks through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Given this government’s track record in securing 
any kind of assistance, I don’t expect we can hold out much 
hope, but nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, the concerns of livestock 
producers affected by drought is very, very real. It’s time this 
NDP government started paying attention to it even more than it 
already has. 
 
This is the same government, Mr. Speaker, that has driven up 
taxes on property in rural Saskatchewan on pastures by 28 per 
cent. In fact, the education portion of property taxes on pasture 
in this province has increased 28 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government making things more 
difficult for livestock producers dealing with drought by raising 
taxes on pasture land? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite — 
and he should know this — that in the management of pastures 
across the province, which has been historical, the fees are set 
by the value and price of livestock. And this formula has been 
in place forever. And the member, and the member opposite 
should know that. So when the value of livestock goes up, the 
animal grazing unit goes up accordingly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And so, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
should know that the animal grazing unit cost is tied to the 
value of the livestock. The member should know that. And I’ve 
answered that question to him on other occasions. 
 
But what I say . . . and when you take a look at property tax in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, we consulted with SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities). And 
SARM said to us you need to reduce the property tax in this 
province. So what did this government do? It reduced the taxes 
on property in this province for agricultural producers. Not only 
one year, Mr. Speaker, but two years. 
 
Fifty million dollars we put into this pool, Mr. Speaker. And 
what did that member opposite and those people across do 
when we presented this budget, Mr. Speaker? They voted 
against it. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, on this side of the House we 
have a long track record of helping farmers in this province. 
And I say to that member, stay out of this file because every 
time you get in you cost Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Once again I remind all members, even if it’s 
their last half sentence, to address it through the Chair. 
 



2012 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

Proposed Pipeline Project in Canada 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, and I will address through 
the Chair. 
 
While Saskatchewan Crowns spend like drunken sailors on 
investments outside Saskatchewan, Premier Klein of Alberta is 
meeting with the vice-president of the United States and the 
movers and shakers of Wall Street to seek billions of dollars of 
investment in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Klein has identified $44 billion worth of energy projects. 
Think what even a tiny fraction of that investment would do for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The premier’s also lobbying to have the proposed Alaska and 
Mackenzie Valley pipelines go through Alberta. Who is telling 
the Americans and our federal government that Saskatchewan 
should be the route for the proposed pipelines? The answer, Mr. 
Speaker, is nothing is being done. This government does not 
know how to attract outside investment; it only knows how to 
start public companies to compete with the private sector, or to 
invest outside the province. 
 
While Premier Klein promotes Alberta, our Premier doesn’t 
realize that the biggest project in Canadian history could be 
landed for this province. Is he only interested in things Crown 
corporations can own? What’s he doing to get the pipeline 
through Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I would think and I say to the member opposite that 
this government, I believe, has a very good track record with 
respect to attracting investment, to growing and building this 
economy. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, we have been 
leading in economic growth in Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to remind the member opposite that we just came off of 
one of the largest pipeline projects that this province has ever 
seen, the Alliance Pipeline that came travelling right smack dab 
through the middle of the province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the best economic 
development tool that we have had is when that member left 
and sat on that side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if one member of 
that government resigning can lead to a spike up in the 
economy, think what would happen to our economy if they all 
quit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — What a boom that would be. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we know this is going to be one of the largest 
industrial projects in the history of this continent when pipelines 
transport oil from the Alaska north slope and from the 
Mackenzie Delta down into the American Midwest. That will 

be a huge project. 
 
Premier Klein is in Washington. He’s in New York. He’s 
pushing Alberta. Who is pushing Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is more to building this province than by 
buying a music company in Nashville. 
 
Who is saying this pipeline should be routed through our 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, the member that I was 
referring to that created the up spike in the economy when he 
left the government side was that member from Battlefords, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now I want to say to the people of Saskatchewan that we have 
been working with the business community since we were 
elected. We have got, I believe, one of the most effective 
bodies, STEP, the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, 
where we partner with business people throughout this province 
in all areas of the world to sell the Saskatchewan’s advantage 
with respect to investment and with respect to creating jobs and 
job opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that our Premier, although a 
very new Premier, will be very active in terms of promoting this 
province, as will the rest of the cabinet and the caucus. 
 
And the only one, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is a positive 
attitude with respect to this province would do an awful lot 
more than the gloom and doom that comes from that side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 42 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Lorjé that Bill No. 42 — The Métis 
Act be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in the 
House this afternoon to speak on Bill 42, The Métis Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for generations the Métis people have contributed 
much to our province’s rich and diverse history with their many 
traditions, their cultures, and their communities. At the same 
time, Mr. Speaker, we must also acknowledge that the Métis 
people have also endured a past fraught with many social and 
economic struggles. 
 
Initially, Mr. Speaker, we were encouraged to see a Bill of this 
nature come forward. But that soon changed however, when 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2013 

 

many grassroots Métis people approached us because they had 
some serious misgivings about this Bill. 
 
There are three main areas of concern that grassroots Métis 
people have with Bill 42: number one, that a 16-member, 
powerful secretariat that will be virtually unaccountable to the 
rest of the Métis people; number two, the lack of consultation 
and discussion on this Bill that resulted in the majority of Métis 
people not being properly informed about this Act and its 
consequences; and, number three, the very serious problems 
that currently exist with the Métis election process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 42 seeks to establish a 16-member secretariat. 
As Métis people have interpreted the secretariat in the Bill, this 
group will be powerful, all-encompassing, and unaccountable 
for any financial or economic decisions that are made. If this is 
true, Mr. Speaker, who would not be concerned? 
 
Any public money flowing through a board to the public for 
designated spending must be tracked and the people that are in 
charge of disbursing those funds must be held accountable for 
how it is spent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, grassroots Métis people have said to me that Bill 
No. 42, if it is allowed to pass, will not be good for the Métis 
people. They say that the Bill seeks to give a select group of 
people nearly absolute power over the remaining grassroots 
Métis people. Those people, those elite powerful group, will be 
solely responsible for disbursing funding and for making 
decisions that will impact on all Métis people. And that is 
wrong, Mr. Speaker, because this goes against the laws that 
exist in the Métis constitution, laws that the Métis people 
themselves say they should adhere to. 
 
So if this Bill is allowed to pass, it will . . . so if this Bill is 
allowed to pass, Mr. Speaker, it will in effect be going against 
grassroots Métis people and it will be going against the Métis 
Nation constitution. This is neither fair nor democratic, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I read from a letter written by Shirley Ross, 
vice-president of Langham Local No. 159, and she writes to 
me: 
 

If any member of this legislature is in favour of passing 
The Métis Act in its present form, and by not listening to 
the people, I have reason to believe that they do not 
understand our culture and our constitution. 

 
So it’s clear, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite, the 
members of the NDP government do not understand the Métis 
culture or their constitution. It’s also clear that not enough 
consultation and discussion was allowed to take place. If it had, 
we wouldn’t have more than 50 grassroots people, Métis 
people, sitting in the gallery today and signing declarations of 
their protest to this Bill. These people are here to protest this 
Bill, Mr. Speaker, not to endorse it. 
 
We have all heard the members opposite, the NDP members, 
say that before any decision is made on any issue they will 
discuss and consult with the people who will be most affected. 
Discussion and consultation did not take place on this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker. This Bill was not clearly outlined nor defined to the 

Métis people — the very people that it should be recognizing 
and respecting and protecting. 
 
We know this because many grassroots Métis people thought 
this was a Métis election Act. Imagine their surprise, their 
worry, and their confusion when they started to realize that it 
was not a Métis election Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the years, the Métis election process has had 
many, many problems. In fact, these problems became so 
pervasive that Citizens for Democracy was formed, a Métis 
group that sought to work towards achieving financial and 
democratic and electoral responsibility. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill does not even look at the Métis election 
process. Nowhere does this Bill even begin to address the 
problems that Métis elections have had in recent years. What 
the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs has done is agreed to spend 
$25,000, an amount matched by the federal government, to hire 
a consultant to study the Métis electoral process. This was done 
only after numerous complaints were lodged following a 
February election that saw nearly 25 per cent of ballots thrown 
out. 
 
Obviously there are major problems with the Métis electoral 
process and some changes are likely needed. But Bill 42 doesn’t 
look into that. Bill 42 avoids that altogether. Instead, the Métis 
people will be forced to wait, who knows how long, while the 
study is done. And then there will be more time on top of that 
while it is decided if recommendations will be implemented and 
how that will occur. 
 
This is a prime example of what the NDP government has 
become so well-known for. They never deal with the issues that 
really matter. Things that really need addressing. Things that 
ultimately define and defend a democratic system. If Bill 42 is 
allowed to pass, it will have a profound and lasting impact on 
the Métis community, a community that seeks to have greater 
impact on the way they live today. 
 
The issue of democracy, Mr. Speaker, an issue that has been 
foremost in the minds of many grassroots Métis people, is not 
addressed in this Bill. The issue of democracy, Mr. Speaker, is 
why there are more than 50 people with us here today. They 
represent a people that want to see democracy upheld and 
preserved. 
 
Because of the concerns that I have brought forward on behalf 
of the members on this side of the House and the members of 
the Métis association, Mr. Speaker, I want to stress to the 
members of the NDP that we are not opposed to a Métis Bill. 
We do however feel that more time is needed so that proper 
discussion and consultation can be allowed to take place. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I put forward a motion, seconded by the 
member from Cannington: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word “That” and substituting the following therefor: 
 
Bill 42, The Métis Act, be not now read a second time but 



2014 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

that it be read a second time this day six months hence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be making some 
comments in regards to accountability, in regards to the history 
of Métis people in the province, as well as dealing with the 
issue of the amendment. 
 
Now in regards to the history of Métis people in this province, I 
know the history well, as a Métis person born and raised in 
northern Saskatchewan and coming to school in the city of 
Prince Albert — high school and then moving on to university. 
In those days, in the early days, we didn’t have any money to 
get an education and so on, so we did it by student loans and I 
happened to win a scholarship to go to university and that’s 
how it was done. As time went on, bursaries were made 
available to Saskatchewan students in the . . . (inaudible) . . . 
and many Métis people started going to university. 
 
But significantly Métis people said that we needed an institution 
under Métis control, so we established under the Blakeney 
government, the NDP government, it was established that 
Gabriel Dumont Institute was formed as well as SUNTEP 
(Saskatchewan urban native teacher education program). And as 
that developed more and more people, Métis people, came in. 
So it was obviously an NDP government that supported Métis 
people. And we also know that there is monies available for the 
organization of the time. 
 
When the members from across changed their name to 
Saskatchewan Party, which used to be the old Tories, I know 
one thing — that they blew up $800,000 during that time when 
statements were made at the constitutional talks. 
 
And I thought that it’s very important to recognize that history 
because when we looked at historical development, those were 
very outstanding institutions. There is still no place in Canada 
where Métis people have made such tremendous gains as in 
Gabriel Dumont Institute. You will see many people . . . I 
attended a graduation ceremony in Prince Albert just a little 
while ago and I saw a lot of the Métis people from the Prince 
Albert area. And I have attended them in Saskatoon, saw Métis 
there in Saskatoon and area, as well as in Regina. 
 
And there’s been a significant amount of achievements on that. 
So in many cases there has been success story when Métis 
people have been given an opportunity to develop and evolve 
with proper accountability measures, etc., there has been 
progress. 
 
Now when I look at the situation here on the amendment, I find 
it problematic because you’re getting to Christmas. And I’ve 
been in the House for 16 . . . for 15 years. I have seen very few 
sessions, you know, at Christmas. And I know very well that 
the member may be saying that because she doesn’t know and 
she cannot decide whether anything can be done in six months. 
 
And it may be a way of simply opposing it. It may be way that 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you can use technical 
words that you are indeed . . . You say that you support it, the 
question will be this. As I look at the issue . . . and I was at the 
recognition of the Louis Riel Trail the other day — those are 
important things. 
 

On that Métis Act, Métis people have been waiting for many 
years. Every time you do something they tell, wait another time. 
When they say do it right then, do it when . . . when I say this, 
the member out of time to speak, allow a Métis person to speak 
as well in the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would request the 
minister to make remarks through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I have a tremendous amount 
of experience working with the Gabriel Dumont Institute as 
well for many years, and worked with Métis people, my own 
people, for many years. 
 
And I would say this: that people are always told to wait. At 
one time I worked at Gabriel Dumont Institute and people told 
us, oh, the Métis people can’t take over their institutions; let’s 
wait some more, some people said. 
 
Let’s wait some more, they said. But we did not wait with the 
Blakeney government, the NDP government. We moved ahead 
with Métis people and now you see the positive results. 
 
Yes, after many years, there are from time to time 
accountability problems. Grant Devine had nine years of 
accountability problems, but $800 million was spent on interest 
payments on the Grant Devine government after many years in 
this House. And those are the people you still support. 
 
So when I looked at this, Mr. Speaker, and I looked at the 
question of more time, they’re always saying more time over 
there when it comes to First Nations or Métis issues. When it 
comes to their issues, they say do it now or do it yesterday. That 
is what they say all the time. But when it comes down to the 
people, they say wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. 
 
I will say this, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the Métis 
veterans that are recognized in this Act, they died for this 
country. Are you going to tell the Métis veterans to wait for six 
months? Is that what you’re saying? When you look at the 
recognition of an institution, do we wait for that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been in the House for 16 years, 15 years, and 
I know the technicalities of how this House can be done. There 
are people who have talked to me in regards to amendments, in 
regards to the amendments, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what I was 
talked to prior to the time I come in. 
 
In regards to amendments, Mr. Speaker, we will of course be 
looking at amendments. I’ve been in the House many years 
looking at amendments. And from time to time I know, Mr. 
Speaker, we can make some reasonable, practical changes on 
amendments — and we have done that before. The minister 
assumes that you can do that. She wants to kill it and she 
doesn’t want to give me a practical, reasonable amendment. 
 
So I would say this, Mr. Speaker, that indeed when you look at 
those amendments, we will await like any system does on any 
time that we’re here, we’ll look at practical, reasonable 
amendments and look at them and we will see what we will do 
with them. And in that sense, that is what a lot of people do. 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2015 

 

But I would say this, in that amendment she gave me, she gave 
me absolutely no amendment except to increase the time and 
say wait. I can’t support that; you’re simply trying to kill it. 
 
So when I look at it, Mr. Speaker, when I see that, Mr. Speaker, 
there are ways of doing it in the House. I will await to see what 
kind of practical amendments are being made. I will await . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I would say this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Just once again ask . . . I want to 
welcome all visitors to the . . . and I want them to feel welcome 
in the Assembly but I must insist that they not participate in any 
way in the debate. 
 
Furthermore, I’ve asked the member several times to direct his 
remarks through the Chair. I know that it’s difficult, particularly 
when you have somebody prompting you a bit from another 
side, but I would ask him to do his best on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Okay, I accept your remarks, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would say this, that in many areas that I’ve been around, we’re 
always told to wait. The practical side of the question will be 
such that we will see what type of amendments, you know, are 
proposed. We will make decisions on that when amendments 
are proposed. 
 
But to say that we just stop it is not a solution. I think that it’s 
very important to examine that. Look at the real practical 
solution that demands the issues relating to accountability and 
democracy. And those were the statements, you know, that 
were made by me, to me by Métis people that I met with you 
know just prior to the Assembly. 
 
And I think it’s very important to recognize that, Mr. Speaker. I 
say that as I look into the past, I’ve seen some systems change 
over time and I will relate back to the . . . (inaudible) . . . Bills 
that we do per year. 
 
Even as we do the first phase in the core development of things, 
I have seen Bills come in here and we’d do something. Next 
year we’d do an amendment as well. But it maybe we will wait 
to see in regards to the amendments that are brought in the 
process of committee during second reading. 
 
And I think that’s when to clearly examine it. If the member 
from there says that he’s got some practical suggestions, and in 
my meetings with the Métis that there are practical suggestions, 
then we will be prepared to look at it. But, Mr. Speaker, to 
simply say no and kill the Bill right now is not a solution. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, those are my remarks, and I think that as a 
Métis person I’ve seen a lot of debates in the House. I’ve seen a 
lot of debates in the Métis assemblies. I’ve been in assemblies 
with a thousand people. And, Mr. Speaker, the debate is very 
important, you know, to take place. And that indeed over time, 
changes are made and things come and improve. 
 
When I went to university, I was the only Métis person going to 
university in 1965 that I knew of. There was three other First 
Nations persons that I knew of at that time. There may have 
been more, but those are the ones that I knew. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we now see 2,000. We see just in northern 
Saskatchewan alone, we have 2,500 First Nations and Métis 
people, you know, taking an education. And these are important 
types of institutions that the Métis people control. 
 
And I support them. But I supported it. Because I remember one 
time when the Devine government come in, they wanted to do 
an assimilation process, assimilative to the colleges and forget 
about Gabriel Dumont. I fought against that while I was in 
opposition. I said that we should keep Gabriel Dumont Institute. 
We should keep the Métis institutions in tact because they do a 
proper service in the education of Métis people in this province. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, those are my words in regards to the 
amendment. So I move to go against the amendment on the Bill 
because she hasn’t provided a solution except to kill the Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to enter into the debate on The Métis Act. And I guess 
my appeal is to all the Métis people across this great province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
It has taken, as the member from Cumberland has indicated, 
taken a great amount of time and energy and vision and 
commitment by the Métis people to really affirm their position 
in our province and to work with the governments of the day to 
really establish their institutions or lending organizations and 
their culture. 
 
I think one of the most important points that I want to make in 
reference to the amendment being proposed by the member 
from Humboldt, that, first of all, in the six-months time frame 
that she is proposing, that is four days before Christmas of this 
year. And she knows very well that there is no plan to recall the 
legislation or the legislature at that time. There is no plan to call 
the Assembly to return to Regina. 
 
So the six-month delay that’s being proposed by the member 
from Humboldt is pure political positioning, and it’s not fair to 
the Métis people nor is it fair to The Métis Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will point out this — I will point out this, Mr. 
Speaker, to the Métis people of Saskatchewan, I urge you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — My message to the Métis people of 
Saskatchewan is this, is that The Métis Act is a framework in 
which we begin to build our hopes and our dreams and our 
aspirations as Métis people of Saskatchewan. It is a framework. 
We are not going to arbitrarily say this is what the Métis people 
want, this is what is best for them. 
 
The Métis Act has many opportunities to revisit it, has many 
opportunities to do amendments to it, has many ways in which 
we can refine the challenges associated with the framework of 
The Métis Act. And the minister has assured all the Métis 
people through various consultations and meetings that this is 
going to occur, Mr. Speaker. 



2016 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

There is no question that some Métis people have expressed 
concern about the MNS (Métis Nation of Saskatchewan) and 
whether this Act gives new powers to the MNS. Mr. Speaker, it 
does not give new powers to the organizations. And the 
concerns have been raised, and we are working with Métis 
people, the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan and the Government 
of Canada to address those concerns. This Act fulfills a 
long-standing promise made to the Métis people. 
 
Because these concerns have been raised, Mr. Speaker, there are 
two fronts we’re going to address some of these concerns. First, 
The Métis Act strengthens the accountability provisions for the 
MNS. It provides for a special meeting of the MNS to be held 
should 250 Métis people sign a petition. Minutes, bylaws, and 
audited financial statements must be available to any person 
who wishes to see them. A qualified auditor must be appointed 
to conduct, at minimum, an annual audit of records, accounts, 
and financial statements of the corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, Canada, Saskatchewan, and MNS have agreed on 
electoral reform review as a result of the concerns about Métis 
Nation election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I would point out to the Métis Nation and to the 
Métis people of Saskatchewan is this challenge is about 
capacity building. And the delay of six months as being 
proposed by the member from Humboldt is just sheer 
positioning for petty politics, Mr. Speaker, and I charge that 
member guilty of that offence. She should not be doing that 
because this is not fair, Mr. Speaker, at all to the Métis people, 
nor is it fair to The Métis Act. 
 
Now let me explain again, Mr. Speaker, very, very important. 
As you look across the board at our institutions and the member 
from Cumberland announced Gabriel Dumont Institute or the 
Dumont technical institute or SNEDCO (SaskNative Economic 
Development Corporation) Mr. Speaker, there are many 
powerful organizations within the Métis group that have shown 
that they’re able to make a significant difference to this great 
province of Saskatchewan, alongside of the Métis people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And this whole issue, this whole issue, Mr. Speaker, is a base 
on which we can build a foundation of a strong Métis house in 
this province of Saskatchewan. And, as you look at the history, 
Mr. Speaker, of this coalition government and the previous 
governments that have been associated with the NDP, they have 
been very, very fair to the Métis people in terms of the many 
things that they have been involved with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And right across the board, whether it’s institutions or whether 
it’s educational opportunities or whether it’s economic 
development, the Métis people have always been first and 
foremost in our Aboriginal strategy as a government, Mr. 
Speaker. And what I would say, Mr. Speaker, is you do not take 
the members’ words opposite that all of a sudden when it comes 
to the Métis people and The Métis Act that’s being proposed, 
all of a sudden there’s a great concern from the Sask Party. 
 
There’s a great concern from the Sask Party and the reason why 
there’s a concern, Mr. Speaker, is I will say again that they want 
to kill the Bill. A six-month delay, a six-month delay, whether 
it’s in December or January, Mr. Speaker, or February or 

March, or whatever the time frame may be, we want to put into 
place a structure and a framework in which we can build. And if 
that structure or that framework needs refinements, Mr. 
Speaker, we invite that, we want to see that happen. But you do 
not kill the framework before you build that powerful house of 
people in this province, and that’s exactly what the opposition 
wants to do. 
 
Now a lot of people in northern Saskatchewan and across the 
province, many people, did not support The Métis Act, Mr. 
Speaker. And I want to for the record say as one of the Métis 
persons that voted in this past election in my home community 
of Ile-a-la-Crosse, those ballots were not counted. My family, 
my wife, and my oldest daughter and I went down to vote and 
those ballots were not counted. 
 
But I’m not going to get up and say my ballots were not 
counted so I’m going to not allow anything else to progress or 
to proceed. We have to understand that this is about capacity 
building, as nation building, and that we have to have that 
diligence to ensure that it does not happen again and that we 
roll with those particular challenges of building ourselves up as 
a nation of people as part of this great province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So my appeal for the Métis people across the province, Mr. 
Speaker, and in the Assembly today, is that let us have the 
vision and the foresight to allow the structure to proceed. 
 
We can have improvements, Mr. Speaker. And yes, no Métis 
person should be denied the right to vote. And no Métis person 
should ever have their vote discounted, Mr. Speaker. That is not 
fundamentally fair to any nation of people, and I will not 
support that. 
 
However the most important thing as the member from 
Cumberland has indicated, past experience will tell you that 
there is genuine intent on this side of the House to see progress 
of the Métis people. There’s a history, Mr. Speaker, on this side 
of the House to see progress made by the Métis people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
On that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, it is pure petty politics. 
They call for a six-month delay, Mr. Speaker, and I say today 
that six-month delay that they’re calling for, they hope that it’s 
for the next 20 years that it’s a delay. And that’s what’s going 
to happen, Mr. Speaker. If we don’t allow it to proceed now, 
it’s going to be another 10, 15, to 20 years before we even 
entertain, Mr. Speaker, a Métis Act. 
 
And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, in wrapping this thing up, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s no question, there is no question that the Métis 
people in this juncture of our lives and in allowing the 
opportunity to see a Métis Act finally passed in Saskatchewan, 
next to the birthplace of Riel, which is Manitoba. The two 
provinces side by side benefited from Riel and some of the 
work that he has done. 
 
Today in 2001, we’re going to pass a Métis Act. And I would 
encourage all the Métis people across this great province to 
remember that if you want to build a Métis nation, it’s not going 
to be just the executive or a select few that are going to 
determine that — it is going to be all the Métis people across 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2017 

 

this province. And I being one of them are going to ensure that 
accountability, capacity building, and building a bright future 
for all of our children, which include mine, so that the Métis 
Nation and the Métis people of this great province can indeed 
contribute and be proud of who they are, where they are, and 
what they are. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on my final point, if we delay the Bill I can 
tell you right now it’s going to take 10 to 15 years before a 
Métis Act’s ever entertained, and that’s exactly what the 
opposition want. And I say to them if there’s any amendments 
done in and for The Métis Act it’s going to be in concert with 
the Métis people, with the Métis Nation, the Government of 
Canada, and the Government of Saskatchewan — not the cheap 
petty politics being played by the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege for me to get up again and speak to Bill 42, The Métis 
Act. As one of the first speakers regarding this Bill, and I made 
my opening statements by saying, first of all, I’m proud to stand 
up as a Métis person in regards to this Métis Act. 
 
And like the member from Humboldt stated in the letter that 
was drafted to her, and I won’t take the time to read it all, but I 
want to reiterate that this is my thoughts also. And I will quote 
from here: 
 

We want The Métis Act (and I will stand and say the same 
— I want a Metis Act), but the one that being presented 
today, Bill 42, our main concern is that the grassroots 
people are not being fairly represented with this Act, but 
the power is with the Métis Nation executive. 

 
And I agree with that totally 100 per cent. And you know what 
surprises me, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that today is Aboriginal 
Day. And in the gallery we have many people of Métis people, 
and they should be home celebrating their day in their home. 
But you know where they are? They’re here today to try and put 
a hoist — just a hoist, Mr. Speaker — it’s not killing the Bill as 
the members on that side of the House think it is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — We are just asking for time — time so that 
the people of the Métis Nation can get a grasp of this Bill and 
put forth things in the Bill that will represent all Métis people in 
the right fashion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I stand here and I 
listen to . . . and this may be off the wall a little bit, and that’s 
regarding the Fyke report. The Fyke report came out, and right 
away the NDP government stands up and say, we got to study 
it, because it’s not quite right. 
 
And yet here, we have a Bill which is a Métis Nation Bill and 
they want to ram it through. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Allchurch: — There’s no absolute . . . any consultation 
with all Métis people, just a few. And that’s what’s wrong. And 
that’s why the member from Humboldt, along with myself and 
all the members on this side, all we’re asking for is a hoist. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. I 
appreciate the help members are trying to give me. The floor 
belongs to the member for Shellbrook-Spiritwood. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Métis Nation Bill is a very good Bill in some of the contexts in 
there. But there’s a lot that’s wrong, and that’s why the Métis 
people are here and that’s why we support a hoist. 
 
And all we on this side of the House are asking is the 
government over there to not play politics with this and just 
stop and realize the impact of what this is going to do to the 
Métis Nation people, and give it six months. Six months for 
consultation with all Métis Nation people and we can be back 
here. It’s up to that side of the House to call the session back to 
deal with this very serious issue. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment, as 
all members on this side of the House are going to, and I would 
hope that the members on that side would take a step backwards 
and just stop and think what they’re trying to ram down the 
throats of the people up there and the people in Saskatchewan. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 15:00 until 15:10. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 20 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Stewart 
Eagles Wall Bakken 
McMorris D’Autremont Kwiatkowski 
Brkich Hart Allchurch 
Huyghebaert Hillson  
 

Nays — 28 
 

Calvert Addley Hagel 
Lautermilch Atkinson Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Goulet 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Wartman 
Thomson Prebble Belanger 
Crofford Axworthy Nilson 
Hamilton Junor Harper 
Jones Higgins Kasperski 
Trew Osika Yates 
McCall   
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Bill 42 is a very important issue in Saskatchewan. It deals with 
in part our history, and in part, Mr. Speaker, our future. But in 
listening to the debate and to the commentary that was going on 
around the debate, Mr. Speaker, I was very disappointed in 



2018 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

some cases. 
 
The member from Yorkton seemed to be indicating from his 
chair, Mr. Speaker, that only members of the Métis Nation 
should be allowed to speak to this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
Well I have to disagree with that sentiment. Mr. Speaker, we 
are all elected in this House. We all represent members who are 
Métis in our constituencies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, some of us have a closer 
association with the Métis; some of us do not. In my own case, 
Mr. Speaker, I am not Métis. But we have a very close 
neighbour, Mr. Speaker, who was the great niece of Louis Riel.. 
Mr. Speaker, my parents are the godparents to her eldest child. 
We visit back and forth, Mr. Speaker. We know each other very 
well. Mr. Speaker, in fact Yolande even taught me how to 
dance. I don’t do it well, but she tried. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my own family, my wife has Métis ancestry. 
Her mother’s side comes from the Red River Settlement, Mr. 
Speaker, and were Métis. So while I personally have no Métis 
blood that I know of, my family certainly does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Northern Affairs talked about the 
Native veterans, the Métis veterans. He’s talking, Mr. Speaker, 
in large part, to those who fought during the Second World 
War, 1939 to 1945. Well, Mr. Speaker, 1944 was when Tommy 
Douglas and the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) a.k.a. (also known as) the NDP were elected, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They were in power from 1944 to 1963. They could have done 
something in that time, Mr. Speaker, to recognize the veterans 
in the Aboriginal community. They didn’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP were in power from 1971 to 1982. 
 
(15:15) 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Harper: — To ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to thank 
the member from Cannington for allowing me the opportunity 
to introduce a guest. Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all the members of the House, two 
gentlemen sitting in your west gallery — a long-time good 
friend of mine, Vince Folk, and with him today is Miles 
Pelletier. And I’d ask all the members to offer them a very 
warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Cypress Hills on his 
feet? 
 

Mr. Elhard: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and to 
members of the House through your office, I’d like to introduce 
a gentleman from the constituency of Cypress Hills, Mr. Mike 
Storks, sitting in your gallery. Mike is a newly appointed 
member of the Economic Development Committee of the area. 
He does a very good job. Maple Creek has benefited from his 
ability already and I’m sure that it will benefit substantially 
more in the future. 
 
I’d like the members of the House to welcome Mike to the 
Assembly today. And I hope that he goes home with new 
inspiration to do an even better job. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Métis Act 
(continued) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was 
saying, Mr. Speaker, the NDP were in power from 1971 to 
1982. They could have recognized the contributions of the 
Aboriginal and Métis veterans in that time. They could have 
brought forward a Métis Act in that time. Did they do so, Mr. 
Speaker? No. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was elected here in 1991, the members 
opposite, a good many of them, were elected to government at 
that time. This is 10 years later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Cumberland could have brought 
forward legislation recognizing Métis and Aboriginal veterans, 
could have brought forward legislation dealing with the Métis 
Nation. Did he do so? No, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yet today, when the people of the Métis community who 
are, some of them are visiting today — 75 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, of Métis community is represented here today in this 
House, in the galleries — they are asking, Mr. Speaker, give us 
more time to look over this Bill, to understand it, and to get 
their concerns and needs represented in this Bill. 
 
And what does the minister say? What does the Minister of 
SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management) say? No! Twenty years, from 1944 to 1963 they 
had; 11 years from 1971 to 1982, they had; 10 years from ’91 to 
today. Have they done anything? No. 
 
Now there’s a Bill before the House. They want to rush it 
through before the community, the Métis community, has a 
chance to look at this Bill, understand it and ensure that it meets 
their needs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
No. For whatever reason, this government is in a rush on this 
Bill. Doesn’t want to allow the community and the people 
involved to have a say. 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2019 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a need to give some more time to this Bill. 
Since they’re unwilling, Mr. Speaker, to give six months, 
perhaps they will allow even a few more days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that this Bill be now adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2001 

 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me is Mr. 
Brian Smith, who is the head of the Public Employees Benefit 
Agency, which is a division of the Department of Finance. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, 
welcome to Mr. Smith this afternoon. 
 
We have a few questions on Bill No. 7, more for clarification, 
and I’ve raised some concerns in debate on this Bill, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And I note, Mr. Minister, in your address under second 
readings, you made reference to a number of different 
superannuation plans that will be affected by the changes 
introduced in Bill No. 7. You also mentioned a number of the 
plans, Mr. Minister. And my question is, how many individuals 
will be affected by those various plans that you identified back 
on May 2; and are the plans of each of those agencies that you 
identified fully funded? 
 
So sort of a two-part question, Mr. Minister: could you tell us 
how many individuals will be affected in each of those benefit 
plans; and are those plans fully funded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I can advise the member 
that with respect to the pension plans affected, which amounts 
to six pension plans, there are 3,069 active members, 196 
deferred members, and 7,906 pensioners. So there’s 7,600 
people that are already on pension . . . 7,906 people on pension 
and 3,069 active members — those would be people still 
working and paying in — 196 deferred members. 
 
And in answer to the second part of the member’s question, of 
the six plans, four of them are not fully funded and two are fully 
funded. The four that are not fully funded — in other words, 
they have unfunded liabilities — would be the Public Service 
Superannuation Plan, the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company plan, the Anti-Tuberculosis League Superannuation 
Plan, and the Liquor Board plan. 
 
The two that would be fully funded would be the Workers’ 
Compensation Board plan and the Power Corporation 
Superannuation Plan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, while 
there doesn’t seem to be many changes in Bill No. 7 that are of 

significant costs. As you indicated, a number of those are to 
ensure that we comply with federal law. I’m wondering, with 
the main proposal which of course is to address the benefits 
paid out to a spouse, have your officials costed that out as far as 
what you see as annual cost to the plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The officials have not done an estimate of 
the cost, they have not costed it out, but they have concluded 
that the cost would not be materially significant, which is why 
they haven’t costed it out. They don’t think that it will affect the 
liabilities through the costs to the plans much one way or the 
other. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, I had 
the opportunity to meet with executive members of the 
Saskatchewan Government Superannuates Association, as I 
indicated to you back in debate on this Bill. And they indicated 
the changes that would be coming about as a result of this Bill 
to the various plans. 
 
There was major concern, Mr. Minister, as you’ve indicated 
today, four of the plans are not fully funded and two are. But 
there was more concern expressed in the area of indexing in that 
some of the people that you’ve identified, the 7,906 individuals 
do have plans that are indexed and change as the cost of living 
changes. 
 
On the other side there are people who belong to the various 
pension plans that you mentioned who do not have that 
indexing and rely on government on an annual basis to either 
change it by a certain percentage, change their pension benefits 
by a percentage relative to the cost of living, or not change them 
based on what the government decides. 
 
Have you had the opportunity, Mr. Minister, since I raised this 
issue in debate, to look at what the many executive members 
feel is discrimination against individual people who happen to 
belong to one pension plan rather than someone who belongs to 
the SaskPower pension plan, for instance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I’m not quite sure, Mr. Chair, what 
difference it would make if somebody belongs to the 
SaskPower pension plan, the old plan which is part of these 
plans, in the sense that . . . in terms of automatic indexing. 
 
But I would point out to the member that these plans are 
defined benefit plans. And under a defined benefit plan the 
member of the plan is entitled, as the name implies, to a defined 
benefit. The benefit is determined on the basis of a formula — a 
certain percentage of the income that the person had while they 
worked in the public service, multiplied by some factors, 
including the length of service of the individual concerned. And 
so the individual is entitled to that defined benefit. 
 
And I’d like to say that the government guarantees that the 
retired employee will receive the benefit that that employee is 
entitled to receive. That’s a commitment that the province has 
been meeting since, I think, at least the 1920s and will continue 
to meet. That’s part of our policy. 
 
Now when we can, in addition to the defined benefit that the 
member is entitled to, we have provided ad hoc increases. In 
other words, defined benefit plus. In most years we add on 



2020 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

something to the defined benefit as the province can afford it. 
 
If the member is saying that — and I’ll invite the member to say 
whether this is what he’s saying because it is a very interesting 
question — if the member is saying that there should be 
legislated indexing on top of the defined benefit, in defined 
benefit plans, the member certainly can so indicate. But I’d like 
to advise the member that if the member proposed that, the debt 
of the province would probably increase, just like that, by a sum 
in the neighbourhood of $400 million, which is a significant 
amount of money. 
 
(15:30) 
 
What we’ve been trying to do, Mr. Chair, is to reduce the 
amount of the indebtedness of the province, even if we can’t 
always be all things to all people. And part of that is our policy 
to award people ad hoc increases but only as the province — 
the people, the taxpayers — can afford it. That’s our policy. 
 
I hope that’s also the policy of the members opposite because as 
I say — and I invite the member to say if his position is that 
there should be guaranteed indexing of defined benefit plans — 
because if that is the position of the opposition, it will 
automatically increase the debt of the taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, what 
I am trying to obtain from you this afternoon, if you could 
clarify, is the point raised by the executive members of SGSA, 
which as I mentioned before is the Saskatchewan Government 
Superannuates Association, is that they have indicated to me 
and it’s my understanding — and please clarify if I’m wrong 
here — is that there are certain pension plans, one being the 
SaskPower pension plan, where there is an automatic indexing 
that takes place each and every year; and that other pension 
plans, which there are, as you mentioned, thousands of people 
who belong to the pension plans, that there is no automatic 
indexing. And you made reference to the fact that you deal with 
that on an ad hoc basis and that you will change the amount of 
pension benefit on an ad hoc basis. 
 
Is there a difference between the plans that you’ve identified in 
the legislation that are being affected by this Bill, that relate to 
indexing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, there is not. The member is incorrect. 
There is no difference with respect to the amount of increase 
awarded each year as between the plans that have an unfunded 
liability and those that have a surplus. 
 
The member has been provided with information that indicates 
that there is some difference in what the retirees get. There is no 
difference. The information that the member has been given is 
incorrect. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. That’s 
exactly what I needed you to say, and I appreciate your 
openness and your frankness there. 
 
Mr. Minister, are any of the changes that you’re proposing in 
Bill No. 7, are they retroactive? Are they going to come into 
place on assent of the Bill? I didn’t notice when the . . . For 
instance, the spousal change that we’re looking at, when do 

those changes come into place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — All of the changes, Mr. Chair, are 
prospective. And they come into effect on the date of assent. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, 
for clarification purposes, the main clause in this Bill of course 
is dealing with spousal benefits. Could you explain why there’s 
a need to address this. And I know that you’ve indicated that 
even though an employee did not select the highest benefit 
payable to his or her spouse upon, you know, the sudden death 
of the individual, that now they would be entitled to that 
benefit. 
 
Can you explain how that will work by using just an example of 
an individual that will now change the amount of the benefit 
even though they may have made a decision, I guess at the time 
of their employment, or I don’t know whether there are annual 
requirements for people to indicate what benefits, what spousal 
benefits they would wish to have in place. How will the 
legislation amend and change that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well we’re removing the requirement that 
an employee has to make a decision that if he or she dies before 
retirement that their spouse should get a higher benefit. And the 
reason we’re changing it is simply because it was a hardship 
that if your spouse was in the public service and had died and 
had not bothered to make the election to give you a higher 
benefit, that you wouldn’t receive the higher benefit. 
 
And yet since the spouse had died and would never be in receipt 
of a pension himself or herself since they’ve died before 
retirement, it seemed only fair to use the contributions that that 
person had paid into the pension plan to give the surviving 
spouse the highest benefit possible. And since the actuaries 
have told us that we can do so without increasing the liabilities 
of the plan, it seemed to be the fair thing to do. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, a final 
question. You’ve indicated that . . . your official has indicated 
that the costing is not there, and I accept that. But in past, as I’m 
sure you’ve looked at before you put this clause amendment 
together, how many people do you think this will affect, that 
they actually pass away before their retirement in the various 
pension plans. Have you got any idea on how many spouses 
will actually receive this enhanced benefit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We believe that it would affect three to 
four surviving spouses approximately per year. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. On clause no. 8, Mr. 
Minister, you’ve indicated authorizing boards to charge fees for 
services provided by the board and prescribing the amounts of 
those fees. 
 
Could you describe what you think will be the services that 
would become chargeable, and that indeed will actually the 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2021 

 

persons who have retired will incur an additional cost for asking 
for some specific information as I understand it, and what do 
you expect the amount of those fees to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We do not have any amount of fees in 
mind. That would have to be set by regulation. 
 
And an example of why you would charge a fee might be upon 
the marriage breakdown of a member of a pension plan. That 
member or the spouse of that member may request of the 
pension plan or the court may request that the plan do an 
evaluation of the person’s pension, what it is worth, for the 
purpose of calculating the value of matrimonial property on a 
marriage breakdown. And some of this can be quite time 
consuming and complicated. 
 
And I don’t think it’s contemplated that every single question 
asked of the pension plan administrators would be charged. But 
I think the feeling is that if a particular member of the pension 
plan has particular legal difficulties and puts the plan to more 
time than usual, that it’s more fair for that person to pay a fee 
for that service than to have the public generally paying for the 
service. So that’s an example of the type of fee that might be 
imposed. But I have to say, Mr. Chair, at this time we don’t 
actually have in mind a very quick imposition of fees. It’s 
simply in the future to enable the plan to charge a fee if that 
seems like the reasonable thing to do. 
 
And it is not so much designed to raise a lot of revenue or 
impose a lot of fees as to say that, if somebody asks for an 
extraordinary amount of service, it’s more fair that they pay a 
fee for that than to have everyone else paying for it for them, 
especially if they get into more legal difficulties than the 
average person. 
 
Clause 8 agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I would like to, before I do that, 
thank the official opposition for their co-operation with respect 
to this work in Committee of the Whole concerning this Bill, 
and also to thank Mr. Smith for his assistance. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 14 — The Provincial Auditor Amendment Act, 2001 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated to my left is 
Mr. Terry Paton, who is the Provincial Comptroller, and behind 
him is Ms. Lori Taylor, who is the manager of the financial 
management branch in the provincial comptroller’s division of 
the Department of Finance. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And 
welcome to the officials that you have with you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, the process for developing The Provincial Auditor 
Act, the changes to The Provincial Auditor Act, has been an 

extensive one and I think it’s been a good one. And I know that 
you’ve stated for the record back on May 2 in your address, sort 
of the process that was followed. 
 
And for the record, Mr. Minister, could you confirm or would 
you state the process that was involved in how the actual 
amendments came to being for the amendments that you 
propose today in Bill No. 14. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I’d be happy to do so. This 
Bill has involved a very open and complete process, in fact, 
which involved the government, the opposition, the Public 
Accounts Committee and people from the private sector, as well 
as of course extensive consultation with the Provincial Auditor 
and his staff. 
 
In February of 2000 — so that goes back almost a year and a 
half — the Provincial Auditor tabled a special report in the 
Assembly with his recommendations for amendments to the 
Act. And the government then established an advisory 
committee, which was composed of experts from the private 
sector to give us some advice as well. And that was headed by 
Dr. George Baxter, who is a professor of accounting at the 
University of Saskatchewan. And there were other experts from 
the accounting field that worked with him. 
 
The Public Accounts Committee, of which the member opposite 
is the Chair, then reviewed the Provincial Auditor’s 
recommendations and the advisory committee’s 
recommendations. The Provincial Auditor and the Provincial 
Comptroller’s division worked together as well. 
 
And so by the time I presented this Bill to the legislature, it had 
been worked by the Provincial Auditor and his staff, the 
Provincial Comptroller and his staff, the private advisory 
committee, the Public Accounts Committee. And I’m very 
pleased that all of those people were able to agree on the 
provisions of this Bill, which seeks to make, the . . . to 
strengthen the independence of the Provincial Auditor’s office 
and increase public accountability. 
 
And I’m also very pleased to report that the Bill received 
support, not only from the government members but also from 
the opposition members in the Public Accounts Committee. 
They were able to unanimously agree on the contents of the 
Bill. 
 
So there was a very extensive process, which involved 
everyone, allowed everybody to have their input, and at the end 
of the day resulted in everybody also agreeing on the contents 
of the Bill that we have before the House today. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, for that 
historical bit of information. 
 
Mr. Minister, the committee recommended a 10-year term and 
that is what is being introduced . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — With the kind leave of the member from 



2022 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

Canora-Pelly, to introduce guests. 
 
The Chair: — I think it takes the leave of the entire committee, 
but is there leave granted by the committee? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
call to your attention and to the attention of the members of this 
place, two people seated in the west gallery. There’s Gail 
McMartin, who hails from Watrous country, and Sonya Gail 
from Yorkton. They’re good citizens of this province. They 
make a great contribution to their committees and to the larger 
whole, and I’d enjoin you to welcome them here to this place 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Provincial Auditor Amendment Act, 2001 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, as I was indicating, in section no. 4, the appointment 
of the Provincial Auditor, the recommendation 3.2 indicates — 
actually it’s 3.1(2) — indicates that the term of office will be 10 
years. 
 
Mr. Minister, your officials, I’m sure, have looked into other 
provinces and is this a normal period of appointment for the 
position of auditor in other provinces and is this something that 
we’re copying, or are we the lead on this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — There’s no consensus in every piece of 
legislation but, generally speaking, the term of a provincial 
auditor in legislation across the country will be 8 to 10 years. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, one of the other things that committee members 
struggled with for a while was trying to determine the salary of 
the Provincial Auditor and the proposal is the recommendation 
of the committee that says that it be tied to the average of the 
salaries of government deputy ministers. Is this also a practice 
that is followed in other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Again, not every province is the same. But 
it is not an uncommon practice to tie the salary of the Provincial 
Auditor to the deputy ministers’ salary. So this is something 
that would also be done in other jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Chair, to 
the minister. The changes to the Bill indicate that the auditor 
now will prepare an annual report on operations and prepare a 
business plan, which the auditor has been doing very well over 
the past years that I’m familiar with. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, do you expect now that this is 
going to be mandated by this Act that these things must be done 

through the Public Accounts Committee, do you expect any 
changes to the reports? Or do you expect that the reporting 
procedure that the auditor has followed in preparing his 
business plan and his annual reports will follow in the same 
fashion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I don’t expect any change to the way in 
which the Provincial Auditor conducts his business and his 
planning. I think what the legislation does is to formalize what 
already exists. In other words, it now sets out in law what the 
Provincial Auditor has been doing and so I don’t think it will 
lead to much change. 
 
Having said that of course, the Provincial Auditor being an 
officer of the Legislative Assembly will, if he deems it 
appropriate, change the way he conducts his affairs — give 
more reports, fewer reports, consolidated reports, special 
reports, and so on as he deems it necessary. And that’s as it 
should be. 
 
But nothing will change as a result of what the legislation says; 
only as a result of however the Provincial Auditor may exercise 
his discretion. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
clause 13 of the Bill, specifically section 20, changes to section 
20 dealing with the Audit Committee. And I want to point out 
clauses (2), (3), and (4) and ask for your interpretation of how 
you feel the Audit Committee will work. 
 
If you note, Mr. Minister, clause (2) said: 
 

An audit committee is established. 
 
And then no. (3) indicates that the Audit Committee is going to 
be five persons that are the unanimous recommendations from 
the Public Accounts Committee to the Speaker. 
 
But then no. (4), Mr. Minister, and I’m wondering how you see 
this working when it says that the recommendation of the 
Public Accounts Committee pursuant to the names, the 
unanimous recommendations: 
 

. . . is to be made only after the public accounts committee 
has consulted with the Standing Committee of the 
Legislative Assembly on Crown Corporations. 

 
We had a lot of discussion about the Audit Committee and 
when the Audit Committee might be used and who would be 
eligible to sit on the Audit Committee, and then I noticed that 
you’ve, in clause no. 4, you’ve said that there has to be 
consultation with the Crown Corps Committee, the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations. 
 
What did you mean by consultation and does there have to be 
approval by the members of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations to approve the unanimous recommendations of the 
PAC (Public Accounts Committee) committee before they go to 
the Speaker? We just need clarification of what you mean in 
clause no. 20(4) of the clause 13 of the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, it will be up to the Public 
Accounts Committee to name the members of the Audit 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2023 

 

Committee. And the meaning of subsection 4 of section 20 is 
simply that before naming the members of the Audit 
Committee, the Public Accounts Committee will consult with 
the members of the Crown Corporations Committee. However, 
consultation implies simply that they will talk to them. 
 
If the members of the Crown Corporations Committee cannot 
agree with the Public Accounts Committee, then it’s quite clear 
under the section 20 that it is the Public Accounts Committee 
that will nominate the members of the Audit Committee. 
 
So they need to consult with the Crown Corporations 
Committee. They do not have to have the agreement of the 
members of the Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for clarifying that, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Minister, this Act comes into force on assent, and the 
changes to The Provincial Auditor Act, as you’ve indicated, 
were necessary before we moved forward. We have currently in 
the province, an acting auditor for the province, Mr. Wendel, 
and who is doing just, you know, I think an outstanding job of 
ensuring that the reports and the various investigations are 
done. 
 
Now that this Bill will come into force, Mr. Minister, how long 
a process do you think will be in place before we move towards 
the selection of a new auditor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Actually, Mr. Chair, I could be asking the 
member opposite that question in the sense that the hiring of the 
new Provincial Auditor will be, actually, in his control and that 
of the Public Accounts Committee and not in the control of the 
Minister of Finance — myself — or the government. 
 
Once the Bill is passed and given Royal Assent, then the 
member opposite as Chair of the Public Accounts Committee 
and the Public Accounts Committee have the authority to 
commence the process to hire a new Provincial Auditor. 
 
And I don’t want to tell the member opposite how to conduct 
the affairs of the Public Accounts Committee; he knows that 
better than I do. But I would presume that what he will do is ask 
the Clerk of the committee to work with the Public Service 
Commission to commence a process to advertise for a 
Provincial Auditor. Then a certain length of time will be given 
— perhaps weeks or months; it will be the committee’s decision 
— to get applications in. They will then have some process to 
review them, probably in consultation with the Clerk’s office 
and the Public Service Commission. And ultimately they’ll 
make a recommendation to the Legislative Assembly and so on. 
 
So as soon as the committee can commence the process, they 
will be free to do so. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before I do that I’d 
like to thank the official opposition, and in particular the 
Finance critic, for their assistance here today with the Bill. And 
also I’d like to thank the opposition Finance critic in his 
capacity as Chair of the Public Accounts Committee for the 

good work that that committee did with government members 
also to achieve unanimity in support of this Bill, which I think 
is a good one for the reasons indicated. And I’d also like to 
thank Mr. Paton and Miss Taylor for assisting us here today. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Finance to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Sitting to my 
left is Mr. Kirk McGregor, who is the assistant deputy minister 
of taxation and intergovernmental affairs in the Department of 
Finance. And right behind Mr. McGregor is Mr. Kelly Laurans, 
who’s the director of corporate taxes and incentives in the 
revenue division of the Department of Finance. And seated 
behind me is Mr. John Meldrum, who is the vice-president and 
corporate counsel at Saskatchewan Telecommunications — 
SaskTel. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and 
welcome to your officials again this afternoon, Mr. Minister. 
 
Bill No. 27 consists of six clauses so it’s a very short Bill, but I 
think it’s a very important Bill in everyone in the province of 
Saskatchewan understanding the changes. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I noted with interest your comments in 
second reading of this Bill back on May 11 when you stated 
that basically the changes today were a technical amendment 
due to the CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and 
Telecommunications Commission) federal changes that have 
come into force. And you talked about the need for replacing 
the existing tax structure with another tax structure. 
 
But you also, Mr. Minister, started to indicate that this Bill was 
necessary to allow SaskTel the ability to charge users of its 
hardware, of its transmission lines a fee and that fee had to be 
worked out through this new tax calculation. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, with reference to your comments of May 11, 
could you indicate what changes CRTC was requiring of 
Saskatchewan and, in this case, of your department to ensure 
that we kept pace with what CRTC required us to do? And 
could you explain what you meant by a new tax system versus a 
user fee of those people who would use SaskTel systems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair. What has happened in the 
last number of years, as the member will know, is that SaskTel 
has gone from being regulated in Saskatchewan to being 
regulated by the CRTC, the Canadian Radio and 
Telecommunications Commission. And that is a federal body. 
 
And CRTC requires that there be a uniform allowable return on 
equity for all telecommunications companies of 11 per cent on 
utility operations representing after-tax earnings. In other 



2024 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

words, the CRTC will regulate how much money each 
telephone company can make, and that’s what they do. And 
they say you can only have a certain rate of return. 
 
Now if the move we’re making today is not made, SaskTel 
would be put at a disadvantage with respect to other 
telecommunications companies in the sense that it would be 
required to pay . . . to charge its competitors less in order to 
have the prescribed rate of return, because the competitors also 
buy from companies which paid capital tax, which SaskTel 
doesn’t do. 
 
So what this Bill does is simply to say that SaskTel will pay the 
capital . . . the corporate income tax, and that then will put 
SaskTel on the same footing as the other companies, thereby 
allowing SaskTel to charge private companies that use its 
services the same amount of money that other 
telecommunications companies would also charge those 
companies that might use some of SaskTel’s services or 
infrastructure. 
 
So really what it does is to put SaskTel on a level playing field 
with other telecommunications companies. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
part that was confusing to me is that in your comments you’ve 
indicated that SaskTel similarly would charge its competitors 
who use some of its services a notional charge for corporate 
income tax. 
 
And now you’ve indicated that that charge that’s currently 
levied for those users of SaskTel would no longer include this 
corporate income taxes, if I’m reading this correctly, and that 
you would be replacing . . . SaskTel would be replacing that 
corporate income tax by this new structure that’s created, which 
is a definition of telecommunications capital and the definition 
of a telecommunications capital tax; that you would put those 
two into place and that there would be a new calculation of a 
tax. 
 
I’m not sure. What difference does this make for the actual 
user? Is there a change in the amount of fees? If the corporate 
income tax that was calculated and charged is now being 
replaced by this new telecommunications capital tax, is there a 
difference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, there is no difference in what the user 
pays. We’re simply replacing what was a notional charge with 
an actual charge, and this legislation changes the notional 
charge to the actual charge because the CRTC has indicated, 
and in fact in one case, you know, has said you can’t put the 
notional charge in there as part of your Bill to the user. You 
have to have an actual charge. 
 
And the only persons that would benefit if you didn’t bring in 
the actual charge would be the private companies that may use 
SaskTel services, the cost to whom would go down because 
SaskTel would not be able to take a notional charge into 
account in calculating its cost of doing business. The CRTC 
says you actually have to pay the capital tax in order to properly 
calculate what you charge the user. 
 
But I would indicate that in terms of the user which would be, 

you know, another telecommunications company I suppose, that 
user would only be put in a position by this Bill that SaskTel 
would be able to charge the user the same fee that Manitoba 
Telephones or Edmonton Telephones or some other company 
might charge. Not more, but we don’t think they should do it 
for less either, and that’s the point. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
to the Minister. The section 58 amended, which is clause no. 5 
of the Bill, indicates that the rate for the calculation of the tax 
payable is going to be prescribed under this section. 
 
Who will determine that tax rate as defined under the definition 
of 13.2? Who will determine what that tax rate is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It would be set by regulation, so that would 
be determined by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, one final question. Under the 
system that is operating today that SaskTel has, how many 
companies would be affected by the changes as proposed in Bill 
No. 27? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It would be less than 10 companies, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
thank the official opposition for their co-operation with respect 
to the progress of this Bill through the House today. And I’d 
like to thank these officials from the Department of Finance and 
also from SaskTel. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2001 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Will the minister be introducing any 
new officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair. With me is still Mr. 
McGregor, to my left. And sitting behind me is Mr. Arun 
Srinivas from the taxation and intergovernmental affairs 
division of the Department of Finance. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Welcome to your new official this afternoon, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, Bill 51 is a very extensive Bill in regards to its 
size. It’s dealing with 33 clauses, a number of formulas, Mr. 
Minister, that look complicated to most people — and I’m sure 
they are. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you confirm that the amendments proposed 
in Bill No. 51 deal entirely with the proposals that you 
announced back in the provincial budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I can confirm that except with the 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2025 

 

additional comment that there are some provisions that deal 
with very technical matters that are requested by the Canada 
Customs and Revenue Agency, which are not substantive in 
nature. But with respect to the substantive components of the 
Bill, these are designed to implement the income tax changes 
which follow upon the tax reform that was announced in the 
budget of 2000 and continued in the budget of 2001. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, for a 
number of years now we have been stating — we, meaning the 
Saskatchewan Party as an opposition — we need to grow 
Saskatchewan, we need to encourage business, we need to 
encourage job growth. And we see by the latest statistics from 
Revenue Canada that indeed Saskatchewan has not grown. We 
have one of the worst records since the Great Depression. 
 
And we recommended that we look at the corporate tax rate. 
The business corporate tax rate that is in place in the province 
of Saskatchewan right now is 8 per cent. And it’s a position that 
we’ve taken that we need to ensure that Saskatchewan becomes 
more competitive and we’ve indicated some pretty drastic 
changes are needed in this to grow Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, your changes this year indicate that the rate of 8 
per cent will be reduced to 6 per cent, effective July 1 as I 
understand; and that the limit, the $200,000 ceiling will be 
increased to $300,000. Is that change also coming into effect on 
July 1? 
 
And then the other part, are you contemplating any other 
changes? In light of the dismal job creation record in the 
province, are you proposing any other changes to the small 
business corporate tax rates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well with respect to the premise of the 
question, Mr. Chair, I would point out that the job numbers that 
the member is referring to compare the number of people 
working in Saskatchewan in May of this year to May of the 
year 2000. And the reality is that May of the year 2000 is the 
month in which more people were working than ever before in 
the history of the province. It was a very, very high number. 
 
And it’s quite true that the number of people working on a 
month-to-month comparison, that the member is referring to, 
has gone down. But the reality is that each and every year there 
are more people working in Saskatchewan than ever before in 
the history of our province, and I’m quite confident that that 
will continue. 
 
In answer to the member’s question, the change in the small 
business corporate income tax rate from 8 per cent to 6 per cent 
will occur on July 1 of this year. The ceiling on that tax rate will 
go from $200,000 to $300,000 on January 1, 2002. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And in answer to the question, will we consider doing more in 
the future, we are always open to suggestions. We are always 
considering changes. If there are changes, they’ll be announced 
in the budget of 2002 which I look forward — if I have the 
opportunity — to present to the legislature at that time. 
 
I’ll certainly welcome any suggestions from the opposition. I 

have noted carefully the recommendations of the economist in 
the paper that the official opposition released yesterday, and I 
note among those the observation by the opposition’s economist 
that the job losses are not really related to tax rates — at least 
he doesn’t mention tax rates — but related to the fundamental 
problems that we have in the field of agriculture, which is also 
something that the Minister of Economic Development has 
been saying. 
 
So there appears to be verification of the government’s position 
from the economist hired by the opposition members. Certainly 
we’re all concerned about the farm situation. We’re also 
concerned about the tax situation. And we will do — as we 
have done for the last five years at least since we’ve begun to 
reduce income taxes — we will be doing what we can as we can 
afford it without jeopardizing the services that people rely upon 
like health and education, and without putting the province back 
into deficit and increase the debt. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, you’ve indicated that in this current fiscal year the 
business tax will be affected twice — once on July 1, once on 
January 1. So there will be, you know, changes that will take 
place to the total amount of the tax that the province receives 
from this area. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s my understanding that about 65 to $70 million 
worth of tax comes in from this particular sector of small 
business, and in light of a change from 8 to 6 per cent effective 
July 1, in light of 200,000 limit being increased to 300,000 limit 
on January 1, 2002, what have your officials concluded will be 
the total cost of actual revenue that you will no longer receive 
for this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I believe, Mr. Chair, that the reduction in 
the small business corporate income tax from 8 per cent to 6 per 
cent would probably mean a tax savings to the small businesses 
concerned of approximately $19 million to $20 million for the 
rate reduction. And for the change in the threshold, probably 
approximately $3 million per year. 
 
These are only estimates. We don’t really know what the impact 
will be. But I would estimate somewhere in the neighbourhood 
of $24 million tax savings to small business as a result of the 
budget measures this year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, you’ve indicated that number 
and you’re saying this year, so your suggestion is that for a full 
fiscal year, with the implementations of a new 6 per cent rate 
and a $300,000 limit, that that indeed will be much larger for a 
full fiscal year. Is that a correct interpretation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No. And I may have been imprecise also in 
the way I answered the question, for which I apologize. The 
figures I was giving would be annualized — that is the benefit 
for a full year. 
 
I believe that for this current fiscal year that we’re in, because 
the changes come in throughout the year in July and January, I 
believe that the savings as a result of the reduction of the rate to 
6 per cent would amount to approximately $10.4 million. The 
increase of the limit to 300,000 this fiscal year would amount to 
about $300,000, for a total this year of about $10.7 million, 



2026 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

growing to somewhere in the neighbourhood of 22 to $24 
million per year thereafter. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for clarifying that 
because those were the numbers that I was using based on the 
January 1 implementation of being only a short period of time. 
So I thank you for clarifying that. 
 
Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that small businesses in 
Saskatchewan will have their overall taxes reduced for this 
fiscal year by about $11 million — 10.7 — do you expect to see 
an economic spinoff in that we should see job creation growing 
in some of those businesses who’ve had the opportunity to save 
some tax actually enlarge their small businesses? 
 
Would you speculate and look into your crystal ball — and I’m 
sure many of your, your economists have had a chance to look 
at that and say, we believe that a change like this will be good 
for Saskatchewan because it will do something positive — 
could you indicate what those positive measures might be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well certainly what we hear from the 
business community very loudly and very clearly, they feel that 
the most important thing for us to be doing right now is to cut 
the small business corporate income tax rate. They think that 
that will create a more positive business environment leading to 
the creation of more investment in small business, and of course 
small business is a big generator of jobs. 
 
Having said that, it’s very difficult to quantify these things. It’s 
the view of the advisers in the government that the small 
business corporate income tax rate is one factor among many 
that will determine the strength of the economy, the number of 
jobs we have, and whether the small business sector is growing, 
whether employment grows. And I think generally speaking 
that’s correct. 
 
There are factors like what’s happening in the United States, 
what’s happening in Ontario to their economy, what is 
happening to the Canadian dollar, indeed what is happening in 
Asia because we are an exporting jurisdiction. 
 
So I think that a variety of factors come into play. Certainly 
competitive taxation rates are one of them. But I don’t think 
there’s a direct, quantifiable relationship that I can describe 
today that would say that you cut the tax by one point, you 
create X number of jobs. I think it has a positive impact. In 
terms of being more specific than that, time will tell. 
 
But it certainly is our hope that reducing the corporate income 
tax rate for small business will in fact have a positive impact on 
the job situation and put more people to work in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s important to the government, it’s 
important to the people, and it is certainly one of the objectives 
of the budget. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. The Canadian Federation of Independent Business, 
CFIB, has made presentations to you and of course they, on a 
regular basis, compare provinces, compare tax rates, and 
present charts to your department and to the official opposition, 
and of course lobby on behalf of their members which, as 
you’ve indicated, Mr. Minister, the change to the small business 

tax was appreciated by members of the CFIB and those 
businesses that are not members of CFIB. 
 
Mr. Minister, the change in Saskatchewan will still mean that 
when you do a comparison, if I look at the Canadian Federation 
of Independent Business latest charts, that in Saskatchewan our 
tax rate will still be one of the highest in Western Canada. We 
also note, Mr. Minister, that there are other categories. 
 
You’ve indicated that your change that you’ve proposed will 
change the limit from 200,00 to 300,000. But that still creates 
only two categories — one below 300,000 and one above 
300,000. In many other provinces there is an intermediary 
category, an intermediate category that doesn’t jump 
automatically to the 17 per cent rate that you have here 
currently in the province for anything above 300,000. 
 
Is there any consideration to looking at a new intermediate rate 
of taxation for companies that are going to be larger than 
$300,000 but not, you know, super large in terms of really, 
really big businesses? Has your department taken a look at 
creating a new class? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Actually, I’m not sure that intermediate 
rates are all that common at the provincial level. I think the 
federal government has an intermediate rate. I’m not so sure 
that most provinces do. 
 
But I should point out that we actually do have an intermediate 
rate when you take into account the treatment that is given to 
the manufacturing and processing sector. We have a variety of 
tax incentives to them which effectively decrease the amount of 
tax they pay pursuant to their corporate taxes. 
 
So what I would say is when you’re comparing corporate taxes, 
you always have to be very careful to look at the whole picture. 
For example, while it’s true that our corporate tax rates are 
higher than some jurisdictions, there are also jurisdictions that 
have payroll taxes which we don’t have. They include 
Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, and Newfoundland. 
 
And then some provinces have health care premiums which are 
often picked up by business. They include British Columbia and 
Alberta. 
 
And I don’t make the point that our taxes are lower in all 
categories. But I simply say while we may be higher in some 
categories, we are in fact lower in other categories that affect 
the business community. And having said that, if in the future 
we can do better, then we certainly will examine all suggestions 
including suggestions that come from the members opposite. 
We listen very carefully, and if there are suggestions that are 
affordable and will serve the economy well, then we’re very 
willing to consider them in the future. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, a 
final question deals with the clause no. 23, new section 51, and 
it’s just for clarification, Mr. Minister. If you would take a look 
at the Bill, which is page 7 of the Bill, I’m wondering, Mr. 
Minister, what the actual numbers mean there when the 
description is that the actual amount expressed in dollars as set 
out in the formula in section 17 is to be $3,618.956263. And it 
indicates that on three numbers. Like why do we have six 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2027 

 

numbers on the right side of the decimal? Could you explain 
what that means or maybe one of your officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The reason is . . . not actually to confuse 
the members opposite or the Minister of Finance by using 
numbers like that, but because with respect to these types of 
credits, we are replicating the federal amount. And we want our 
amount to be the same as the federal amount, so that if there is a 
federal credit, that the Saskatchewan taxpayer will also get the 
credit. 
 
And the reason the amounts become as precise as they are is 
that the federal government has started out with certain 
amounts, and those amounts have then been indexed to 
inflation. 
 
And so they’ve gone from, you know, a set figure in dollars and 
cents to a different figure, as the result of their indexation is 
taken into account. And then we are latching onto that system 
and using the same numbers so that our amounts will be the 
same as what they use in Ottawa. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Chair: — Thank you, committee. This is quite a lengthy 
Bill. It would be nice to be able to go page by page. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 33 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I’d 
like to thank the official opposition, and in particular the 
Finance critic, for co-operation in moving this Bill forward 
today. 
 
And I’d also like to thank the officials from the Department of 
Finance here. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 14 — The Provincial Auditor Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Centenary Fund 

Vote 70 
 
Subvote (CF01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Finance to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated to my 
right is Mr. Cal Kirby, who is the director of facilities planning 
at K to 12, Education. To my left is Mr. Glen Veikle, who is the 
assistant deputy minister at the treasury board branch in the 
Department of Finance; seated to his right is Mr. Tony 
Antonini, who is the director of facilities and administrative 
services at Post-Secondary Education. And behind Mr. Veikle 
is Mr. Don Wincherauk, who is the assistant deputy minister at 
corporate services for Highways and Transportation 
department. 
 
And seated two seats behind Mr. Antonini is Mr. Rick 
Pritchard, who is from the environment protection branch of 
SERM. And behind me is Mr. Larry Chaykowski, who is the 
acting executive director of business operations and information 
technology at Municipal Affairs and Housing. And to his right 
is Mr. Don MacAulay who is the director of parks at SERM. 
 
And the reason there are so many people here from so many 
departments is because this is an initiative that crosses 
departments and each of these departments is responsible for 
part of the Centenary Capital Fund. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Again, 
welcome to all the officials that have joined you, Mr. Minister, 
this afternoon for discussion of the Centenary Capital Fund. 
 
Mr. Minister, I note your comments back a year ago, in fact, 
when you announced the Centenary Fund and you indicated that 
this was going to be a four-year project that was going to 
expend over the course of four years $120 million through 
various departments. 
 
And as you’ve indicated, Mr. Minister, you’ve introduced 
officials from six different departments and those are the 



2028 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

departments that are responsible for approximately $5 million 
each year. 
 
Mr. Minister, the first year of the Centenary Fund projects is 
over, back on March 31. And I’m wondering if you could 
explain to the House and to people of Saskatchewan, what 
accounting procedures you have put in place to ensure that the 
auditor of the . . . the Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan, the 
people of Saskatchewan, the Legislative Assembly, sees the 
accounting or the record keeping for the Centenary Fund for 
each and every one of the departments to ensure that the people 
of Saskatchewan know where the $30 million was spent for the 
last fiscal year before we begin the expenditure of a second $30 
million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The accounting in each department would 
be the same as with respect to any monies the department would 
receive. In other words, the Provincial Auditor has jurisdiction 
to account each department. The Centenary Fund would 
allocate funds to the department; the Provincial Auditor would 
audit the disposition of those funds in the same way as he will 
audit the disposition of any funds. 
 
So the rules are just the same as always and the Provincial 
Auditor will audit the books with respect to the Centenary Fund 
in that way. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, in light of some of the concerns 
raised by many organizations and other levels of government in 
the province being able to access monies from the Centenary 
Fund, I’m wondering if you’ve had any thought or if you’ve 
had any suggestion made by people of the province that the 
Centenary Fund and allocating it in this manner could have 
been much more efficient if indeed the $5 million was just 
allocated to the budgets of the various departments. 
 
And I’ll use the example . . . as you’ve indicated, you have a 
gentleman here from the facilities department of the K to 12 
system that I believe has an excellent program in place to 
ensure that they deal with requests of boards of educations, the 
B-1s that come in, and the procedures that they deal in 
priorizing the requests, and finally administering the capital 
projects. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, is this a duplication that you have 
now created through this Centenary Fund, or are you actually 
relying on the existing departments and the existing 
coordinators in each of those departments to allocate monies 
towards infrastructure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, I don’t believe a lot of duplication is 
created. I believe that the money simply allow the departments 
to do more than they might otherwise would have been able to 
do. 
 
In the case of the Department of Education, K to 12 for 
example, the monies are allocated using the same sort of 
prioritization system that is used in any event — the 
consultation with the stakeholders, the school boards, and so on 
to determine the most important capital priorities. What the 
money does is just enable them to do more. 
 
And so I think where there are existing systems for allocation of 

funds, those systems are used. It’s just that there is a higher 
amount of funds so that more can be done. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, if I’m to interpret your answer 
then. If I look at your estimate document and I look at the 
expenditure for Education, I look at the expenditure for 
Post-Secondary Education for capital, if I was to look at 
Education then and say the budget under the Education column 
indicates that the planned capital expenditure for this fiscal 
year, this budget, is 24.167 million, and in Post-Secondary for 
instance, it says Post-Secondary capital is 29.83, then what 
you’ve indicated to those departments is that in each case their 
budgets are increased by $5 million and all of the regulations, 
all of the rules that they put in place to determine where capital 
is spent will be followed for the same monies that are now 
coming from the Centenary Fund. Is that accurate? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, that’s correct, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, for a number of times now we’ve had the Associated 
Entities Fund which is different than the Centenary Fund, where 
there’s been criticism of the fact that it has become a political 
fund where ministers go around the province allocating 
resources to projects. And now the same criticism is being 
levied to not all of your departments, Mr. Minister, but specific 
departments that are now responsible for their sections of the 
Centenary Fund. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what systems you’ve put in place 
to ensure that there is equal access for all people and all groups 
that wish to apply for funds from the Centenary Fund through 
the municipal entity, first of all, that is responsible for a portion 
of the monies; through SERM which is responsible for regional 
parks and the developments there. 
 
What systems have you put in place to ensure that there is no 
interference by the ministers responsible for those sectors; that 
there’s no interference from the cabinet? That indeed the 
department that is responsible for the Centenary Fund monies 
has put in place a process that is known to everyone and the 
actual application forms are distributed to everyone to ensure 
that the funds that will be applied for can be allocated in a 
correct, proper manner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I’m not quite sure what the member 
means, Mr. Chair, by no interference from cabinet. We must 
remember that in a cabinet system of government, cabinet is 
ultimately responsible for the expenditure of public funds. And 
certainly cabinet and cabinet ministers will play a role in the 
allocation of the funds under the Centenary Fund. That is the 
job of cabinet. 
 
In the case of the Department of Education, as I’ve said, and the 
Department of Post-Secondary Education, as I’ve said and the 
member has said, there is a process by which the funds are 
allocated and that process is followed. 
 
In the case of the Department of Highways, they have their 
priorities based upon the needs of the highways system and they 
allocate their funds accordingly. 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2029 

 

In the case of the Department of Municipal Government, which 
would implement or administer the Centenary Fund with 
respect to three areas — namely heritage and parks, municipal 
infrastructure, and social housing — they have an open process 
whereby people can apply for funds. 
 
In the case of the Department of the Environment, which has 
also been involved of course with the environmental cleanup 
and I believe heritage and parks aspects of the program, they 
have been assessing their own priorities. 
 
But I would have to say to the member that in both of those 
cases, when you look at a list of where the monies have been 
spent in provincial parks or improving roads in rural 
Saskatchewan, there’s so many infrastructure needs that I’m 
sure that the member would agree that all of the projects that 
have been designated for funding are projects that are of benefit 
to communities throughout the province. 
 
And I think that it’s fair to say that the monies are being spent 
on infrastructure needs that the people have identified 
throughout the province. There’s no frivolous projects here. 
These are things that need to be done — to fix the schools; to 
fix the roads; to improve the provincial parks. And the civil 
service is certainly doing a very good job, I think, identifying 
these needs. 
 
In the case of Municipal Government, inviting members of the 
public to apply for funding. In the case of other departments, 
using their established criteria and procedures. 
 
And so I think the program has been working quite well. Of 
course there are so many infrastructure needs and a need for 
long-term planning that the monies have pretty much been 
totally spoken for, even though we’re only in the second year of 
the program. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
have an advantage in that the first year for the Centenary 
Capital Fund ended back on March 31 of this year. And I’m 
sure that your officials from the various departments that are 
responsible for each of those segments of the fund have 
reported to you as to where the monies were allocated and the 
expenditures. 
 
And I’m not in any way suggesting that any of those projects 
were frivolous, okay. Those were needed and necessary projects 
and you have an idea where that money was spent. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, one of the . . . and you’ve picked highways 
and roads and I’ll stay on that one for a second if I might, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
In my constituency and in some of the other areas that we’ve 
had discussion with the Minister of Highways, for instance, 
there have been collapses of bridges, the complete collapse of a 
bridge. In my constituency, a bridge over a river has been 
declared unusable by the Department of Highways, by the 
person that is responsible for that. 
 
And the RM of Sliding Hills has inquired with the minister, 
now the Department of Fisheries, Department of Coast Guard to 
try to obtain funding for the reconstruction of a new bridge. 

They recognize that this road is not being used as a super grid 
would be used and the traffic on that road is limited. So they 
recognize that the construction of a new bridge is expensive and 
may not be the best spent money. 
 
So they’ve approached the Minister of Highways. They didn’t 
know about the Centenary Capital Fund, that indeed now they 
would like to put in a low level crossing across the river. 
 
First of all, they had problems with the Department of Fisheries 
who said, well, spawning is going to be difficult. And finally, 
when an official came out there and recognized that the water in 
the spring is 10 feet above where the low level crossing would 
be, that shouldn’t be a problem for the fish and, in fact, they 
could swim through the culverts if they wanted to stay at the 
bottom of the river. 
 
And then, the second part was that the Coast Guard has now 
said no, this will create a situation where the river will no 
longer be navigable. And the Minister of Highways, I asked her 
this question and she said that’s the decision of Coast Guard. 
It’s going to cost another $120,000 for rebuilding of the bridge 
because that’s a need of the Coast Guard. 
 
So I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, when we talk about the 
Centenary Fund and trying to allocate resources — and I really 
wonder about the last answer you gave — did you imply that 
the $30 million for each of the next three years has already been 
spent and that projects that may be thought of next year are 
indeed out of luck because the demand is so great that all of that 
money is allocated? 
 
Because here, we have an RM that needs assistance, that the 
Highways department is saying that the $311 million that they 
have in their budget is allocated already and now you’re telling 
me that the Centenary Fund is out of question as well. 
 
So there is concern at that level that do all people in 
Saskatchewan know how to access funds from the 
transportation, highways, and rural roads section? Are there 
applications in the social housing section? Are there 
applications for parks and heritage projects? 
 
Do all people in the various communities in the various service 
clubs, in all of those areas, do they have the information from 
your various departments that inform them how they can access 
monies through the Centenary Fund, not only in this coming 
fiscal year, 2001-2002, but in the two subsequent remaining 
years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the amount of money available 
through the Centenary Fund is a limited amount of money. And 
I guess I would say this, that there won’t be enough money in 
the Centenary Fund to meet all of the infrastructure needs that 
we have in Saskatchewan. I mean dealing with the question of 
the roads and the bridges, the allocation to the Department of 
Highways and Transportation is $5 million per year for four 
years. 
 
And as the member knows, Mr. Chair, and I know also, the 
amount of money we need to spend just on our portion of the 
highways and roads each year is at least $300 million. And this 
year the budget is spending more. 



2030 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

And rural roads, we’re giving $23 million to the RMs (rural 
municipality) each year to maintain their grids. And what I 
meant to suggest before was that I don’t think $5 million a year 
for four years — and we’re into the second year — is going to 
resolve all of the highways and roads needs. We need many 
more millions of dollars and tens of millions of dollars and, 
well, hundreds of millions of dollars each year to do that. And I 
simply meant to say to the member that it won’t take very long 
for all of the money in the Centenary Fund to be spoken for. 
 
Having said that, of course we’re only in the second year. It is a 
four-year program. And if any municipality or other 
organization feels that they have a project, which is worthy of 
consideration, they can certainly contact the Minister of 
Highways and ask that consideration be given. 
 
And I’m sure that I can’t commit that the monies would be 
provided; I don’t know how many requests there would be. But 
certainly I would say to the member, we would want to consider 
any such requests and I would not want to be heard to say that 
everything was decided and those requests would not be 
considered. Because if something more important comes along, 
then you should have a look at it. 
 
But I’m simply making the point that when you get right down 
to it, it isn’t enough money to meet all the needs that are there, 
and it isn’t even all that much money in the scheme of things 
compared to the amount of money we need to spend each and 
every year on highways, schools, universities, SIAST, and so 
on. 
 
So having said that, I want to assure the member that we are 
more than open to having people that are interested in accessing 
these funds contact the minister concerned. And it’s simply a 
matter of writing the Minister of Municipal Affairs in the case 
of municipal infrastructure; writing the Minister of Highways 
and Transportation in the case of roads and bridges projects; 
and bringing matters also to the attention of the Minister of 
Education or Post-Secondary Education, or the Environment for 
that matter. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
don’t have a copy of Hansard from last year at about this time, 
but I’m sure you recall, Mr. Minister, I raised the concern about 
applications and the fact that deadlines had come and gone 
before people were informed. 
 
And I did relate to you, Mr. Minister, about a couple of 
applications that came out of the Leslie Beach co-operative. 
And one of those was for a short road system that needed to be 
paved, and it was a joint project of the golf course of the RM of 
Foam Lake and the Leslie Beach co-operative, and they had 
applied for assistance because Highways department had said 
this was not a project. I also indicated to you at that time that 
there was a project to upgrade the park facilities at Leslie Beach 
and apply for the improvement of instituting underground 
electricity. 
 
And I recall at that time, and I’m paraphrasing and I might be 
wrong a little bit, Mr. Minister, but you said, all worthwhile 
projects, all projects that should be considered — very similar 
to your remarks today — and you said, but the $30 million is a 
small amount of money and it’s allocated in all of these other 

areas and it’s probably spent for this year, but those are great 
projects and reconsider it. Again same projects, no assistance. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, when you announced in the 
budget of a year ago, you said that the Centenary Fund was 
going to help address specific infrastructure needs, and then you 
created the six areas. I’m wondering if your departments have 
given any thought — and as you’ve indicated, we do have two 
years left — has your departments of . . . especially the area of 
municipal control, housing, and the environment, parks and 
heritage properties, have there been specific criteria put in place 
that says that the Centenary Fund monies in these specific areas 
will be given out based on applications that will meet this 
particular criteria? 
 
And I single out those, Mr. Minister, different from the K to 12 
education system and the post-secondary capital systems 
because those two I think operate on an entirely different kind 
of system. And probably Highways does as well. 
 
But when you look at the very specific requests of small service 
clubs — the Leslie Beach co-operative, a small project put 
forward by the RM of Foam Lake and the golf course, and I’m 
sure that there are many other projects in all of Saskatchewan 
that have put forward — do the people that are submitting these 
requests, do they know what the criteria is and what kinds of 
things are in place from the various departments so that they 
can be . . . understand why in one instance they’re accepted and 
then maybe in another instance they’re not accepted? 
 
(17:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, in answer to the question, 
with respect to the Department of Municipal Affairs, they set 
priorities as follows. They wanted to emphasize libraries, public 
safety facilities, parks, and other community facilities that 
would help the communities to celebrate the centennial. 
 
I’m advised that they wanted to stay away from the sort of 
projects that would be funded by the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program and concentrate on the libraries, the 
public safety facilities, the parks, and other community facilities 
that would be consistent with celebration of the centennial in 
2005. 
 
Now having said that, the problem of course is that — and I’m 
sure that the project that the member is describing is a worthy 
project, and perhaps it will be funded at some point, perhaps 
not, I don’t know — but I am advised that, just to give an 
example of the accessibility of the application process for 
municipalities, and community organizations, parks wanting to 
apply, that Municipal Government, of $20 million that they will 
have over the course of four years to expend, they have already 
had $67 million worth of applications. 
 
So they obviously don’t even have a third as much money as 
people are applying for. And I think that’s to be . . . that’s not a 
surprise, it’s to be understood. And unfortunately it means that 
they’ve had to select some projects and try to prioritize. But 
there have been many worthy projects that I think we’d all 
agree would be very good projects to undertake that we have 
not had the resources to fund. 
 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2031 

 

So the priorities are as I’ve described, and the reality is like 
everything else in life — the demand for the money is quite a 
bit larger than the amount of money available, unfortunately, 
and so they have not been able to approve all of the applications 
that they’ve got. In fact probably, you know, less than about 
one-third of the applications that they have received. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, while 
I understand the approval process of capital requests at the K to 
12 structure and I understand that they’re very similar in the 
Post-Secondary department, could you indicate now the $67 
million worth of requests through municipal infrastructure for 
the Centenary Fund of only 30 million — or sorry, no, it will be 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 20 million, it’ll be 20 million. 
Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Who determines which of the projects are going to receive the 
funding? Is it a committee? Is it the deputy minister of 
Municipal Affairs? Is it the Minister of Municipal Affairs? Who 
actually evaluates the projects and says that the $5 million for 
this year will be spent on the selected projects as indicated on 
this list? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The officials who work for the Department 
of Municipal Affairs evaluate the projects and they make their 
recommendations through the budgetary process. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — When those officials make those 
recommendations through the process then, the funds are 
accessed from the Centenary Fund and then are paid directly 
from the Centenary Fund to the various municipalities or 
service clubs? Or is the money paid from the Centenary Fund, 
or transferred from the Centenary Fund through to the 
Department of Municipal Affairs and then the funds are paid 
out from that particular department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Once a project is approved, the funds 
would go directly from the General Revenue Fund to the 
project. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Okay, Mr. Minister, then if I take you back to 
my first question about accountability and reporting and 
auditing from the first year — and again because the March 31 
deadline is just passed — where will the people of 
Saskatchewan see the reporting, the accounting, and the 
auditing of all of the projects that have received funds? 
 
Will they have to see it at the local level, for instance — and I 
use the example of a municipality receiving certain amounts of 
funds for redoing a particular park — will the reporting for each 
and every project that received the $30 million, will it be 
reported through this Assembly so that we are assured that all 
$30 million are accounted for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, the monies would be reported to this 
Assembly through the public accounts. In saying that the 
monies would be paid directly from the General Revenue Fund 
to a park, for example, that was recommended by the 
Department of Municipal Government, that should not be taken 
to imply that the monies would not nevertheless be considered 
under the administration of the Department of Municipal 
Government for the purpose of auditing. 
 

So the Provincial Auditor certainly, as I said before, would have 
the authority to audit the Department of Municipal Affairs, and 
the monies that may have been sent from the General Revenue 
Fund to a park, for example, would form part of that audit. And 
the Provincial Auditor would do what he and his office do very 
well, which is to make sure that those monies go to the purpose 
for which they’re intended. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
you’ve indicated one example of $67 million worth of requests 
from one of the departments. Could you indicate, Mr. Minister, 
or could your officials indicate to us as to how many projects 
were approved last year, in the first year of the funding, that are 
relying on a continued support from the Centenary Fund for 
more than one year? In other words, they may also be receiving 
assistance from the Centenary Fund in the current fiscal year, 
the third fiscal year, and the fourth fiscal year. 
 
Are there any projects that have that type of funding 
commitment from any of the departments that are involved in 
the distribution of the Centenary Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’d be very happy to provide the member 
with that information, but I do not have a detailed . . . I don’t 
have the number of departments . . . or projects that may be 
ongoing. And I’d be happy to put that information together and 
send it over to the member. And the officials will put that 
together and we’ll send it in writing. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. And I’m 
not sure whether you would have the answer to this question. 
You indicated in your responses that the Centenary Fund 
applications, that you were trying to encourage the departments 
to stay away from projects that would receive assistance from 
the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program. 
 
And as we’ve witnessed over the last number of months, Mr. 
Minister, the infrastructure program in water and sewer is in 
need of some serious overhaul in the province of Saskatchewan. 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, whether you have an answer from 
your department as to whether or not any projects have been 
approved under the Centenary Fund to actually allocate monies 
for sewer and water infrastructure improvements in the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In the area of northern water and sewer, we 
have allocated $2.5 million per year from the Centenary Fund. 
 
And I should say that the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program and the predecessor to that, which was the 
Saskatchewan infrastructure program, have been focussing 
quite a bit on water and sewer. And one of the . . . when you 
really look into what’s happening — this is off the Centenary 
Fund a bit — but when you really look into what’s happening 
on the infrastructure spending side, most of those projects are 
water and sewer. And so the Centenary Fund has a slightly 
different focus. 
 
But I do want to say that I understand that under the 
infrastructure program, every community that has had a boil 
drinking water advisory which applied to the infrastructure 
funding for their water and sewer system, received funding for 
water and sewer. All of which is to say, on the water and sewer 



2032 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

side, I think we have in fact been making significant progress. 
 
Even before Walkerton ever happened, or North Battleford, 
communities were starting to work on water and sewer. That’s 
continuing. Water and sewer will get much more emphasis than 
any other area. When you look at the whole infrastructure 
program out of the Centenary Fund, it’s $2.5 million per year in 
the North for water and sewer. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in 
your release last year, you indicated that you would address 
northern water and sewer needs, and that you indicated that the 
criteria used to allocate money from other categories within the 
Centenary Capital Fund will ensure that a minimum of $5 
million a year will go to the North. And I think I just heard you 
say you’ve allocated 2.5 million to the North for water and 
sewer specific projects. 
 
Mr. Minister, does this description that I just read to you, which 
are your words from your budget, does this mean that in each of 
the other categories, you have allocated some of the 5 million 
that was for instance targeted for the K to 12 capital structure or 
the post-secondary structure, that you took some of those 
monies from each of the six areas, and allocated . . . or pooled 
them together to ensure that $5 million was allocated to the 
North per year; and that of that 5 million, you’ve now said well 
we’re not going to be worried about ensuring that each of the 
categories are met, that you’ve said now you can in the North 
spend 2.5 million of that 5 million on water and sewer. Is that a 
correct interpretation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Of the 5 million per year, 2.5 million 
for a few years could be water and sewer. There would be 
Highways money going into the North, social housing. It would 
be across the piece. 
 
And I should say that I think that the main commitment is that 
over the course of four years, we want to spend $20 million of 
that money on northern projects. Now I don’t want to say to the 
member of the House that it will be exactly $5 million per year 
in each of the four years. It could be that one year we’ll spend 6, 
and the next year it may be 4, and so on. 
 
But at the end of the day, after the four years is done, that $20 
million would have been spent in the North, for an average of 
$5 million per year. That money would come out of each area 
into the North, and at least each of several areas. It may not be 
that in each year every area puts money into the North. But the 
money would come out of those categories into the North, at an 
average of $5 million per year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, then if I interpret your 
explanation, is that these six areas that you’ve allocated the $5 
million to each of those six areas, that it may not be that each 
one is reduced by about 800,000, which would make up the, 
you know, required 5 million. And that indeed would leave 4.2 
million, if I used the example of the K to 12 schools which were 
supposed to receive 5 million. 
 
What you’re saying then is that department may not have had 
its budget reduced from 5 to 4.2 because $800,000 would have 
been allocated from that specific section to make up the $5 
million that was necessary for the North. 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, it’s correct, Mr. Chair. We’re not 
taking an average amount out of each category. Municipal 
Government is providing the 2.5 million I think last year and 
this year for water and sewer; and other departments . . . other 
categories may provide a lesser amount. 
 
We want to spend $20 million over the course of four years. 
Those amounts will not come equally out of each category, and 
it may vary from year to year which category is making up that 
$5 million. And there are no set amounts in those categories. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for that explanation, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Minister, if there are groups in the province of 
Saskatchewan who are looking at projects that they would have 
in their communities, in their municipalities, in other areas, 
whether they’re related to upgrading of parks or heritage 
properties or municipal infrastructure or bridge construction — 
is there hope that these projects . . . rather than saying hope, is 
there any type of hope that the people who would put together 
an application form to receive some funding under the 
Centenary Fund would still actually be able to allocate the 
Centenary Fund in each . . . in any one of the remaining two 
years past this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In answer to the question, Mr. Chair, I 
would say this: that there is certainly a hope that if there’s a 
proposal that a community has and it’s submitted, there’s a 
hope that that would be funded. And certainly I can assure the 
member that it would be considered. 
 
But I have to be completely straightforward and indicate to the 
member that, for example, in the area of heritage properties — 
that’s one of the categories of the Centenary Fund, heritage 
properties and parks — there is approximately, I think, $7 
million available throughout the four years to fix heritage 
properties. But the amount of applications that the Municipal 
Government department has already received is somewhere in 
the area of $80 million in projects, so that we have to be 
realistic and say that the amount of money available doesn’t 
allow us to approve every application that we get. 
 
And so most people that apply — unfortunately, and I think 
regrettably, from my point of view and I know the member’s 
point of view, we can’t do everything — so most people that 
apply would not get funding. 
 
Having said that, if somebody has a good idea that should be 
considered, I think they should send it in. We can’t promise that 
it would be funded, but it certainly won’t be funded if it’s never 
considered. And it may be that something comes along that 
really is a higher priority than something that may have already 
been submitted. 
 
So I would say that people should apply if they have a project, 
but they should go into the process with their eyes open and 
with the realization that there are many, many more applications 
for funding than the funding available. And that’s just a fact of 
life. 
 
So most of the applications would not be approved; but 
certainly we would want to say to people: if you’ve got a good 
idea, send it in and we’ll take a look at it. 
 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2033 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, you’ve raised a good question 
that is in the minds of many people in Saskatchewan because 
they’re not sure about the criteria. And I’ll use the example that 
you just gave us about the heritage monies. 
 
You’ve indicated that about $7 million is available over four 
years for improvement to heritage properties. Then I guess, Mr. 
Minister, a group could come forward and lobby the department 
responsible for allocating this money so extensively that that 
department would allocate the full 7 million to one project. So 
the other numbers of millions of dollars worth of projects are all 
out of luck because the $7 million has been allocated to one 
project. 
 
And I know, Mr. Minister, in the past, whether it’s been 
provincial governments or federal governments or whether 
they’ve been through sporting grants that I’ve been associated, 
usually there are limits placed on the amount of money that can 
be allocated to any one project. Usually there’s a funding 
process that is put in place regarding the amount of people that 
are affected based on a per capita allocation of grant. There’s 
certain criteria that is there, Mr. Minister. 
 
And what I’m hearing from so many different people in the 
province of Saskatchewan, they don’t understand. They do not 
understand the criteria that your departments have to evaluate 
projects, to in any way consider them, because as you’ve 
indicated, if a huge project comes forward and your department 
recommends it, all the money’s gone. 
 
Now what kind of a system have your officials put in place to 
ensure that: is there a maximum amount of allocation of funds 
to a particular project; do you want to establish that indeed a 
hundred projects are financed in each and every year? What 
criteria have your departments put in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well this would be evaluated by the 
officials. There is no maximum amount but we would be 
cognizant of the fact that we don’t want to spend all the money 
on one thing. We want to spend the money on as many different 
things in as many communities as we can, while at the same 
time not spreading it so thin that you end up doing noth 
ing at all. So we’re endeavouring to do as many as we can. 
 
I’m advised that last year there were 14 projects in heritage and 
parks, so it wasn’t one project certainly. It was at least fourteen 
and we will try to do as many as we can, recognizing that we 
probably won’t do all of them. 
 
But I know one area that we’re putting money into is the 
regional parks. And there’s a fund of $500,000 for regional 
parks — which I believe there are about 104 — to try to access 
funds for improvements within regional parks. That half a 
million dollars a year, presumably, would be spread to a 
number of regional parks. 
 
In the area of highways, I know that there are a lot of projects 
within provincial parks that will touch on a lot of areas in the 
province. So I don’t think we’re spending all the money in one 
place. I think it is actually being spread to many parks and 
roadways within parks and highways and environment projects 
around the province. 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
final question. You’ve indicated that your officials will put 
together some information that will be sent over to the official 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d ask, in light of what you just said that there 
are 14 projects that were approved for funding under the 
heritage allocation of funds — and I’m sure there are many 
projects in each of the K to 12 system and the post-secondary 
system and highways, etc. — would your officials be able to put 
together a list that indicates the projects that have received or 
have been approved for funding for the last fiscal year, 
2000-2001, that would be able to be sent to the official 
opposition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. I would be pleased to ask the officials 
to prepare that, to provide it to the official opposition, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Subvote (CF01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 70 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I know 
we’ve had a fairly productive afternoon and I want to thank you 
and your officials that you have in the Assembly right at this 
moment, plus all of the other officials that have been present 
this afternoon to assist in answering some of the questions that 
people of Saskatchewan have asked. 
 
And I want to thank you for your co-operation in actually 
supplying the information at a future date. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank the 
official opposition for their co-operation in moving these 
estimates along and their very good questions. And I’d also like 
to thank the officials from various departments for their 
assistance here today. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
The Chair: — The first item is item 31, Bill No. 24. But by 
previous mutual agreement the committee will recess, by leave, 
for 1 hour and 35 minutes. Is that agreed? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 
 


