















































Hansard: June 11, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1717 
 June 11, 2001 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 
Subvote (PE01) 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Report progress on Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — To my right is Ron Styles, deputy 
minister. On my right is Barry Martin, the assistant deputy 
minister. Behind me is Don Wincherauk, the assistant deputy 
minister in charge of corporate services. And beside Mr. 
Wincherauk is Carl Neggers, the assistant deputy minister in 
charge of policy and planning. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, And welcome to the 
minister and her officials. 
 
I guess you probably know from which member stands up what 
questions on highways are going to come first. It’s interesting 
— my colleague said something about, I don’t have any bad 
highways. Well I happen to have two pieces of asphalt sitting 
by my front door, about that size, that have hit two cars in the 
last two months. And I see the member from Moose Jaw says 
put them back. If I could find the highway, I would. 
 
But rather than go through a whole long tirade about that 
situation, because you’ve probably heard about it or read it in 
the papers, my question is, what exactly is the time line on 
Highway 312 repairs? Because my people are driving me nuts 
on weekends, saying where is the equipment, when are they 
going to start, and when are they going to finish. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell you is that we have 
scheduled from Rosthern to Laird, kilometre .66 to 6 and 11.4 
to 17.9, for a total of 11.8 kilometres, at a cost of $1.6 million. 
This is a contractor that has two other projects, and it’s 
scheduled for later in the summer or early fall. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, thank you. I’ll pass that on, every 
weekend. The other question I usually have deals with Highway 
11. I’m wondering where Highway 11 presently stands when 
you do the traffic counts. Generally this is one of the top three, 
four busiest highways in the province. I’m wondering if it’s 
changed and what its position is at present. 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member, and it just 
depends on which stretch, but it is the busiest two-lane highway 
in the province, particularly in the summertime. And I’m 
emphasizing two lanes because there are four-lane highways 
that are busier. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. The minister, last time I think we 
had Highways in estimates, made a statement something to the 
effect that it was her opinion that the department was downright 
frugal. And so I want to just pursue that a little bit with a 
specific example. So I have a couple of very specific questions 
that I’m going to be asking. 
 
One is I’d like to know how you analyze the cost of a piece of 
equipment, particularly let’s say tandem trucks, gravel trucks, 
payloaders. Are those costed at an hourly cost or on a kilometre 
that you put onto the piece of equipment or how do you cost 
those out? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I need further clarification. Are you 
talking about the equipment that’s owned by the Department of 
Highways or are you talking about the private sector . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . okay, you’re talking about the 
equipment that we own. I’ll be right back to you with the 
answer. 
 
For the large equipment it’s an hourly rate and it includes 
repairs, overhead, depreciation, and all of those kinds of factors. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Would I be able to have that for, let’s say, a 
tandem gravel truck and a large payloader? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We can get that information for you. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I’d also like to know what the 
hourly wage is for a payloader operator and tandem gravel truck 
operator, if I could. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don’t have it here; we’ll get it. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay. And I’m going to hope that the 
minister will get that to me. 
 
So now I’ll explain why I’m asking this particular question. Just 
before the access to the towns — and this is particular on 
Highway 11 because I travel that one a fair bit — from about 
Chamberlain through to Rosthern there are the signs that you 
have about a mile outside of each community that says the 
name of the community — might be Osler 1. Those are signs 
that are probably about six feet long and about a foot and a half, 
two feet wide. 
 
And I’d like to explain to the minister the process that happened 
with Department of Highways putting up those signs and then 
to sort of question the fact when she says they’re actually 
frugal. This is a process that happened this winter. Tandem 
truck, two people in there, hitched to the back is a trailer with a 
payloader. They move to one of those signs. The truck operator 
stays in the truck, the other individual gets out, removes the 
payloader, and takes one strip of snow away from one side 
beside the sign. Now in most cases, the snow was only about 3 
to 4 inches deep this winter, so it was in most cases an exercise 



1718 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

that wasn’t even necessary. But it’s a process that took place, I 
imagine that at some considerable expense because there’s two 
operators and two fairly expensive pieces of equipment. 
 
Then that piece of equipment moves down to the other side of 
town, does the same thing over there, and works its way all the 
way down Highway 11. Next follows another tandem truck — 
the one that has the Canada arm on there with a bit of a drill 
unit for drilling holes to put up signs — with two people on that 
one. They then back into that little slot that’s been put in the 
snow and they put up the sign. 
 
So by the time all is said and done, you’ve used two tandem 
trucks, a payloader, and four people to put up that sign. That’s 
why I was asking the cost and so when I get these various 
figures I’ll add that up, but I’m sure it’s going to be significant. 
 
Now had Department of Highways wanted to do that 
differently, I’m sure they could have waited till spring or 
summer. And right now any three-quarter-ton truck with a bit of 
a rack on the back, and two people could’ve done that very 
quickly. A matter of fact they could’ve probably been farmed 
out to some of my farm boys who would’ve been glad to 
change those signs for probably $10 a piece, and they would’ve 
made themselves about 3, $400 a day. They’d be glad to have 
done that. 
 
So my question is this basically: if you’re so frugal then why 
would you have gone through all this process to do it in winter 
using all that equipment when you could do it now in summer 
with two people and one three-quarter-ton truck instead of that 
whole entourage going down the highway? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well what I can tell you is it’s no 
doubt, as I understand it, trying to use our maintenance crew at 
various times of the year because we have people who are 
full-time employees — they’re not seasonal workers — and it’s 
a matter of having them doing certain tasks outside of 
maintenance on the highways in the summertime and then snow 
clearing in the wintertime. So it’s a matter of utilization. 
 
What I can tell you is that we have increased the amount of 
money in our budget to rehabilitate our signs in this fiscal year. 
We had a lot of complaints from motorists who . . . because of 
the condition of the signs they were difficult to read. The paint 
was starting to wear and it was very difficult to see what the 
signs were in fact saying. 
 
This is going to allow us to replace a number of aging signs and 
also non-standard intersection signing patterns. We invested 
$300,000 last year as the start of our $1.5 million, five-year 
program to improve the conditions of our provincial highway 
signs across the province. 
 
The department is not . . . The officials here tonight are not 
familiar with the exact situation that you talk about, but I 
presume it was in the Osler area, and I presume that this must 
have occurred this past winter and we’ll get information and 
respond to your specific question. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. The situation occurred all the 
way, I believe, from Chamberlain through to probably Rosthern 
or Duck Lake. And I’ve noticed that on various ones of those on 

both sides of Saskatoon — the same process, the same group of 
equipment. And Madam Minister used the word, sort of giving 
tasks to people. Sounds like that is a euphemism for a 
make-work project. 
 
And as I said earlier on, when I see all that equipment and all 
those people going down there, someone is not utilizing people 
properly. We’re just looking at what is happening in health now 
and where we have individuals overworked maintaining the 
health care, and here you have four people and four or five 
pieces of equipment to put up one sign that two people and a 
three-quarter-ton truck could have done. I think government 
needs to look at that, maybe even get out the old P-word and do 
some privatizing because they could do that a whole lot 
cheaper. 
 
While we’re dealing with use of equipment, this one may have 
the same answer, Madam Minister. Beginning of February this 
year I made a number of trips to Regina, and as you’ll know if 
you check your weather forecasts, in the beginning of February 
the temperature basically was between 20 and 30 below. There 
is no frost on a Saskatchewan highway at that temperature. We 
hadn’t had any snow and there was virtually no snow in 
Saskatchewan and we had absolutely no wind. So after days of 
that sort of weather — no frost, no snow, no wind — and when 
I come out of Saskatoon, which would usually be about . . . oh, 
around 6, 6:30 in the morning, here I have a nice big 
snowplough going down the road. And this happens time and 
again, and there is no snow. There’s not a snowbank in sight. 
 
So I’m wondering, is there a process out there that decides 
when these snowploughs go out, or is that part of, to use your 
words, giving a task to someone? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m advised by our assistant deputy 
minister of operations that we have a procedure in place where 
we regularly inspect the roads to look for, maybe there’s a 
snowdrift or an icy spot or some difficulty with the road. They 
use the snowplough trucks, the bigger trucks, because if they 
were using a half-ton, they’d have to come back . . . go back in 
and then come back out with the truck. 
 
And it’s just a matter of how we try and keep our roads in safe 
condition. And it’s the procedure that they use in the 
department, and it’s the procedure that we’ve used for many 
years. 
 
Just to get back to your earlier comment about tasks. You will 
know that there are people that work in the Department of 
Highways on a full-time basis. A lot of the people who work in 
the department are seasonal employees. These tend to be older 
workers that have been with the department for a number of 
years, were full-time employees, and they are in charge of 
maintaining the roads in the summer and looking after the roads 
in the winter. 
 
And as you know there will be downtimes, when you have 
full-time employees, where you won’t necessarily have various 
roads to plough and things to do, and it’s a matter of trying to 
utilize workers in an effective way to get things done that need 
to be done in the department. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1719 

 

safety concerns. I don’t think anyone wants to have a highway 
that has snowbanks that stay across it day after day. 
 
However, sometimes when there is no wind, you’re not going to 
have a snowdrift. I think we’ve lived in Saskatchewan, we 
know that, so I think we need to keep those sorts of things in 
mind. 
 
Switching gears here a little bit on questions. There’s an 
interesting one that has come to light in my constituency, and I 
guess the question I have is with relationship to election signs 
on highway property. I’m wondering if you can just give a bit 
of a brief answer to exactly what the location of election signs 
has to be relative to highways. And I’m going to add a little 
more to that — how would any person who wants to run get 
that information? 
 
(19:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I could tell the member is that 
whenever an election is called, whether it’s a federal election or 
provincial election, a by-election or municipal election, 
information is sent to all of the political parties advising them of 
the information with regard to election signs. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I believe it is, but the information 
isn’t anywheres near valid or satisfactory. 
 
In the last election I had someone from Department of 
Highways phone up, as they do every single time there’s an 
election, and complain that my sign’s in the wrong place. So 
this last time I said, could you please tell me how far from the 
centre of the road I can have my signs for the highways in my 
constituency. And the answer I got back was, that would be way 
too much work to give that to you. We won’t send that out. So 
here I have different highways that obviously have a different 
amount of space from the centre of the highway to where my 
signs are allowed. 
 
Then I was also told, when I didn’t remove my signs as 
requested, that if I didn’t remove them they would remove 
them. So that’s just a point of information. I’m not looking for a 
response on that. 
 
The interesting thing was when we had the federal election, the 
last federal election, there was one particular candidate who 
happened to be a Liberal who had his signs strewn up and down 
Highway 11 and Highway 12 between where you have the 
information sign that might say so many miles to another town. 
Those are about 10, 12, 15 feet off the highway. Between there 
and the asphalt which is about 10, 12 feet, that’s where that 
person’s signs were, and they stayed up the whole time. Not just 
one but dozens of signs, and that was from the Liberal 
candidate in the Saskatoon Wanuskewin. 
 
So I’m wondering why some people’s signs can stay there when 
other people’s signs are threatened to be moved out of the way. 
That’s sort of a political question, and as a member mentioned, 
it doesn’t seem to make any difference if they’re on the right or 
the left side of the highway. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well maybe the Saskatchewan Party’s 
more co-operative than the Liberal Party, I don’t know. Or 

maybe the area manager’s a Liberal, I don’t know. 
 
We do try and have consistent application of the policy and if 
you were suggesting that we need to sort of become a little 
more detailed in terms of the number of feet from the centre of 
the highway to, you know, the edge of the ditch, maybe we 
could take that . . . we could take a look at that. 
 
Because I do think we need to have a consistent application of 
public policy regardless of who the candidate is. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I would think consistent 
enforcement will probably be the key thing. I can live with most 
anything as long as everyone else has to live with the same sorts 
of things. 
 
I have a question that relates to snowmobiles and you’re 
probably going to move this one over to Justice, but it seems to 
fall in between. I will be asking the question and we’ll see what 
happens with the answer. 
 
What happens with the snowmobile trails that are groomed in 
highway ditches? There’s a fee for those. Now for example 
between Rosthern and Waldheim — that’s about a 15-mile 
stretch — there are some 50 farms that are within a mile to less 
of the highway so they use the highway ditch just to go from 
neighbour to neighbour or go to the towns and this sort of thing. 
But with the grooming that takes place they’re supposed to buy 
a $40 permit to use that grooming area. So I’m wondering how 
does Highways fit into this decision making and is this actually 
a toll ditch that we have now instead of a toll highway or a toll 
road? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — My officials know nothing about this 
so maybe you can provide me with greater detail and the permit 
may be coming from some other department. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, I did ask the question of Department 
of Highways, they’ve shuffled it on to Justice. The Justice 
minister’s listening carefully so when he’s up later on he now 
knows that it’s in his territory . . . and he’s giving me the similar 
response. 
 
One other quick question. The bridge that fell through — 
you’ve probably had lots of questions on that already. Was that 
truck overloaded by the standards that were there or had the 
bridge been inspected previously? When was the last inspection 
and what was the result of that inspection? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The last inspection was in the fall, 
November of 2000. At that time there was a recommendation 
that the pile caps and piles 5 to 11, I believe, or 5 to 9, needed 
to be replaced. In March there were replacements made of the 
pile cats, and I think it was June 10 the piles were scheduled for 
replacement. 
 
The morning of the collapse of the bridge, the maintenance 
crew noticed that there was a bend in the bridge. They closed 
the bridge to one lane of traffic and the engineers were en route 
to the bridge when the bridge collapsed. 
 
The bridge has undergone . . . we’ve had a number of engineers 
there to determine precisely what has happened. And I 



1720 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

understand that the bridge is going to be repaired this week and 
the bridge will be repaired for about $100,000 because the 
concrete beams weren’t damaged and they could be reused. So 
the bridge should be operational by mid-June. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good 
evening to the minister and her officials. I will not be as 
colourful in my questioning as my colleague from Rosthern, but 
I have a few questions that pertain to the Rosetown-Biggar 
constituency and then a few general questions about budgeting 
for the department. 
 
The first couple of questions are more on the specific nature. 
I’ve had some calls from constituents about Highway No. 373. 
It’s a very short stretch of highway that commences just north 
of Riverhurst ferry and goes up to Birsay. That highway was 
ruined by the Department of Highways when they reconstructed 
Highway 42, I believe the number is, from Lucky Lake to 
Birsay to facilitate the transportation of potatoes out of the 
Lucky Lake facility. 
 
Needless to say because the highway was ruined, it has been 
reverted back to gravel. And the concerns of my constituents 
that live in that area is the . . . there is a high volume of traffic 
for a grid road and the dust problems are rather severe. 
 
Also there is concern because this is an area that is trying to 
develop and expand its tourism potential with Palliser Park 
being located near Riverhurst ferry, and the access from the 
north is made more difficult because a lot of the recreational 
users of that area are not very keen on using a gravel highway 
to gain access to the Riverhurst ferry and the park. 
 
So I am wondering what plans the department has to improve 
the quality of that highway so that tourism potential will be 
realized so the traffic volumes will again increase on that stretch 
of highway. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is we have 
no immediate plans to pave that particular stretch of road. There 
are other highways in your constituency that have undergone a 
number of activities in the last two . . . well actually last four 
years. I note that there have been several hundred kilometres of 
road that have been addressed in your constituency. 
 
This year there will be some sections from Kyle to Sanctuary, 
11 kilometres, for a cost of $672,000 where there will be some 
spot overlays. As well, between Tessier and Harris, there’s 
some resurfacing work that’s being undertaken at a cost of 
$790,000. Between Biggar and Perdue, there’s some carry-over, 
and there’s some problems with that road that the contractor has 
to go back in and redo. 
 
As well there’s some 4 kilometres at Biggar that’s going to be 
resurfaced, so there’s about $1.6 million that’s going to be spent 
in your constituency. Last year we spent over $5 million for 94 
kilometres, but that particular stretch that you’re talking about 
is not on our immediate . . . we don’t have it in our immediate 
plans in the next three years. And we are now doing multi-year 
budgeting, and that road is not in our . . . not sort of on our 
agenda at this stage. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I wonder if the minister was aware, and if 

so, could she respond to the fact that the highway was ruined 
because of the construction of another highway. That was a 
dust-free surface in reasonably good shape and was totally 
annihilated with the refurbishment of Highway 42. Does the 
minister and does her department feel any responsibility to 
bring that highway back up to standard rather than leave it in 
the condition it is now? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As you know, there’s a very heavy 
potato haul in that particular area, and it would be impossible to 
restore it to a TMS, a thin membrane surface road, with that 
kind of haul that’s going over the road. If we could work with 
municipalities for some form of alternate route, then we might 
be in a position to repair the road to its former position, but it’s 
a matter of working with the municipalities in order that we can 
divert some truck traffic off of that road because it is a TMS 
road. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Also my 
constituents are wondering in your — is it three-year planning? 
— are you planning on reverting any other dust-free surfaces to 
gravel in the Rosetown-Biggar constituency? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — That certainly is not our plan. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Another question I have . . . thank you, 
Mr. Chair. Another question, questions that I get is in regard to 
the quality of Highway 44 which runs from just north of Elrose, 
east through Dinsmore and through Macrorie. It’s a notoriously 
bad highway. In fact there have been some accidents in that 
area. I just wondered if there are any plans on the drawing 
board to improve the quality of Highway 44. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As the member may know, what we’re 
trying to do is invest in strategic corridors across the province. 
We only have so much money. And it’s not, once again, it’s not 
in our plans for the next three years. 
 
What . . . if we could get some alternative truck routes, we 
might be able to keep the road as a thin membrane surface with 
good repair. But when we’ve had some experience with 
alternate truck routes in certain parts of the province where 
people, the truckers and people got extremely upset at . . . And I 
don’t know how you balance this between, you know, truckers 
who want to go over these roads but the roads were never built 
to handle that kind of truck haul, and yet the public wants to 
have dust-free surfaces. 
 
That’s why the legislation was introduced today, amendments 
to The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 in order that we 
can do some creative work with municipalities to try and keep 
as much truck traffic off our TMS roads in order that we can 
maintain those roads for our rural citizens in a dust-free 
condition. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A few more 
general questions now just for my knowledge and 
understanding, some classification of the categories under the 
Highways construction and maintenance budget. 
 
Out of the global budget, how many dollars would be classified 
as being spent on highway construction and maintenance? 
 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1721 

 

(19:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It’s about $268 million is being used on 
capital construction and preservation and maintenance. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Then could the minister break 
down that amount as to how much is construction and is there 
categories within construction. Like would new construction or 
would twinning be separate from renewing an existing roadbed? 
Just give me some idea of the categories of construction. How 
much is there and how much is considered maintenance? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — $140.4 million is for major 
construction and $127.8 million is for preservation and 
maintenance. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Are there any 
other categories besides construction and maintenance that 
relate to highways? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Then there’s the operations part of the 
department which would be winter maintenance, ferries, just the 
operations side of the department. All of the $311 million goes 
into . . . most of it goes into our highways. There is some of that 
money that goes into ferries and our airports, but most of it’s 
into the roads. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a news 
release dated May 29, 2001 and its title is “Additional spring 
road improvements,” and it identifies 20 new highway 
improvement projects valued at over $45 million in the spring 
tender schedule. And then there is an appendix to the news 
release, and in it, it indicates, first of all, a summary of 
2001-2002 road activity, and by general category, and 
following a more detailed description of a number of projects, 
certainly more than 20 projects are contained on about 1, 2, 3, 
4, 5 . . . about 5 or 6 pages here at the end of the news release. 
 
So am I to understand then that the activities mentioned in the 
2001-2002 construction projects include all projects for the year 
2001-2002? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There’s $140.4 million in capital 
construction. Out of that, $15 million is coming from the 
federal government under the prairie grain roads program. And 
this question was asked by a previous colleague of yours. So 
$15 million is federal money. 
 
We couldn’t announce the project until the federal government 
passed the necessary order in council because . . . announcing 
that we’d entered into this agreement. Therefore we had to 
make the announcement at the end of March. 
 
As you will recall, there were a number of announcements that 
were made in the wintertime, because with the excess oil and 
gas revenues that we had last November, the Minister of 
Finance was able to give our department $150 million over the 
next three years to improve our provincial highways. That’s 
why we have the multi-year budget and that’s why we have 
some money in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. That’s where our 
money is sitting to get us through the next three years. 
 
So we were able to announce a number of initiatives in the 

wintertime which was before we had the provincial budget at 
the end of March. And then we had to wait for the federal order 
in council to be passed before we could do the other tenders. 
And it was getting very late and we were quite concerned about 
this. And that’s why, when we issued the press release, we were 
talking about the prairie grains program, but then we also 
indicated once again all of those things that had been 
announced in the winter and shortly after the provincial budget. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I just wondered then — so that I know 
exactly what’s happening in the Rosetown-Biggar constituency 
— what projects that might be occurring now that aren’t in the 
list, that’s the addendum to the May 29 news release. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The schedule that you have attached to 
that press release was the winter projects and the spring tender 
projects, so you will have all the projects for your constituency 
announced. They’ve all been announced; there’s nothing new. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well that’s what I was wondering. Then 
the problem is, I don’t know what . . . where then does the 
construction on 342 Highway fall, which is from north of Kyle 
to Clearwater Lake? This is new construction; it’s not on this 
list. I’m wondering what category in the budget it would fall 
under. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It’s a partnership project with the rural 
municipalities. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — So then my question is: what category 
does the funding for these partnership projects fall under? Does 
it fall under your . . . is it a part of your budget for construction, 
highway construction? Where does this fall and how many 
other projects like this are occurring in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The strategic rural roads partnership 
program is a $6.9 million program, and that’s where it falls. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Can the minister tell me . . . Thank you, 
Mr. Chairman. Can the minister tell me how many projects 
under this partnership project are partnerships with rural 
municipalities. And can the minister indicate whether this is a 
. . . I guess what the reason is for partnering with municipalities 
rather than partnering with, you know, using her own 
department to do the construction or using private sector 
construction companies to do the work. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There are times when RMs (rural 
municipality) want things to get done, and they have some 
money and we have some money and we can get it done 
together. And a lot of RMs have equipment, as you know, 
because they build grid roads and it’s a matter of utilizing their 
equipment that might not be utilized. So it’s a way to try and 
minimize costs as much as possible. 
 
And I’ll just give you an example of some of the things that 
we’ve done. There at the last SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) meeting I met with a 
number of municipalities. They have specific issues about 
access roads to terminals or whatever, turning lanes. They’re 
worried about safety, they’re coming off of their RM roads, 
they want the department to act and we want to act. 
 



1722 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

So we have some money, and if we can partner we can get 
things done. And oftentimes what they might do — and we pay 
them for the use of their equipment — that they might move 
gravel or dirt with the equipment that they have. They might 
offer services in kind as part of their contribution. And that’s 
how we are able to get more things done with the existing 
budget that we have. And that’s why the fund — the $6.9 
million strategic partnership fund — is to deal with some 
smaller issues that are very important to the people in those 
RMs. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. So on the project 
that I was questioning about, the Highway 342 project, what is 
the total cost of that project and how much of that cost is being 
borne by the minister’s department and how much of the cost of 
that project is being borne by the municipality? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell you, I made a mistake. 
It’s not 6.9, it’s 6 million in the strategic partnership. I was 
looking at the wrong number. So it’s 6 million and what I can 
also tell you is that we’re spending $600,000 on that partnership 
that you referred to in your last question, and we’re providing 
the money but they’re doing the work. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — So thank you, Mr. Chairman. So then can 
the minister . . . does the minister have to have a costing of the 
amount of work done by the municipality before the project is 
approved? And in this case, what would that costing be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member, had the 
RM not partnered with us, it’s probably something that we 
wouldn’t have done. And there will be . . . there is a project 
estimate. We don’t have it here, but we suspect it might have 
been twice as much, so 600,000, had you gone elsewhere, 
because they’re providing the equipment and the human 
resources and we’re providing the money. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. So is the minister 
telling me then that the entire cost is actually borne by her 
department, but that cost then is less than if the work was 
contracted to someone other than the municipality? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We pay for their direct costs and there 
is a view that, had someone else done it, it may have cost a lot 
more than their exact direct cost. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. So then my 
question to the minister is, is this based on experience where 
tenders were put and consistently RMs were able to undercut 
the private road building sector, or is this more based on 
speculation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There is in-kind contribution from the 
RM. So they might go out and purchase the land; they might 
provide the gravel, the clay, the equipment, the human 
resources. So there are some things that the RM provides, that 
are in kind, to the total cost to the project. We provide the . . . 
we provide money for the direct costs of the project. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. So then I guess my 
question is, in the case of this project, what are the costs in kind 
that are being borne by the municipality? 
 

(19:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don’t have that here but we’ll get 
that for you. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. I think my final question — 
unless it’s not answered satisfactorily, Mr. Chair — is how 
many projects of this kind have been completed prior to the 
2001-2002 year? How many of these projects currently are 
occurring in the current fiscal year? And does the minister 
expect that this program will be expanded in the future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don’t have the previous year’s 
information here, but we can get that detail for you. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Could you tell me 
how many projects are underway this year and whether your 
department expects to expand this partnering category in the 
future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have three underway this year, and 
we could see the program expanding if municipalities want to 
participate. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, Madam 
Minister, welcome. And welcome to your officials for this 
evening. 
 
The Chair: — We’ll just take a brief recess for one moment. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’ll just resume 
some of the questioning that the Leader of the Opposition put 
forward to you just a moment ago about the partnering projects 
that are now taking place. And you had mentioned that there 
were three of those projects taking place in Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, I was quite surprised to see that there was 
some work being done on No. 20 Highway south of Humboldt, 
and I believe it’s between No. 16 and Humboldt. So what I’m 
wondering if that’s part . . . one of the partnering projects, 
because I too looked at your list of 2001-2002 construction 
projects when it came out and I didn’t see any reference to No. 
20 Highway. So I’m just wondering if this was something that 
was done, partnering with the RMs, whether in fact this was one 
of the projects that you were waiting on the federal 
government’s money for, or what category this project is under. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’re paving Highway No. 20 from 16 
kilometres north of Junction No. 16 to 8 kilometres south of 
Humboldt, and we’re doing 12.9 kilometres. And it’s under the 
prairie grain roads program which would have been announced 
at the end of March, or end of May, pardon me. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I 
was simply curious about that because I do use that highway 
quite a bit and as well do many of the people from the 
Humboldt district in going south. So thank you for the answer. 
 
Madam Minister, I’ve had a number of my constituents in the 
St. Louis area asking me about the proposed reconstruction of 
the St. Louis bridge. Now as you well know, Madam Minister, 
that’s a very, very important bridge. That bridge is the 
connection between the north and the south of Saskatchewan 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1723 

 

and crosses the Saskatchewan River. That bridge has long since 
been condemned and there are some concerns about the usage 
of that bridge as far as safety concerns go. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I’m wondering what the status is of the 
construction of the new bridge, and why in fact this bridge and 
the construction of it has not been tended to much sooner than it 
is. In fact, there doesn’t seem to be any proposal put forward by 
your government in your construction projects, and I’m 
wondering what is going on here and why that bridge is not 
being reconstructed. What is the problem? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell you is that the bridge is 
tentatively scheduled to begin construction work in 2003, 2004. 
UMA Engineering has been commissioned to carry out a study 
to determine the recommended location for a new bridge and all 
of the related roadways. They’ve submitted their report. That 
report was distributed to local governments in late 1999. 
There’s been additional geotechnical drilling that was carried 
out in the river during February of 2000 to verify that a bridge 
could be constructed along the recommended route, 
recommended by UMA Engineering. 
 
The analysis of the data gathered during the drilling has 
confirmed the feasibility of the construction of a bridge at that 
particular site. We’re currently developing recommendations on 
where the bridge should be located because there is some 
concern from the village or the town of St. Louis about the 
location of the bridge, and different contact has been made with 
local government. And we will need to do more work with local 
government before we finalize exactly where the bridge will be 
located. 
 
As well, there’s been further technical drilling done in the river 
during February of this past winter in order to establish 
additional design parameters for the bridge foundations and the 
approach. So there’s some geotechnical work that’s being done. 
 
We’re advised that the St. Louis bridge has a service life of 
about five to ten years longer, but we know we need to start 
construction of that bridge within the next couple of years. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
that bridge was condemned so I’m just wondering . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . that’s what I understand from the 
people in that area that it had been condemned, and really it 
does look like it should be condemned. To tell you the truth, 
there are great gaps in that bridge. When traffic drives over, you 
can see huge gaps rather between the support beams. And so I 
think there needs to be some attention paid to making sure there 
is a bridge there that’s safe. 
 
Madam Minister, you’d mentioned that there were some 
recommendations put forward from the geotechnical team in 
regards to the location of the bridge. So can you tell me what 
this team of people recommended as far as the location of the 
bridge and where the bridge could be adequately constructed in 
a safe fashion, where one could be sure that it’s going to uphold 
or the surface underneath will uphold a bridge and so on. So can 
you tell me what the recommendations were. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I understand there are five different 
locations. They’re downstream from the town of St. Louis. All 

of them have certain geotechnical risks and we need to 
determine the best location. And that’s why further geotechnical 
work was done in the river in February of this past winter; 
that’s why geotechnical work was done in the river in February 
of 2000. 
 
Now the member grimaces. Well let me just say this, Member. 
You can grimace all you want but this bridge is going to cost a 
great deal of money and we need to make sure that we’re 
locating it where the bridge can withstand the geography of the 
area and we just don’t want to put it someplace for the sake of 
putting it someplace. You need to make sure that, given the soil 
conditions and the geography, that the bridge will stand into the 
future, and that’s why we’re being careful about this. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, I would agree with you on the 
points that you put forward. However, there have been studies 
going on about where to place this bridge and a safe location for 
it for quite a number of years now — I think since about 1998 
that I was informed. So there have been a number of 
geographical studies done, geotechnical testing, and everything 
that goes with it. 
 
So as far as I know those things have been done and I know that 
they did some work again in February of this year. But all of the 
necessary testing I understand has been done and so to continue 
with testing after it has been done over and over again makes 
me question why. 
 
There are just people there that are wondering when the 
construction of that bridge is going to take place. And you have 
given me that answer, Madam Minister, and I think you said 
that the year 2002-2003 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
2003-2004. Okay, well I will certainly convey that back to the 
people in the area, and I thank you for that. 
 
Madam Minister, there’s a constituent around Cudworth that 
lived in Toronto for a little while and so she has gone back and 
forth between the two provinces, visiting her parents here and 
so on. And she made some notations about the safety on the 
roads. 
 
She is wondering why, when in fact there has been road 
construction done in regards to repairs — and she was referring 
specifically to Highway No. 2 and Highway 27— and she is 
wondering why the white lines on the side of the roads have not 
been marked. After the repairs take place, there doesn’t seem to 
be any markings on the road to guide travellers, especially in 
the wintertime. 
 
So I don’t know whether or not you want to respond to this, 
Madam Minister, but I bring it forward to you as a request by 
some of my constituents that this be done in order to guide them 
in the wintertime, especially during storms. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well last year we painted 45 kilometres 
of highway lines. And that’s what you’re talking about, is the 
lines at the side of the road, right? And we plan to paint another 
42,600 kilometres of highway lines in this fiscal year. So we 
plan on improving our highway line markings and pavement 
markings. 
 
I’m advised by the department that after there’s been a patch, 



1724 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

that before winter there’s supposed to be lines put at the side of 
the patches. And obviously you’ve noticed that there haven’t 
been. And I’d be interested in precisely where this is occurring 
because — which highway, which section of the road — in 
order that we can remedy that situation. 
 
(20:00) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I 
think that that is really very necessary, and I thank you for 
offering to take this to the attention of highway workers. 
 
Madam Minister, the other concern that’s been brought to my 
attention is the use of the mixture of salt and potash and gravel 
to put on roads in the wintertime when it’s icy to improve road 
conditions, I guess. As we know in some other provinces, and 
particularly in Ontario, as my constituent refers to Ontario, 
there is salt used in order to address the ice on the highways and 
make it safer. 
 
In Saskatchewan it seems that this mixture now of salt, potash, 
and gravel is being used and my constituent is simply 
wondering why because she says, she says that really . . . her 
words are: 
 

“This mixture is much worse on a vehicle than salt. My 
vehicle has been douched with this all winter and it’s truly 
disgusting, much worse than in Ontario and just as hard on 
a vehicle.” 

 
So I’m just wondering whether or not you or your officials 
could comment on why that mixture is used. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The officials advise me that there have 
been studies done about salt usage in the country, and that 
Ontario and Quebec use 10 times the amount of salt that we use. 
We try and minimize the use of salt in the province as much as 
possible, but we do have icy patches that need to be dealt with. 
 
And we also will put some salt into the sand in order to prevent 
it from freezing and sticking together. But we try and minimize 
it as much as possible. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
this particular constituent states that the use of the three 
components or the three elements in order to check the icy 
highways does not . . . like the use of salt with gravel, doesn’t 
necessarily keep it from clumping because these three things 
together really do cake a lot under one’s vehicle. So why, if it 
causes that much damage to vehicles and it in fact does cake 
under a vehicle and it doesn’t do any better a job as far as 
addressing the icy highway conditions, why wouldn’t we just 
use salt? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m going to write you a letter with the 
answer because it’s a bit complicated because we’re talking 
about potash tailings and there’s certain kind of chlorides that 
attract moisture. Anyway it’s a technical answer and what I’ll 
do is I’ll simply write you a letter because it will be much easier 
for your constituent to understand than if I just try and explain it 
here in the House. 
 
Ms. Julé: — All right thank you, Madam Minister. That will 

suffice. 
 
Madam Minister, I just want to refer to your announcement that 
there are more highway signs planned to promote attractions — 
tourist attractions. In my constituency I have a vacation farm 
and the owners of that vacation farm are wondering why signs 
. . . they cannot erect their own signs especially if the signs are 
off the highways. If the signs are on side roads leading to their 
vacation farms, why in fact they cannot erect those signs? They 
were told by the department that they had to buy department 
signs. And of course their concern is with the cost of those 
signs. 
 
And so they were rationalizing with me saying that if they made 
sure the signs were erected in a place that was complying with 
regulations about the distance signage has to be from roadways 
that they would be pleased to comply with that, but wondering 
why they could not in fact get their own contractor to make 
signs that may come at a price that’s much less than what 
they’d have to pay to the Department of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — If I understand it, in Canada all across 
the country, provinces are trying to move towards consistent 
signage so that you have a marker when you’re talking about 
recreation, culture, and museums, and you’ll have a particular 
colour scheme. If you’re talking about services, there’ll be 
another colour scheme. You have the colours of towns; it’s 
green. Services tend to be blue and white. And cultural 
facilities, museums, tourist attractions, there’s a consistent 
signage that they’re trying to go to across the country. So it has 
to do with standards and uniformity. 
 
And even in the tourism industry, they too are trying to move 
towards particular uniformity across the province so that if 
you’re driving, you see something, you know it’s cultural, or 
it’s tourism, or it’s ecotourism, or whatever. And that’s what the 
department is trying to work with in terms of developing 
consistent application of signs. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I 
can understand that in as far as the signs indicate the type of 
tourism that may . . . whether it’s bed and breakfast or vacation 
farm or so on — little barns on the sign, that’s understandable. 
 
But if you’re off highway and there is a number of different 
turns in a rural area, different roads to be taken, is it permittable 
— permissible, sorry — for people that own that vacation farm 
to erect their own signs giving direction to tourists on how to 
get there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it’s about signage. 
And the signage is . . . these people have had to deal with the 
Department of Highways regarding signs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Once they’re 400 metres off the 
highway, then you’re dealing with the RM. So perhaps, I mean 
once again, if you could just send me a note or we could have a 
private discussion, I can try and understand the issue, and we 
can see what we can do. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Possibly you 
want me to deal with the Municipal Affairs minister on this. 
That’s fine; I can do that. 
 
But it seems quite simple. If I’m driving down a country road 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1725 

 

and I’ve been given direction off the highway that there is a 
vacation farm 10 miles off the highway, that’s the only 
indication I’m given from the highway. And that’s fine. If I’m 
travelling down that road and there is a number of different 
municipal roads that I have to take in between, is it permissible 
for the owner of that vacation farm to just simply have a sign — 
vacation farm, 5 miles — with an arrow going that way, so 
people know where to go? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The way you describe it, it’s up to each 
individual rural municipality to determine on a municipal . . . 
We’re now talking about municipal roads, what sort of signage 
could be allocated along those roads. We only deal with 
provincial highways, roads that come under provincial 
jurisdiction. Municipal roads come under municipal 
jurisdiction. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, if there were tourist signs that 
. . . Do provincial tourist signs have to be used consistently 
along the way as people move towards their destination? Or can 
they erect signs of their own making after they’re off the 
highway? That’s what I’d like to know. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’re working with the tourism 
industry in order to have consistent signage when it comes to 
tourist attractions. 
 
What a municipality does is up to them, but I do know, and the 
department advises me, that municipalities are trying to work 
with the province as well so that you have almost like a marker. 
You see something; you know it’s a tourist attraction. So if you 
have consistent signage, whether it’s along a provincial 
highway or down a municipal road, people know that it’s 
tourism. But it’s up to the local municipality to determine if 
that’s what they want to go to: consistent signage. But I do 
know that municipalities are working with the province and the 
tourism industry in order to develop uniform signs across the 
province. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, Madam Minister, if municipalities agree that 
people within that municipality can put up a sign that they want 
to manufacture themselves, then they can be assured that the 
Department of Highways or tourism is not going to stop them 
from doing so. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’re not aware of any Department of 
Highways officials interfering with municipalities in their 
decision as to what kind of signs that they want located along 
municipal roads. We’re not aware of any interference by us. It’s 
up to the municipalities. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Minister of 
Highways had said at one point — I’m not sure if it was in 
debate or question period — that we in rural Saskatchewan 
were going to start complaining about construction on our 
highways and I thought that was rather humorous. But now here 
it is and I’m here and I’m complaining about some work being 
done on the highways. 
 
Highway 16 which is a Trans-Canada Highway . . . I had three 
motorists come in just in the last week and apparently there is 
some gravel being put on Highway 16 between Plunkett and 
Viscount. I haven’t had an opportunity to go out there and see 

what actually is going on. The motorists were saying that gravel 
was being poured on the highway and then oil on top of that. 
There was a number of vehicles that got stone chips in their 
windshields. It was slowing down traffic. And the people who 
are in the area between Plunkett and Viscount were saying there 
is nothing wrong with this highway. This is probably the best 
highway we have in Saskatchewan. 
 
The gal in my office had phoned the department to get an 
explanation because when I looked at the work order sheets that 
were sent out to my office there was no mention of work to be 
done on Highway 16 in this particular area. So I was wondering 
if someone had an opportunity to find out what was going on 
there, why work was being done when everybody in the area is 
quite happy with that particular highway. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This is not a major construction 
project. It’s not resurfacing. What it is is maintenance. And it’s 
a seal coat that’s being put on the road. And oftentimes when 
you’re driving down the road you won’t necessarily see the 
cracking in the highway but if you get out and walk it, you’ll 
see cracking. And this is a preservation technique to try and 
preserve the road. And obviously with the way you describe it, 
my officials tell me that this is a seal coat that’s being put on 
the road in order to preserve the road and keep it in a good state 
of repair. 
 
We’re trying to do a lot of preventative work now so that roads 
don’t get to the point where they’re starting to crumble. And 
this is all part of our preservation and maintenance. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. A question 
that I have, a further question: when this is done to a road — 
because I don’t recall in my area this being done before — how 
long will the potential of damage from the loose gravel then 
continue that is put on for this seal coat? Because that is 
probably the major concern that’s coming forward, is the 
windshield. 
 
(20:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There shouldn’t be any more difficulty 
with gravel on that particular stretch of road after 48 hours. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, Madam 
Minister. I just have a few questions, Madam Minister, on some 
highways out in my area. I believe the highway is going to be 
improved from the Togo corner to Kamsack this year. Is that on 
the agenda? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes it is, from north of Junction No. 
357 to Kamsack, 17.7 kilometres of paving. As well, there’s 
some work that will be done from Wroxton to Grid 637 for 13.3 
kilometres, resurface work. In total you’ll have close to a little 
over $2.7 million worth of highway construction done in your 
constituency. 
 
And if you take into consideration the activity from last year, 
you had $2.2 million worth of construction work. So it’s about a 
$500,000 increase. Last year you had 56 kilometres worth of 
work done; this year it’ll be 31 kilometres worth of work. This 
is new work; then there’s maintenance and preservation over 
and above that. And if you want me to go to the previous year, 



1726 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

’99 to 2000, you had $5.4 million worth of work done in your 
constituency for 53 kilometres worth of work, and the year 
before 172 kilometres of work done for a total of 12.9 million. 
 
So, Member, you’ve got over $20 million worth of work that’s 
been done in your constituency in the last four years. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m glad to 
hear that. I would hope, Madam Minister, that the people of the 
Saltcoats constituency are listening tonight because that must be 
about 10 times as much as you spent in any other constituency 
in this province, and I’m glad to hear that. 
 
Madam Minister, I also . . . I commend you for fixing the 
highway from Kamsack south. That was a terrible piece of road. 
I’ve got more calls on that. 
 
But I’m getting another rash of calls on another highway, 
Madam Minister, and maybe your department has . . . from 
Langenburg south on No. 8 Highway and it goes . . . it doesn’t 
go right to the town of Spy Hill but it goes to the junction, the 
junction of 22. And, Madam Minister, do you . . . how far ahead 
do you look? Like, is that highway getting anywhere near the 
top of the list from Langenburg south? Because that road is 
every bit as bad as the piece from Kamsack south and every bit 
as dangerous. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I know the member is pleased 
with all of the work that’s been done in his constituency over 
the last four years, and he’s very grateful. But I don’t think I 
could make a commitment tonight that work will be done on 
that road in the next couple of years. There are other projects 
that are ahead of it. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I would 
hope, though, that that road would be taken into consideration 
because I’m getting a lot of calls this spring. I don’t know why 
some of the other highways aren’t as bad this spring or don’t 
seem to have broken up nearly as bad as possibly last year or 
the year before. But for some reason that highway . . . and I’m 
getting a lot of calls from mine workers and actually the mine 
itself at Esterhazy about that piece of highway. 
 
And I know I was down at, while it was still frozen in the 
wintertime . . . but there was some really bad spots in that piece 
of highway. It’s a narrow-shouldered highway that’s actually 
. . . when you meet a car and there’s bad spots on it you have 
nowhere to go but right through the bad spots. There’s no 
shoulders on that road, Madam Minister. So I would hope that 
your officials will take a good look at that road, and maybe we 
can up the amount of money we’re spending in that 
constituency — gratefully accepted. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like to talk for a minute about No. 15 
Highway, and I’m sure your department over the years has had 
a lot of calls on that highway. And we have had quite a number 
of improvements made to that highway, but I want to mention 
the way that we’ve improved out there. The department has 
gone out and done stretches of maybe an eighth of a mile, a 
quarter of a mile and it’s really improved the highway. And 
then we’ll come along and do another stretch where we’ll just 
patch here and patch there. And I know it would be appreciated 
by the people that use that highway if more of the spots like the 

eighth of a mile in a section . . . because they seem to be 
standing up far better than the hit-and-the-miss patching that 
we’ve been doing before . . . and I would think in the long run 
would probably, Madam Minister, would be cheaper for 
everyone concerned. 
 
One other question, Madam Minister. You’re talking about the 
Bill you brought in today, about Bill 53. And I know we can ask 
these questions later in committee and so on in debating that 
Bill. But in bringing that Bill forward, have you dealt with 
SARM on this issue? And I’d like to know, have they agreed to 
what we’re or what you’re trying to do in that Bill? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We haven’t talked to SARM in 
particular detail about the details contained in the Bill. But the 
Bill contains things that we have been doing in terms of 
alternate truck routes, where we’re entering into partnerships 
with municipalities. And as you know, we don’t enter into 
partnerships unless the municipalities want to enter into 
partnerships. 
 
And we had an example in the Vanguard area this spring where 
there was a partnership and then, because of the pressure that 
was brought to bear by people along that highway, two of the 
municipalities withdrew from the partnership and truck traffic is 
now back on that road. The difficulty is that some pieces of that 
road are just not standing up because of the truck traffic. 
 
So it’s not something that we’re forcing on people, but it’s a 
way to try and save as many TMS roads as possible as we make 
our way through the budget. You know, we’ve only got so 
much money and we’re trying to manage the money that we 
have as best as we can, putting it into strategic corridors. In the 
meantime, what do you do with these TMS roads? 
 
And many of you have raised examples in the last several days 
of roads in your riding, and you’re saying, when are we getting 
to it. And I have to say, well not in the next two or three years. 
In the meantime, we are investing in roads in your ridings, but 
we can’t do it all. 
 
So how do you save those TMSs so that people do have a 
dust-free surface? At the same time we have to deal with the 
reality of truck haul. And that’s why, if municipalities want to, 
if we can enter into alternate trucking arrangements, or truck 
route arrangements, we can keep those surfaces as dust free as 
possible and save those roads for as long as possible, until we 
get to the point where we have the money to deal with those 
roads. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well, Madam 
Minister, in the case where you have a group of RMs you’d like 
to come into an agreement with and go to what you’re talking 
about in Bill 53, but in the event that you couldn’t come to an 
agreement with those RMs, would you still go ahead and put 
weight restrictions on those thin membrane highways? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Put that on the record. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Yes, do answer us on the record, Madam 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I’d like to, because we just see 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1727 

 

what happens. They just get pummelled and then, you know, we 
have to deal with the reality. You’re raising questions on behalf 
of your constituents and people say, well are you reverting any 
of these TMSs to gravel? When you only have so much money 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well no, we’re trying not to. We’re 
trying not to revert those roads to gravel. But how do you . . . 
how do you manage this? And so it’s a matter of trying to figure 
this out, you know, as much as we can, given the political 
pressure that you’re under because you represent a lot of those 
rural communities. 
 
But we only have so much money. And we have lots of 
pressures to spend that money and to do further tax cuts, and 
increase money in health care and education and municipal 
government — we hear it all the time in the legislature. And I 
understand why we hear it is because we’re all trying to 
advocate on behalf of our constituents, and it’s a matter of how 
do you balance this. 
 
And we’ve got a large budget this year — $311 million. We’re 
constructing highways and maintaining our roads. I’m pleased 
to hear you say that our roads stood up better this year than last 
year. I think we did a good job last year of trying to really do a 
good job in maintaining the roads. We’re doing that again this 
year. We’re spending over $120 million in preservation. But 
you will have people still complaining about it. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, a little different question here. 
 
Some of the complaints I get in the wintertime and out in my 
area is the quickness of the snowplough. And again I’m talking 
mostly mineworkers that have to go to work at 6 o’clock, 7 
o’clock in the morning. And from the feeling I got out there, the 
direction that the Highway departments — and don’t . . . this 
did not come from the local Highway department, this came 
from other people. So we won’t, you know . . . don’t be looking 
at the highway workers out there for saying that. 
 
But is direction come from Saskatoon as to when the 
snowploughs can go out in the wintertime or is that policy 
changed? Because the understanding we had that they couldn’t 
go out in the last couple of years without Saskatoon sent word 
out. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The area manager, who I think is 
located in Yorkton, would make the decision when the ploughs 
go out. And in fact oftentimes it’s the supervisors out in those 
communities that make the decision because they’ve lived 
there, they know where the snow is, they’ve got contacts, they 
know the roads, and they try and clear the roads. They know 
when people have to get to work. 
 
So I think, as I understand it, there’s as much decentralized 
decision making as possible in order to maintain those roads, 
particularly in the wintertime. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, because 
I agree with you. The local people have supervisors, and 

Highway departments out there have a much better idea when 
those roads need to be ploughed in the wintertime. 
 
I want to thank you, Madam Minister, for your answers, and I’ll 
pass off to the member for Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister 
. . . Madam Minister. I’m so used to dealing with the minister 
from Meadow Lake when it came to highways. 
 
The member from Saltcoats talked about 15 Highway. I’ve had 
a . . . some of the communities have approached me and also 
the RM of 280 in getting Highway 15 identified as the main 
corridor between Manitoba and Alberta. Is there any money set 
aside for the budget this year? Are you looking at that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well now, if the member from 
Saltcoats thought he had a good . . . he was a good MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly), let me talk about you. 
 
This MLA, in his constituency, will have 90 kilometres of work 
done at a cost of $10.3 million. Last year he had 113 kilometres 
of work done at a cost of 5.7 million. So we’re close to 16 
million. The year before — now he probably wasn’t elected 
then — 85 kilometres at 2.2 million; and the year before, 368 
kilometres at 25.5 million. 
 
So this member has had over 35, 40, $42 million worth of work 
done in his constituency in the last four years. So I can list all of 
the highways that are being done in your area, but I would say 
to you that in terms of the budget, this member has gee, about 8 
per cent of the capital construction budget going into his riding. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s what I tell 
my constituents, that I’m here doing a job, and I guess I’ll just 
be passing that on to them. 
 
Just two more questions. First of all, of all that money you 
stated, how much of that was federal? And then again, you 
didn’t answer me, are you looking at designating 15 Highway 
as the main corridor between Manitoba and Alberta? And have 
towns and RMs approached you over this, if you’re looking at 
it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — My understanding is none of the 
money is coming from the prairie grain roads — so none of the 
money. This is all provincial money that is going into your 
constituency. And the road that you talked about, Highway 15 I 
believe, it’s not something that we have under consideration for 
the next couple of years. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. One other question. On 19 
Highway, that was the winter . . . no, your spring tendering 
came out, you’re building it from junction of Elbow to 44. And 
it didn’t say in the tendering, and it’s been asked of me, are you 
building that to primary weights? You’re not? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — No we’re not. It’s being upgraded to a 
structural pavement. 
 
(20:30) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Okay, thank you. So I believe a member was 



1728 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

talking about bridges. It also brought me up to remembering 
that I had a couple of letters this winter about the old bridge at 
Outlook. There was a snowmobile club there. I think they’ve 
written you letters saying that they wanted to use that old bridge 
as a snowmobile trail to cross from one side of the river to the 
other. That way they wouldn’t have to use the new bridge. Have 
they written you for permission for that or how is that coming 
along? Are you looking at something like that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — My understanding is, on your last 
question, they’ve written us several times and the department 
continues to deny that request. 
 
And I just want to make one correction. On Highway 19 from 
Elbow to south of the junction No. 44, there is 13 kilometres of 
paving that’s going on for a cost of 1.7 million, and that’s part 
of the prairie grain roads initiative. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. How come on the bridge issue, 
why were they denied? Was it safety issues, the bridge unsafe? 
What would be the reasons? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Safety and liability issues. If anything 
happened, if the bridge isn’t up to standard, then there is a 
liability question. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Chairman, Madam Minister. I’ll 
ask you then, one more question now. I’ll just ask, what are you 
going to do with the bridge? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’re not quite sure what we’re going 
to do with the bridge at this point, but no doubt a decision will 
be made at some time in the future. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Minister. 
Madam Minister, on Highway No. 39 between North Portal and 
around Midale, the highway is extremely bad. So bad in fact 
that semi trucks are refusing to cross the border into Canada at 
the North Portal crossing and this is causing a lot of concern for 
the brokerage firms in North Portal that are losing a lot of 
business. Apparently the trucks are going up through Emerson, 
Manitoba and just going right onto No. 1. Now I know 
previously that you said that there was nothing scheduled for 
this portion of Highway 39, but that leads me to another 
question. 
 
On this same Highway No. 39 between Macoun and Midale, 
this highway is deteriorating very quickly and along the centre 
line it is critical. There is cracks in some places that are maybe 
2 feet long, 5 inches wide, and if you dare pull out and pass a 
vehicle, your wheel will get caught in that. And you know, it’s 
especially critical for motorcyclists on the road. And I was just 
wondering if you have any plans to do any repairs at all on that 
stretch of road. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We will be doing repairs on that road 
but we’re not doing any kind of pavement or resurfacing. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Do you have those schedules, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — When? I can’t answer that specifically, 
but it’s ongoing and it’s being done by the local crews. 
 

Mr. Elhard: — By agreement we extended the time to 8:30. 
We’re past that now. I’d like to thank the minister and her 
officials for allowing us that little bit of extra latitude. And I 
appreciate the opportunity to question her and I’m looking 
forward to the next five hours. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I would ask that we rise and report 
progress. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Minister has asked the committee report 
progress. Is this agreed? Carried. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Affairs and Housing 

Vote 24 
 

(Subvote MG01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my 
immediate left is acting deputy minister, Mr. Brij Mathur. Peter 
Hoffmann is sitting to my far right. John Edwards is sitting to 
the left of Brij. Lana Grosse directly behind me; she’s executive 
director, protection and emergency services. Larry Chaykowski 
is executive director of finance, administration, and facilities. 
And Doug Morcom, who is the director of grants 
administration. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good evening, Mr. 
Minister, and good evening to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, the impact of reassessment on property owners 
has been indeed a very serious one and one that’s causing a 
great deal of burden to taxpayers throughout the province. I’d 
like to bring to your attention, Mr. Minister, one of the concerns 
that constituents have brought to my attention, and I would just 
refer you to an e-mail I received from a constituent, and it goes 
like this: 
 

I’m an acreage homeowner with 5 acres of land. I have 
been notified that our taxes for the RM of Blucher will 
increase 80 to 90 per cent. I was told this was because the 
government changed section 331. 

 
Now this person states that they have a family of six people; 
there’s two adults and four children and that they cannot afford 
this $2,000 increase in their taxes on this acreage. That’s $2,000 
increase, Mr. Minister, because of changes to section 331. 
These people have no services, no sidewalks, no paved roads, 
no stores, no sewer, nothing but a gravel road. 
 
Mr. Minister, my constituent is asking you to justify paying 
these kind of taxes; and I am asking you, Mr. Minister, to please 
explain section 331 and the negative impact that this has on 
acreage homeowners. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, 
that section that you referred to, there were changes made to the 
statute specifically to create more parity between urban and 
rural lots that people had built their properties on, their homes 
on. So that was basically the reason for that. 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1729 

 

Now the impact from reassessment on value of land, no 
question, also impacted on some of those properties, and some 
went up and some went down. In that particular case, if your 
constituent would like a more detailed explanation of the impact 
and the effects and how the direction taken to create parity for 
all taxpayers, landowners in those areas where you had close 
proximity to urban and rural land bases, I’d be more than happy 
to do it. My department would be more than happy to respond 
in detail as opposed to perhaps us talking about the 
complexities of those changes. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, there’s no 
doubt in my mind that you probably don’t want to discuss this 
publicly because it is a very contentious issue. I think that this 
issue has been brought to the attention of your government for 
some time now, and I know very well that my constituent is 
very aware of the effects, very aware of the effects of this 
measure to create parity between rural and urban lots. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, I point out to you one more time that in 
the urban areas, taxes paid on lots include services for those 
people like sidewalks, like stores, sewer, paved roads going by, 
a number of services. People in these rural areas, many of them 
that just have simple acreages out there, people who have gone 
out to live on acreages to escape the cost of living in the city are 
now inundated with increased costs to their taxes because of 
section 331. 
 
Now I think there needs to be some consideration given to the 
fact there are no services out there and why in goodness’ name 
should these people have to deal with an 80 to 90 per cent 
increase. Mr. Minister, this is not $2,000 in total that these 
people pay in taxes, it is a $2,000 increase. Now that seems to 
me to be absolutely unbelievable and unacceptable. So I ask 
you to respond to my comments regarding the fact that there are 
no services out there, and I want to know whether or not that 
was taken into consideration when section 331 was changed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. These changes 
to the legislation were made after lengthy consultation with 
people in the review committee, the tax review committee. And 
that tax review committee was composed of representatives 
from SARM, SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association), and SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association). So it was not just an arbitrary decision to move in 
that direction. It was a belief by that committee, and through 
their recommendations, to create greater parity. 
 
Now each municipality, as the member is probably aware, does 
have available to them tax tools that in some of those extreme 
cases, they can apply to offset some of the real significant 
increases in the tax assessments. And I think as I mentioned 
earlier, Mr. Chair, under those kinds of re-evaluations and 
reassessments, there may be those increases and decreases in 
order to create the parity and a level playing field for all. 
 
And I, or this . . . certainly not concerned about discussing this 
issue publicly at all, and more than happy to supply detailed 
explanations at length, in writing, to whomever would like the 
explanations for those changes. 
 
But the bottom line is that it was not an arbitrary decision by the 
department, by government. That change was made as a result 

of extensive consultation and the appropriate representatives 
that are the representatives of the communities through SUMA, 
SARM, and SSTA. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I wonder 
if you could just please go through section 331 and explain that 
section and what changes were made in that section. I want to 
know what was changed there . . . what the government 
indicated must be changed there. If you could just read the 
changes to me, I’d be appreciative. 
 
(20:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t have the Bill in 
front of us and so I’m not able to refer directly to the specific 
section. However, again going back to the changes made as a 
result of recommendations, particularly in recognition of the 
support for people in the agricultural sector . . . In other words, 
the land subtracted from the house evaluation was how it was 
initially used. This now allowed the effects of the changes, now 
recognized and gave some consideration to agricultural 
landowners specifically. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I know that the 
farmers and landowners, crop producers, and so on are very, 
you know . . . certainly are inundated with high taxes also. And 
when you consider they have a number of quarters of land they 
have to pay tax on, they are paying their fair share and more. 
 
But this kind of a measure certainly will drive a number of 
those people that have acreages off the acreages, out of the rural 
area again, and force them to go somewhere else. They simply 
cannot afford this. So as minister of Municipal Government I 
would certainly appreciate that you would address this issue in 
the coming year and see if something can’t be done about it. 
 
I thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — If I may just comment. Part of the concern 
was . . . the member alluded to building in rural municipalities 
opposite urban areas — similar homes with less taxes on one 
than the other because one was on agricultural land, in an RM, 
and the other was in an urban municipality. 
 
So to try and create a level playing field, the changes were 
made to recognize that disparity. And from what you’re saying, 
yes, there were those that perhaps may have seen their 
assessments and their values increase to similar values that 
members on the other side in the opposite RM, to bring them to 
some parity. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome, and to your officials, welcome. 
 
I want to go down the path in regard into questioning something 
you’re all familiar with, and that’s regarding the forest fringe 
land. I’ve been asking questions of SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) and a lot of the 
questions I asked in regards to SERM was referred to the 
Department of Municipal Affairs. And so therefore I have quite 
a few questions for the minister today. 
 
This goes back a little while because back in 1994-1995 SARM 



1730 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

came to the government — and I understand, Mr. Minister, that 
you weren’t here I don’t believe at that time, especially you 
were not here as minister anyway — but at that time SARM 
came to the government asking for RMs to allow to tax forest 
fringe land which SERM owns. And hopefully some of the 
members that are here tonight that have been here for quite 
some time can recollect some of the on-goings that went on, in 
other words to allow the department to allow RMs to tax forest 
fringe land. 
 
And you already know, Mr. Minister, that forest fringe land is 
governed by SERM, but yet RMs, which is another jurisdiction, 
have the right now to tax that. And it is not only just municipal 
tax on that, it is also education tax on top of that. Can you take 
me back to the years ’94-95, somewhere in that neighbourhood, 
in regards to why the Department of Municipal Affairs allow 
RMs to tax forest fringe land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. And thank you 
to the member for that question. 
 
Again I have, there is the responses . . . I have the responses for 
your questions. And if it might . . . you might find it more 
expedient, I can give them, send these over to you. They answer 
the questions you just asked: why is the RM allowed to tax 
SERM-owned forest fringe land for cattle operations. I can read 
that into the record or I can send the answers over to the 
member in anticipation of our previous discussions that these 
questions might come up. 
 
I’ll read this, the first answer into the record. When property is 
normally exempt from taxation, such as SERM forest fringe 
land is used by someone other than the owner for a purpose that 
would otherwise be taxable were the activity not taking place 
on a tax-exempt land, the property is assessed for property 
taxation purposes and the occupant is taxed. The situation 
would be the same, for example, if part of a municipal building, 
office building, normally exempt from property taxation, is 
used by another person as office space to operate a business. 
 
So there is rationale. And I’d be more than happy to send the 
member the questions and answers to this forest fringe land 
taxation issue. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
would welcome those comments in writing. 
 
From what I gather from the comments you just told me about, 
if there was another building in regards to land of that nature, 
then the owner would be assessed tax. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The property that’s normally exempt from 
taxation, such as the land we’re talking about, is used by 
someone other than the owner for a purpose that would 
otherwise be taxable. So there’s no reference to buildings in this 
respect, but the activity is not taking place on tax-exempt land, 
so in fact the property’s assessed for property taxation purposes 
and the occupant of that land at the time is taxed. 
 
And as the example I used, no different than municipal 
buildings that may be vacant but rented or used by an individual 
for operating a business. Then that person becomes the person 
that’s responsible to pay the taxes. 

This goes on . . . the answer that you have, that I passed over to 
you, goes on to say that the subsections of the Act, 284(6) and 
(7) of The Rural Municipality Act, 1989, speak specifically to 
how leased and permitted land is to be assessed. So that, Mr. 
Chair, may be of help to the member. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in 
regards to the answers you just quoted me, in a situation with 
forest fringe land which is government-owned land — okay, the 
government owns it — there are many users of that said land. 
Not only do cattle grazers use that land, there are woodcutters, 
there are snowmobilers. In fact, even one government operation 
or department, which is SERM, utilizes that land. They utilize it 
for hunting licences. Those are users of that said land. 
 
Why is it that just one user of that land, which is cattle grazing 
operations, are taxed on that said land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I assume the member is 
referring to multiple leases or permits on similar property . . . on 
the same property. Just for some clarity? 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
in regards to the forest fringe land, there are many users of that 
land. Anybody that’s utilizing that land, like for instance the 
cattle grazing operations, they go to the SERM department and 
they buy a permit. They do not buy a lease; they buy a permit. 
That permit is granted to them on the maximum usage of land 
for 145 days. That’s the maximum use. 
 
Now there are other users of that land, like snowmobilers, who 
utilize that land in the wintertime, and it may be for 120 days. 
There are government departments like SERM, who utilize that 
land for hunting seasons, which may be eight or nine weeks. If 
it is a logging outfit that goes in there, or a woodcutting outfit 
that goes in there, they also buy permits to utilize that land. 
 
But only one jurisdiction of that said land is taxed, and that is 
the cattle grazing operations. My question is, why is it just one 
jurisdiction of user of that land, who buys a permit, is taxed for 
the whole year, and the maximum days of usage they can use is 
145 days? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, that is an important question 
and I think it should be properly answered. And if the member 
will allow me to get that answer within the next 48 hours, to 
respond to your specific, to the specific question. 
 
The multiple uses — individuals who obtain a permit for that 
land are considered the occupants, and they would be the users 
and under those circumstances would then be the individual or 
individuals who are responsible for the tax assessments. 
 
Beyond that, the points that you raise about the length of time 
that they may occupy that particular piece of land, the 
Crown-owned land, is a point of which I do not have clarity on, 
and I would appreciate the opportunity, if you would allow, Mr. 
Chair, for me to determine specifically so I don’t respond in an 
inaccurate or a fuzzy way, if you wish. So I’d like to understand 
that answer myself, so if you’d allow me to do that. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I thank 
you for that response. And I really hope that you, Mr. Minister, 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1731 

 

and your department — or the department — will take a real 
look at this issue because it’s a very, very serious issue. It’s 
been going on since 1996 where the RMs who absolutely 
provide none — absolutely none — services to that area. And 
the reason they can’t provide services in that area, is it because 
it belongs to the government, which is SERM? 
 
That is public land open to everybody. The public can go in 
there at any time to utilize that area as long as they’re not using 
it for, say, taking out wood or cutting logs or whatever. 
Therefore, they have to buy a permit. 
 
The department under SERM regulates the users of that said 
land and they do it in the form of a permit basis which is fair 
and equitable to anybody utilizing that land. And that’s why the 
cattle grazing operations who utilize that land have no problems 
whatsoever paying for a permit. 
 
But the whole problem lies with the Department of Municipal 
Affairs allowing RMs next to that said land, allow to charge 
municipal tax. They don’t get absolutely no services 
whatsoever. They utilize the land for a maximum of 145 days 
and they are taxed on a year basis. 
 
Now I say to the minister, is that a fair taxation system that has 
been drawn up? Put yourself in the shoes of the cattle grazing 
people. You’re paying a permit. You’re paying municipal tax. 
You’re paying education tax because under the laws if you’re 
paying municipal tax you have to pay education tax. Education 
is on a two-to-one basis, so if you pay $200 worth of municipal 
tax, you’re paying $400 worth of education tax. 
 
They don’t own the land. They get absolutely no services and 
they’re paying all this taxes. And I would like somebody from 
the government to explain why this unfair tax has been imposed 
on these grazing people and has been imposed since 1996. 
Where did the Department of Municipal Affairs come up with 
the idea that RMs have the right to tax this property to that 
extent? 
 
(21:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll again refer further to 
some of the document that I sent over. And I do agree that this 
has become a controversial issue that the member raises. 
 
To begin with, permits are issued annually, and SERM does not 
require proof of payment of the previous year’s taxes by an 
individual to remove that permit. And I’m told that this is 
primarily because some rural municipalities assess the land and 
tax the occupant, while others do not. 
 
Permits are issued for only part of the year, so taxing those 
occupants at all is becoming somewhat of a controversial issue. 
 
So having said that, and again the contents of the information 
that I sent you, underlines that, yes, this is a controversial issue. 
And, Mr. Chair, I will assure the member that there will be a 
good, hard look taken at this situation. And it may need to 
involve the municipalities for discussion with SARM and to 
determine and, as you say, clarify what we both now understand 
is a controversial issue. 
 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I just 
want to go one step further. I asked some questions regarding 
how many permits — and I asked these questions to the SERM 
department — how many permits were issued in the year 2000 
and how many permits were issued in this year. And in the year 
2000, there was 146 permits issued on SERM land for grazing 
purposes. This year to date there is only somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 10. 
 
Now not all RMs are taxing cattle grazing people. Not all RMs; 
there’s only a few. And when you add up all the taxes as they 
pay, it becomes to a place where they should put their cattle in 
community pastures rather than on this land because they’re 
taking all the responsibility for that said land and they’re paying 
through the nose. 
 
There are also some people in and around Lloydminster and 
Meadow Lake and Glaslyn areas that are now being summoned 
to court because of back taxes that the RMs have imposed on 
these gentlemen with grazing permits. They haven’t paid their 
last year’s taxes, and now they’re being summoned to court. 
 
Will you, or pardon me, would the minister come forth today 
and say that he will hold off on all court proceedings to all 
members of cattle grazing permits that are being summoned to 
court to pay back taxes until the minister or the ministers sit 
down with a group of people to get a hold of this issue because 
it is a very, very unfair practice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, with all due respect, I’m 
sure the member will recognize that it would be impossible for 
me to make such a commitment. These are matters that the rural 
municipalities have the right under The Rural Municipality Act 
to proceed with court action. They may sue for taxes under that 
particular Act — they have the right to do that — or collect 
taxes through the distress, and that’s the seizure and sale of 
goods again under that same Act. 
 
So no, I cannot make the commitment the member asks me to 
make. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Then, 
Mr. Minister, can you answer this question: if there is tax 
arrears on SERM land which is issued to cattle grazer permit 
owners and they have back taxes and they’re summoned to 
court, can the tax arrears be charged to the land that they own 
outside SERM land? In other words, land that’s in the RM that 
they own, can those taxes fall against that property? Or can a 
lien be put against that property? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, to the member, again that’s a 
question that probably would need to be answered by someone 
more knowledgeable about the legal technicalities of those 
types of issues, and I would have to get some legal advice 
before I could answer to that or have someone from the legal 
profession give me that advice or that response in order that I 
could forward it to the member. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. With that, Mr. Minister, can you get legal advice 
regarding the question I just asked and have it given to me in 
the very, very earliest date? Because, like I say, some of these 
members are summoned to court already and they don’t know 



1732 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

what to do and until somebody takes a hold of this issue and 
resolves it . . . 
 
Because as you know, Mr. Minister, one of the bright spots in 
Saskatchewan is the cattle industry. In fact it’s the only bright 
spot in the agriculture system right now. And when you look at 
the amount of users in and around the forest fringe area, which 
goes right across Saskatchewan, that are utilizing this land on a 
certain number of days, being taxed on a full year, then what 
you’re doing is driving out the cattle business because if they 
don’t have this said land to operate and graze their cattle in the 
summertime, where are they going to go? They’ve got no place 
else to go. So, Mr. Minister, I really hope that you take a look at 
this and try and solve this problem because it’s going to hurt 
this industry. 
 
Another question I want to ask in regards to the same said land 
as far as forest or forest fringe area is in regards to, if there are 
areas in the forest fringe area that the RM has to supply part of 
a road to go from one area to another one, then that area there 
could be taxed because of the usage of that road. Why couldn’t 
SERM administer a fee for service to the grazing permit holder 
rather than a tax? If they utilize a fee for service then there’s no 
tax on it. There’s no education tax on it. And there are a few 
areas, Mr. Minister, that have that situation. 
 
And I’m sure the cattle grazing operations would say, hey, if 
there’s a road going through a part of SERM property which 
gets to my place, I don’t mind paying a fee for service rather 
than a tax. 
 
Any comments on that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The road that would be maintained by the 
rural municipality would require the rural municipality to 
recover some of the costs for maintenance of that road. SERM 
would not be involved in road maintenance or access, merely 
the issuance of permits for the use of that land. So that might be 
a controversial topic again because it’s the RMs that have the 
right to assess taxes. And if, in the case that you’re describing, 
they would be supplying the access, they would also be the ones 
that would require payment for the access. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
understand that. The same token is though that the land where 
this, let’s say this house is, is still in forest fringe land which is 
SERM government-owned land. Why would there have to be a 
tax on it? Why can’t a person just use it as a . . . or pay a fee for 
service? That way it gets away from all the taxation problems 
that we’re faced with. That was my question. 
 
And it’s just a thought that when you’re looking at this whole 
idea of taxing forest fringe land through the RMs that you could 
look at that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, under the current laws and the 
way they exist and are presently written that any land that we’re 
discussing of this nature is taxable. And until this issue is 
addressed and . . . as a matter of fact, I will be bringing it up 
with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities in 
the very near future, this very issue. But regardless of the use of 
that land, it is taxable and it’s taxable by the rural municipality. 
That’s under the existing laws. That’s the way it is. 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I know 
that’s the way the law is. It came into effect in 1996. What I’m 
saying to you, Mr. Minister, is the fact that, yes it is law now, 
but can it not be changed? I mean, just stop and think of the 
unfairness in the whole system regarding that idea of allowing 
RMs to tax forest fringe land. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, this is a very valid concern 
that the member raises. And I’m not aware of it having been 
raised previously so perhaps now that it has been raised, I 
would appreciate the opportunity to discuss it with SARM, who 
is directly in one way or another involved in this controversy 
that we’re having. And perhaps SERM as well will need to be 
engaged in order that yes, we can certainly take a look at. 
 
And I agree with the member, Mr. Chairman, that because 
certain laws are in place, may have become outdated, or served 
no useful purpose and I fully support and agree with either 
changing or eliminating those particular regulations or the laws 
that no longer serve a valid or meaningful purpose and may be 
more distressful than they are beneficial. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I take 
your word at that and I hope that we can sit down in the very, 
very near future with whoever parties are involved in this and 
come up to a solution because I think I’ve outlined previous to 
the minister of SERM the problems regarding this. And now 
I’ve come to you as Minister of Municipal Affairs who has the 
power of the taxing issue. 
 
And I hope we can sit down and come up with a 
recommendation that will be equal and fair to everybody 
because I can guarantee you they don’t mind paying their fair 
share of taxes where they should be paying fair share of taxes. 
But to be taxed in this regards is totally unbelievable. And I’m 
sure that when you look at this from an open mind you will see 
this. 
 
I now would like to go on to questioning . . . just a couple 
questions in regarding money under the Centenary Fund, I 
believe it is. To date, there has been many communities have 
gotten money from this fund and it’s been welcome money. I 
was just at a function on Saturday at Big River where the Big 
River hall just received $153,000 in Centenary Fund for their 
new hall, and it was welcome news to the people in and around 
Big River. I don’t know if the Duck Lake museum project was 
under the same program. I don’t know, but they received money 
down there. 
 
To date, Mr. Minister, how many areas in Saskatchewan have 
received money, and could you give me a ballpark figure of the 
total of how much money has been spent to date and how much 
money is left in the fund to be spent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member again, with 
all due respect, the previous discussion that we had on 
estimates, I had mentioned at that time that when all the grant 
money had been committed I would make the announcement 
with respect to all the various projects. There are those that have 
not yet been completely finalized and I would prefer again, with 
the member’s indulgence, to allow us just some little more time 
until we have everything nailed down, and the entire 
announcement will be made — the number of communities and 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1733 

 

the amounts spread out throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. I guess 
where I’m going with this, is there enough applications sent in 
to cover the allotted money that’s been allotted through the 
Centenary Fund or is there still money available? Because I 
know lots of areas not only in my constituency but other 
constituencies that would like to apply for that kind of money 
but don’t know if it’s worth their time to sit down and go 
through and send it in or not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told there are enough 
applications for all the money that’s available under that fund 
and the final decisions for all of them have not yet been made. 
And that will be coming soon. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ve enjoyed your 
answers today. And like I say, in regards to the forest fringe 
areas, I look forward to meeting with you and your officials, 
whoever is involved in that, so we can get to the bottom of a 
very, very serious problem. Thank you. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. Minister. 
A couple of questions on the community planning branch, if I 
may, within the department, and specifically a question with 
regards to a backlog that we’re hearing about in terms of 
applications for subdivisions that are being made. 
 
I wonder if you would provide your feedback in terms of 
surveying companies and surveyors in our province who — and 
communities, for that matter, I guess — who are waiting for the 
processing of the subdivision of land. I understand that some 
are waiting six to eight months. It’s anecdotal; maybe it isn’t 
that long. Certainly that’s the information that I have, and I 
wonder if you could respond to that. And if there are delays 
anywhere near that length, if you could please outline why 
those delays are taking place and what the department is doing 
to speed up that portion of work of your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the 
member’s question, the applications are dealt with as quickly as 
possible when they are received by the department. In those 
cases where there may be some complications or some 
controversy with respect to the information that’s supplied, it 
creates a delay. 
 
I would ask the member, though, if there are specific instances 
where it seems that the delays or appears the delays are 
extraordinary, please bring them to my attention, and we will 
certainly follow up to determine why the holdup. 
 
Mr. Wall: — We’ll certainly do that, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
Mr. Minister. Thank you for the answer. 
 
I think, though, maybe you could provide for the members of 
the committee an explanation of how long that normal process 
is. I hear you saying that applications are being made, and 
they’re dealt with as quickly as possible. So do you have an 
idea then, from your officials, how long is that taking right now, 
be it . . . well any manner of subdivision application that’s 
coming in. 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Generally, Mr. Chairman, the application 
process would take from four to six weeks if everything was in 
place and all the t’s were crossed and the i’s were dotted. The 
delays again would occur if the applications would need to be 
returned, and perhaps some information verified. But generally 
it shouldn’t take longer than four to six weeks without any 
complications. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman of 
Committees, just one last question then on this subject. I 
appreciate the answer, Mr. Minister. There is a . . . I don’t have 
a specific case to bring to you, and certainly as they come to me 
I’ll do that; I’ll take you up on your offer and do that. 
 
Are you aware then, or are your officials aware of any specific 
applications or a group of applications that may be taking an 
inordinately long period of time other than those ones that have 
to be sent back to the applicant for clarification? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I’m told that at this point we’re 
not aware of any specific instances, although, in general terms, 
there have been some in the past that have taken perhaps four, 
five or six months to process because of some difficulties in 
clarifying information and requiring input from other 
departments or agencies with respect to the applications that 
have been submitted by individuals. 
 
But again for any specific individual ones, we’re not aware of 
any at this point. And once again I would encourage the 
members to notify our office in the event that there are some 
inordinate delays, and we can follow through and follow up on 
them as quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I would like 
to ask a few questions dealing with the protection in the 
emergency services branch in your department. I wonder if you 
could briefly explain the mandate and responsibilities of that 
branch. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, if you want the specific 
detail, for the member, the public safety under Municipal 
Affairs and Housing develops and enforces safety standards for 
boilers, pressure vessels, elevators, amusement rides, and 
building construction. In addition it provides coordination 
services to municipalities for firefighter training, fire prevention 
programs, and emergency preparedness. It also provides 
payments for disaster assistance, Sask 911 address 
identification, and emergency telecommunications equipment. 
 
So that’s pretty much the mandate, the responsibility in a 
nutshell, of the public safety department. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, it appears that this branch has a . . . 
a large part of its mandate is public safety, having to do with 
boiler inspections and building codes and those sorts of things, 
if I interpret your answer correctly. 
 
Therefore the executive director of that branch, that position, 
would be a fairly important position with regards to the public 
safety and as far as the responsibilities and mandate of that 
branch. 
 
I wonder, could you just briefly outline what qualifications that 



1734 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

position requires, and that is the position of executive director? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, the requirements would be for 
management skills, leadership skills, and an individual to be 
able to lead a team of experts who would be able to advise on 
the technical expertise and provide the technical expertise in 
specific areas of concerns. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, does . . . is it not conceivable that the 
person, that position, would also require a certain amount of 
technical expertise in that position, supervises inspectors and 
those sorts of things? Is that also part of that position’s demands 
and qualifications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, because of the diversity of 
responsibilities in a variety of technical fields that’s 
responsibilities of this department, the director needs to have 
the management and the leadership skills to coordinate the 
activities of the technical, the technicians and the experts. And 
that’s what that position requires. Once again because of the 
diversity and the variety of expertise that’s required for the 
various responsibilities. 
 
So the leader of that particular department needs to have all the 
leadership skills and qualities, administration skills to lead a 
team of experts in dealing with those issues. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Mr. Minister, so what you’re telling me then 
is that you have a branch of your department that is responsible 
for public safety and inspections and you have the executive 
director — that position does not require any type of technical 
background, merely administration and management skills? Is 
that what you are saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I believe that’s what I’m saying. That it’s 
for a person that’s in a responsible position of ensuring that all 
technical aspects of responsibilities in a variety of areas are 
carried out. I don’t, I don’t believe that it’s totally necessary for 
that individual to have all the technical knowledge for the 
various areas that that individual would be responsible for. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, it would seem to me, though, that 
that position would require at least a background and an 
understanding. Maybe not necessarily being an expert in any 
one position but I would imagine that that position would deal 
with a lot of technical matters. And if you don’t have a 
background in that area, how can you make the proper 
management decisions? 
 
And so therefore I find it somewhat discomforting to know that 
that branch who is responsible for public safety, the person who 
heads that branch up is not required to have any technical 
expertise, merely management and administrative skills. 
 
So I would ask you again, is that the only requirement for that 
position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t want the 
member to be distressed. The job descriptions for those 
positions are handled through the Public Service Commission. 
They’re the ones that search out the people that they feel would 
have the qualifications to direct an operation such as we have 
here. 

I might use an analogy that a conductor doesn’t have to play all 
the trumpets and the clarinets and everything else, but certainly 
knows how to direct and make all those instruments work 
together. So I hope that clarifies. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I agree with you, Mr. Minister, that a conductor 
doesn’t have to play all the instruments, but he should be able to 
at least read the music, Mr. Minister. 
 
But perhaps you could allay some of my fears. I believe the 
person that presently occupies that position is Ms. Lana Grosse; 
you introduced her earlier, and I was just wondering if you 
could tell us what education and experience she has to fill this 
present position. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to ease the member’s 
concerns . . . and I hope he would be amenable to allowing us 
send over the qualifications for the person, the individual that 
occupies that position. We will send that over to you, the entire 
curriculum vitae. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Yes, Mr. Minister, I was just hoping perhaps you 
could touch upon, you know, degrees that Ms. Grosse has and 
that sort of thing. But if you would send it over, I think that 
would be quite acceptable. 
 
I was just wondering, how long has Ms. Grosse been in the 
position; and was that position — when she gained the position 
— was it by appointment or was it by competition? Could you 
please give us that information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, Ms. Grosse has been with 
that department . . . she was seconded from the Department of 
Finance in February of 1999 to head up, orchestrate, this 
particular department. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Within the protection 
and emergency services branches, there is the boiler and 
pressure safety unit. I wonder if you could briefly explain the 
responsibilities of that unit. 
 
(21:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, basically what the experts, 
the technicians are required to do is carry out inspections, safety 
inspections, pressure vessel inspections, and boilers, whether 
they’re brought into the province or whether they are those that 
are already being utilized. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, could you perhaps explain where 
these boilers would be located? Are they in industrial 
complexes? Are they in residential complexes? Are they in 
schools? Could you give us some examples of where these 
boilers are that these inspectors conduct their inspections? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan’s in-service 
inspection frequencies for boilers and pressure vessels are 
consistent with those throughout North American jurisdictions 
and they’re performed at one year for steam boilers, two years 
for hot water boilers, and five years for pressure vessels. And 
these are items such of this nature are located throughout the 
province. 
 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1735 

 

Mr. Hart: — So, Mr. Minister, could you tell us like what type 
of buildings — like are they in schools, for instance? Are they 
in hospitals? Are they in long-term care homes? Are they in 
areas where a great number of people are in close proximity to 
these boilers? Could you give us some examples? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that they are . . . 
they do exist in a number of industrial buildings and major 
facilities that require these types of vessels for heat, for water 
transmission, and so on. So yes, they’re included in all those 
places that the member has mentioned and perhaps some others, 
some other industrial areas as well. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So they are . . . the 
inspections are carried out on boilers that are installed in 
schools and hospitals and long-term care homes and so on, plus 
many other places. 
 
I understand by looking at the organizational chart that there is 
a position, a chief inspector position that is the head of this unit, 
who reports directly to the executive director of the branch. 
Could you briefly outline the qualifications that are set for this 
position, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, these are trained 
technicians, technical people. And since the member wants the 
information with respect to the requirements of these 
individuals to fulfill those positions, I believe it would be 
probably more expedient, perhaps more informative, to the 
member if we supply you with the requirements for those 
positions. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I understand that, again looking at 
the organizational chart, the position of chief inspector is filled 
by a Mr. Nick Surtees. And could you give us an indication as 
to whether Mr. Surtees’s qualifications meet the requirements 
of the position of chief inspector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, for any of those positions that 
the member wishes, we’ll provide under the name of any 
members that you wish, their background and their 
qualifications for the positions that they fill. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I wonder if, Mr. Minister, seeing that the 
executive director of the protections branch is sitting behind 
you, could you give me the qualifications that the inspectors 
that are out in the field and actually doing the inspections, what 
type of education and training do those people have and how 
many years of experience do they need to have in the field 
before they are deemed to be an inspector? 
 
Is there a training period or do these folks come right out of 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) or do they come off the street and are appointed as 
a position of inspector? I’d like some indication as to the level 
of experience that your people have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, again there are a variety of 
expertise. Some of these people are professional engineers; 
others hold the proper type of certificates to present when they 
are applying for this kind of technical work. I’m sure there are 
not a lot of people around here that would know what the 
requirements would be to inspect a pressure vessel or a boiler. 

Perhaps there are. But those folks, in order for them to carry out 
a serious responsibility, if you’re looking at the type of 
equipment in the types of facilities where people are being 
cared for, so they would have to have the skills required before 
they’d be hired to do that. 
 
And again, not having all the details on the specifications of 
individuals that are employed as such, we will send them over 
to the member. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Mr. Minister, though surely you must have 
a minimum level of training that an inspector must have before 
he’s placed in such a position, whether it be some training 
through SIAST or . . . and also is there a minimum number of 
years of experience, whether that be six months on-the-job 
training or what have you? Could you not provide us with that 
information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, there are minimum 
requirements that are specified and as spelled out by a variety of 
union agreements. 
 
The different qualifications . . . yes, they could be engineers — 
first-class, second-class, or third-class engineers. They could be 
engineers who have the qualifications based on their 
performance in perhaps a military environment. But they are 
people that have some basic requirements in order to be 
accepted to meet the criteria of the job applications that are sent 
out and the individuals that are invited to compete for these 
positions. They must show that they are capable, able, and have 
had some training, by way of a certificate, a facility that they’ve 
attended, or undertake the training necessary for them to carry 
out these responsibilities. 
 
It would not be prudent for someone to hire an individual who 
has had no background, no experience, in the field of carrying 
out such important inspections. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I find it a little disconcerting that 
you have the executive director of that branch with you here 
today and that you’re unable to tell us what the minimum 
requirements are for an inspector in the boiler and pressure unit 
. . . or boiler and pressure vessel unit inspection branch. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — There are four or five different options or 
combination of options that would fulfill the requirements of an 
individual looking for this kind of a position. And I’m happy to 
supply that information, what those combinations may be. 
There are a variety of them. Again from the different levels of 
engineering that an individual may have had, whether it’s just a 
basic certificate or beyond or, as I mentioned, some training in 
the military background. There are a variety of combinations. 
 
So we’ll be happy to supply all the detail on what those basic 
minimum . . . For us to tell the member that the basic 
requirement is a certificate from SIAST may not fulfill the total 
requirement. There may be other requirements depending on 
what particular aspect of responsibilities the individual may be 
applying to do. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, again I find it a little concerning 
that you’re not able to provide us this evening with the exact 
requirements; however, we won’t dwell on that. My concern is 



1736 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

that I understand that there’s been a fairly high turnover of staff 
in that particular unit. And could you give us an indication as to 
the average years of experience that the inspectors have that are 
currently working within your unit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that the people 
working for the department now are between three and five 
years experience with the department. That does not include 
their experience prior to coming to the department. So they may 
have been occupied in other places. As a matter of fact, these 
people do quite a number of inspections each year and the 
addition of people based on the requirements of these additional 
inspections are quite extensive. But the folks that have been 
there up to this point in time, roughly between three and five 
years with the department, but prior to that may have had 
experience in other areas. And there may also, or there could be 
the possibility of people coming right out of engineering school 
and walking into a responsibility of this nature. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I wonder, could you give us an 
indication as to the turnover in that particular unit . . . as the 
number of inspectors that have come and left within the last five 
years. I guess the question is: is there a high turnover or what is 
the turnover of inspectors in that unit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — For a specific number of turnover might 
. . . may not be fair to suggest other than in general terms there 
is a fairly high turnover. And one of the reasons being is that 
the people gain the experience and then go on to private 
industry which attracts them through higher paying salaries. So 
the turnover is considerable; it’s quite high. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I would suggest perhaps there are 
other reasons that the turnover is high in that particular unit. I 
have a letter here in my hand that is dated December 16, 1999 
and it’s addressed to Lana Grosse, executive director. And it is 
signed by six individuals. 
 
And I guess I would like to know, Mr. Minister, if these 
individuals have been and currently are employees of your 
department. They are . . . the names are Richard Guenther, 
Kathryn A. Black, Jim Kerr, Russ Mataford, Theo Poelen, and 
Gord Aisman. Are these people . . . have they been employees 
of the emergency or the protection branch, and more 
specifically the unit we are talking about? And are they still 
employed with the department? 
 
(21:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I wonder if we could either 
have a copy of the list of names, or if you would please repeat, 
if the member could repeat them for us. We didn’t get them all. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, Richard Guenther, Kathryn Black, 
Jim Kerr, Russ Maddeford, Theo. Poelen, and Gord Aisman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, all those employees are still 
there, with the exception of one. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I would assume that they are 
inspectors within the boiler and pressure vessels safety unit. Is 
that correct? 
 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Yes, they are. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wanted to confirm 
that they are employees of the department because these people 
sent a letter, as I indicated, to your executive director, outlining 
some very serious concerns within the unit, and I would like to 
pursue these concerns with you. 
 
They have identified five main areas of concern, the first one 
being the administration of the power engineers exam and 
determination of eligibility. They say that none of the remaining 
inspectors are trained on procedures involved with the 
examination process. They go on to say that we need some 
training in order to get up to speed on what is involved in this 
area. I wonder could you tell me if that concern has been 
addressed, what has been done to address these concerns as 
outlined by these inspectors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that yes, since that 
letter was written, there have been steps taken to address those 
concerns. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I wonder if the minister could expand on those 
steps. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Big steps. 
 
Mr. Hart: — The Minister of Post-Secondary Education says 
big steps. I would hope that something more than big steps have 
been taken. These are people who are working within the unit, 
raising some very serious concerns, and I think we need a more 
defined answer than simply saying that some steps have been 
taken to address the concerns. Could you please expand on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that these people 
have received on-the-job training. 
 
And unless there’s something more that the member has in his 
questions, something specific, I’m told that these people have 
had the opportunity to become qualified to administer those 
certain exams and have received the on-the-job training. If there 
is some question with respect to inadequacies where there is 
still a concern, I would like those addressed directly, so we can 
deal with the specifically — if it’s specific individuals, specific 
concerns — rather than try and guess as to what we need to zero 
in on. The concerns, I’m told, have been responded to through 
on-the-job training, qualifying people to administer certain 
examinations. But if there’s some specific concern, then I’d 
appreciate knowing, so we can get right to the nub of the 
problem. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I understand by reading the letter 
that the signatures to the letter state that branch practice in the 
past, only first-class power engineers can sit on the writing of 
first-class exams. And their concern is . . . The letter deals with 
the resignation of a manager, and their concern is that there isn’t 
enough people with the experience to administer those exams. 
And that’s their concern. 
 
Now are there more people who have the qualifications and 
experiences to do the administration of the exams? Have there 
been people trained to fulfill that requirement? 
 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1737 

 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the people that are sitting 
in on those exams now are considered to be qualified. So 
through the concerns that were raised, there were the 
opportunities to correct some of those concerns, both on the job 
and ensuring that people were qualified to sit in on the exams 
that were being carried out. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, the next area of concern deals with 
weld testing — weld testing. According to the six folks that 
submitted . . . or wrote the letter, they said no one has been . . . 
has had time to be fully trained to cover this area. 
 
One of the signatures, Russ Maddeford, has been training with 
the manager that resigned but has . . . and is now doing 
independent testing, but he was using the manager of the 
inspection . . . the manager that resigned, he was using him as 
backup. He did not . . . Russ Maddeford did not feel confident 
in going out and doing inspections on his own. He felt he 
wasn’t properly trained and the six people felt that this is a real 
area of concern. 
 
Now what has been done to address that concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, in the 18 months that has 
passed since that letter, I’m told that the people that are doing 
the well testing now have gained adequate enough experience to 
carry out that particular function. So during that period of time, 
there has been an opportunity for individuals to upgrade their 
abilities to carry out that function. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I wonder if you could explain how those people 
were trained. Mr. Maddeford said after the resignation of the 
manager of inspections that he had no backup. There was no 
one else that he could rely on. He himself, Russ, felt that he 
wasn’t . . . he didn’t have the necessary training and experience 
to conduct the well tests. He used the manager of inspections as 
his backup. When the manager of inspections resigned, there 
was no backup. 
 
So how did these people in 18 months get all this experience 
and training if they had no experienced people to work for? I 
wonder if you could explain that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the experience that existed 
within the department from people who were qualified to do 
these well . . . the well tests, it was a combination of both 
support for one another plus the experience that had been there. 
And the additional experience of on the job, being able to 
facilitate an adequate enough experience to carry out that 
function. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, that doesn’t seem credible. I make 
that comment based on the information in this letter. In the area 
number 2, in the letter, the well testing, it says: 
 

With the recent departure of an employee, no one has time 
to be fully trained to cover this area. Ross Maddeford has 
been training with Henry . . . 
 

And we’re talking about Henry Bergey, who is the individual 
who resigned due to the problems within the branch, a person 
that has 22 years experience and did his level best to solve some 
of these problems. He ran up against a brick wall and submitted 

his resignation and this letter now is a result of his resignation 
and the concerns that these folks have. 
 
And the letter goes on to say: 
 

Russ Maddeford has been training with Henry for the last 
month. He is now doing independent testing but still has to 
rely on Henry for assistance. Russ has no backup at this 
time other than Henry. And if Henry is gone, Russ has no 
backup. 

 
So could you provide us with the names of the people who had 
the experience to train the folks and to do proper well testing? If 
there were . . . according to this letter, there is nobody there. So 
how did, how did the people that are in the unit gain experience 
when they had no one to gain experience from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I guess the member is 
taking that letter as gospel, that there were no other people with 
the necessary training or expertise to coach others along. That’s 
based on the letter that the member is reading. 
 
So he’s placing all the confidence in the world on what the 
person who is no longer there is saying, that there is no backup. 
And the contention within the department is that there were in 
fact people who were able and capable of assisting one another 
and meeting the requirements. So with all due respect, I just 
want to point that out. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, this letter is signed as I indicated by 
a number of employees who are listed on your organizational 
chart as inspectors. So I would place a fair bit of credibility in 
this letter. Obviously these people know what they’re talking 
about. These aren’t people that have walked in off the street or 
someone in a managerial or administrative position who are 
saying we’ve got problems in our inspection unit. These are the 
inspectors themselves that are raising these concerns. 
 
Now, if in fact there are other people within the department or 
within the branch that have the experience to train people, 
provide us with the names of those people who did the training. 
 
(22:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I think, Mr. Chairman, what again may be 
both expedient and perhaps hopefully appropriate to the 
member, if he would share that letter with us and we would 
reply in writing to the questions that he is asking specifically in 
detail. 
 
Because if there is some concern then it needs to be addressed 
and it needs to be addressed in probably a more detailed fashion 
or matter, if you wish, than just a matter of trying to guess or 
give answers to questions back and forth and skirting issues that 
should perhaps be zeroed in on and assessed and addressed by 
the department. We would very much appreciate the 
opportunity to do that. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I’d be happy to provide you with a 
copy of the letter, but the person sitting behind you, that’s who 
the letter was addressed to. It was addressed to your executive 
director, Lana Grosse. So you should have a copy of this letter 
available to you. 



1738 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

We are talking about some very serious issues here. You 
mentioned earlier that this unit is responsible for the inspection 
of boilers in schools and hospitals and long-term care homes 
and those sorts of things. And we have a group of individuals 
who have raised some concerns, and I have other documents 
here to indicate that these concerns have been raised for a 
period of years, and it seems like nothing has been done to 
address these concerns. So finally out of frustration they came 
forward and have raised these concerns to this level. 
 
So I think what we will do is I’d be happy to provide you with a 
copy, but I think we will continue to discuss these concerns, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
The third concern that’s listed in the letter is, it’s entitled 
“Branch past practices,” and they go on to say: 
 

Due to the high staff turnover, practices that normally 
would have been handed down by senior inspectors training 
their younger counterparts has been lost. 

 
And they say: 
 

We rely heavily on Henry to make up this deficiency in our 
unit. 

 
So again, what they are saying is that this Mr. Bergey is 
resigning taking 22 years of experience with him. The 
remaining inspectors are saying look, we don’t have the 
expertise within our group and they are asking for help. 
 
And my question to you is, what has been done to address this 
particular concern where you don’t have inspectors with 
experience to train the younger ones because it appears to me 
that this is an occupation where there is a lot of on-the-job 
training. So have you hired inspectors with more experience to 
train the younger ones? You indicated earlier that the average 
years of experience seems to be fairly low. And as you 
indicated earlier this evening, and I will repeat again, these 
people perform some very vital functions, and there is the issue 
of public safety here. And so I wonder, could you explain what 
has been done to address the concern about on-the-job training. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — First of all, these people again when they 
come to the responsibility areas, have their degrees. They have 
their certificates. They could be engineers when they do come 
to the job. 
 
The member talks about the letter in December 16, 1999. Now 
since that time, has there been some problems that have come to 
light that would support the fact that nothing’s been done since 
then or to . . . has there been a problem? 
 
Have those concerns not been addressed? Have there been some 
issues that have happened that would suggest that there hasn’t 
been any action taken to update or upgrade or to have 
confidence in those people that have been carrying out these 
responsibilities since that time? And if there are, then, yes, 
that’s serious. And those specific issues should have been 
brought to someone’s attention immediately. 
 
Now this is now 18 months, and I guess my hope is that 
something did happen that people would not take the 

responsibility or assume a responsibility of a serious job 
responsibility that they have if they didn’t feel qualified. So I 
guess I appreciate very much the concerns that have been 
brought forward, but I’m also hoping that since the letter was 
written that there have been some measures taken that have 
prevented a serious incident from occurring as a result of the 
earlier concerns. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I guess that’s exactly the point. You 
asked what . . . has there been something, an explosion or 
something like that that has prompted these concerns, and I 
think that that’s the problem here. These inspectors feel that 
there is the potential for a disaster. We don’t need to wait until a 
boiler explodes and kills somebody before you take corrective 
measures, Mr. Minister, and these inspectors are saying that. I 
would read from this letter that these inspectors fear that there is 
the potential for that to happen. 
 
And also, Mr. Minister, you keep referring to staff having 
training and experience elsewhere and that sort of thing. I 
wonder if you could, if you would undertake to provide it, me 
with a list of the years of experience and training that the 
inspectors have. Would you be prepared to do that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Yes, we’ll undertake to do that. The fact 
still remains . . . we go back to 1999. We received a status 
report, and since that time hopefully, as I said, something has 
happened to try and make sure that there wasn’t the catastrophe 
that you’re suggesting might happen. Hopefully that’s not the 
situation. So we had the status report, and people have carried 
out their responsibilities to this point in time. We will supply 
you with a detailed report of what has happened since that time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll be looking forward 
to receiving your report. 
 
The fourth concern that is listed by these individuals is a lack of 
experience. The inspector in the . . . and I’m quoting from the 
letter: 
 

The inspector in the Regina office with the most amount of 
service is Richard Guenther with two and three-quarter 
years of experience. The remaining inspectors are 
approximately one year behind. 

 
Now that’s not much experience as you were saying earlier. 
And from what we’ve been told in the letter and other 
documents, it appears that this is a training on the job, and the 
inspectors themselves are saying that they don’t have enough 
experience. The letter goes on and says: 
 

Generally we accept that it takes over three years for a new 
employee to become an effective inspector. 
 

Now these are inspectors themselves saying this, Mr. Minister. 
 

Until then the learning curve is so great that a lot of time 
has been spent in investigating and studying the relevant 
codes. Again we rely heavily on Henry and Brian to direct 
us in our research. 

 
So again I ask you, have you brought in people with more 



June 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1739 

 

experience because by now some of them may be up to four 
years of experience, Mr. Speaker, fairly new on the job? And in 
view of the concerns that these people are expressing, has there 
been people hired with more years of experience to replace the 
people who have left with 22 years of experience? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, that’s another point in the letter 
from 1999 that we will address as to what action has been taken 
since that letter was written. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, the executive director of the branch 
is sitting behind you. Surely she’d be able to answer that 
question for us this evening, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I’m told that there have been a 
number of training opportunities taken advantage of. For 
example, A and B endorsements — our inspectors need to get 
these A and B endorsements from the National Board of Boiler 
and Pressure Vessels. And there’s communications training. 
And there are different training programs that are offered and 
made available to those people in those responsibility areas. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, then how many of the inspectors 
and staff have taken the training and taken advantage of those 
opportunities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Depending on the person’s, the 
individual’s previous experience or requirements, it could be 
any number of directed programs for an individual, depending 
on previous experience. And again there’s a whole mixed bag 
of opportunities that would be made available depending on 
what specific needs a individual or individuals may require. 
 
So again, the detail of all the available training programs, 
which, you know, we could find a list of, or send it to you with 
our other communication, I’d be happy to supply. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, it appears that there is a definite 
lack of information within your department in that area and I 
would hope that you could provide us at a future date with that 
information. It’s somewhat surprising that the executive 
director wouldn’t have that information available to her. 
 
But we will go on with the fifth concern and that, at that time 
. . . I guess the question is does it still exist? Apparently there 
was quite a backlog in inspections and there was a great 
concern expressed by the inspectors that because of their lack of 
experience that they spent a lot of time trying to figure out what 
needed to be done instead of actually doing the work. They 
needed some experienced people to point them in the right 
direction, to explain codes to them and those sorts of things. 
 
I wonder, could you give us an indication of what the backlog 
in the inspections is to date, and what remedies were put in 
place to deal with the backlog? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The backlog that existed has been 
addressed in one of two ways. The numbers of backlogs . . . the 
numbers within the backlog have been reduced considerably, 
primarily due to the fact that in this year’s budget there were 
provisions made for two additional inspectors to be hired to 
assist in reducing the backlog. Specific numbers I don’t have 
because they’ve been lowered obviously, since there has been 

inclusion of two additional people. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, have those two new inspectors been 
hired? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — They have not been hired, but that was the 
point of making the provisions within the budget — to bring 
them on stream as quickly as possible, and to address that. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, then in fact if you haven’t hired 
new people, how can you address the backlog? These folks 
were saying some 18 months ago that there is a backlog. They 
don’t have the experience to deal with it. They were spending a 
lot of time in administrative matters and those sorts of things, 
familiarizing themselves with codes, etc. 
 
So how can the backlog be . . . I find it somewhat interesting 
that the backlog in fact has been reduced, and you haven’t even 
hired the two new inspectors. 
 
(22:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The numbers of backlog changes from 
month to month. And from 18 months ago there would have 
been the problem of a backlog addressed. Let me just, if I can, 
refer to some background information. 
 
Over 6,000 new pressure vessels have been added to the 
inspection inventory since 1996-97. That’s a significant 
number. That’s an average of about 1,200 new vessels per year. 
So in 2001-2002 this equipment will now become due for the 
five-year in-service inspections — that’s going to come due. 
 
This means that commencing this fiscal year there will be 
approximately 1,200 additional units that will require these 
kinds of inspections and that’s one of the reasons that there 
were provisions made to hire two additional technicians to carry 
out this function. And so that . . . this rate of growth I’m told is 
expected to continue at 1,200 vessels per year. 
 
Now each inspector can inspect 1,000 to 1,200 items per year 
— that’s what I’m told. The combined 1,200 new pressure 
vessels which are now due for reinspection plus an estimated 
1,200 new pressure vessels that will be put into service annually 
require or will be met . . . those needs will be met by the 
increase in these two additional inspectors which we will be 
searching for immediately. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, you indicated that an inspector can 
do between 1,000 and 1,200 inspections per year. Now is that 
experienced inspectors, inspectors who have four or five years 
of experience? And in fact are your inspectors doing that 
number of inspections per year? 
 
According to some of the information I have, I would doubt 
whether those numbers of inspections are actually taking place, 
or if in fact they are whether the quality of inspection is there 
because of the concerns expressed by the inspectors. So if I 
understood you correctly, you said that an inspector should be 
able to do these up to 1,200 inspections per year. 
 
My question is: in fact, are your inspectors doing that? 
 



1740 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2001 

 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Those inspectors that are full time 
attending to that responsibility and are in the field on a full-time 
basis, yes they can carry these out. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Did I understand you correctly; you say they can 
do that. Or did you say they are doing that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I guess it’s yes to both. They can do that 
when they’re full time, when they’re full-time inspectors doing 
nothing but in the field carrying out these inspections, that 
number is accurate. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, there was a concern expressed 
about . . . that dealt with the regulations of the inspection unit. 
The concern . . . and I’m just wondering when were the 
regulations last reviewed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, they’re currently under review 
and we’ll be going into consultation, I’m told, this summer with 
respect to any changes that will be required. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I have in my possession a 
department memo that’s dated July 5, 1995, in which the 
concern was expressed with the long delay review of our 
outdated regulations. That was some six years ago almost. And 
you’re telling me now that you’re going to start reviewing them. 
Is that in fact . . . did I understand you correctly that these 
regulations will be reviewed in the near future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I’m told that the new Act was 
passed in 1999 and there is now the move to go into 
consultations with respect to regulations. So there was a new 
Act passed two years ago. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Mr. Minister, the new Act is working with the 
old regulations who . . . regulations that were considered 
outdated back in 1995. Is that, is that what you’re telling me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The new Act is not yet proclaimed. But it 
was as a result of the concerns that were raised that in fact there 
was a review undertaken and a need to revamp the Act, which 
was in fact passed here but not yet proclaimed in 1999. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I wonder could you explain or tell 
us why the new Act hasn’t been proclaimed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Because of the complexity of the Act and 
the regulations, it has not been proclaimed pending the 
regulations to be put in place. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So what you are telling us, Mr. Minister, is that 
back in 1995, there was concerns being expressed about the out 
datedness of the regulations back in 1995, and we are still 
operating with those outdated regulations now. We have a new 
Act that was passed in ’99 and it hasn’t been proclaimed. 
 
And that tells me that I think you’ve got some real serious 
problems in this area, Mr. Minister. You have a letter sent to 
your executive director expressing — 18 months ago — 
expressing some very serious concerns about the inspection 
unit. It appears that really nothing has been done to correct that 
situation. Now the regulations were out of date in 1995 and 
nothing has been done. 

I understand that the executive director was hired to update 
those . . . one of the duties was to . . . or requirements was to 
update the regulations and now you’re telling us that hasn’t 
been done. Mr. Minister, how are you going to deal with this 
serious situation you have in your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, again, referring to that letter, it 
was based on that letter that the member is suggesting the 
regulations were outdated. That is the expertise in that letter that 
suggests all those regulations were outdated. The executive 
director was brought into the department in 1999 to ensure that 
these regulations were in fact, following the new Act, that there 
was some new work initiated and created for the new 
regulations that would come in and allow that Act to be 
proclaimed. 
 
But again, I . . . the suggestion that the regulations were 
outdated is based on the letter that you’ve received, on the 
expertise in that letter. Is that . . . 
 
Mr. Hart: — No, Mr. Minister. The . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:27. 
 
 


