















































Hansard: May 31, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1453 
 May 31, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
condition of Highway 339, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Briercrest and Drinkwater. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise today to present a 
petition from people in the Wadena area that are concerned 
about the reduction of services to the Wadena health centre. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena health centre 
be maintained at its current level of service at minimum, 
with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral services 
available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, public 
health, home care, and long-term care services available to 
users from our district and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks from Kuroki, Wadena, Elfros, and 
even Calgary, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise to present a petition in support of comprehensive 
tobacco control legislation on World No Tobacco Day. And this 
is signed by people who are in support of comprehensive 
tobacco legislation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial tobacco legislation to prevent children from 
starting to smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand 
smoke in public places and workplaces, and to control 
youth access to tobacco products. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. And this is signed by people, generally from 
Saskatoon, but as well from Martensville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
petitioners concerned with the state of the hospital in Swift 

Current, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer of the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the city of Swift 
Current. They’re from Hodgeville and from Val Marie. They’re 
from Cabri, Beechy, Ponteix, Ferland, Elrose, Mankota, and 
Aneroid, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of residents of Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency 
who are concerned about the proposals put forward in the Fyke 
report. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take the necessary steps to 
ensure that services are maintained at least at their current 
levels at Weyburn General Hospital, Bengough Health 
Centre, Radville Marian Health Centre, and Pangman 
Health Centre, in order that accessible health care services 
are available to residents of the Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency and beyond. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Pangman, 
Moose Jaw, and Yellow Grass. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present 
petitions regarding the EMS (emergency medical service) 
service in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in Redvers, 
Storthoaks, Bellegarde, and Alida areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 
rise on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who have expressed 
an interest in maintaining and the upgrading of the 
Saskatchewan road network. And the prayer goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ask the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue with its foresight and vision of 



1454 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2001 

 

increasing the funding to $900 million over the next three 
years to maintain and upgrade our thoroughfares of 
commerce. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Colonsay, Allan, Saskatoon, Young, and Watrous, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present dealing with the Redvers health care centre. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral 
services available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to the users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities of 
Antler, Redvers, Fertile, Manor, Moosomin, Regina, 
Bellegarde, Glenavon, and Maryfield, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition signed on behalf of residents of Prince Albert 
and Meadow Lake, and the petition has to do with tobacco 
smoke and reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban on smoking in enclosed public places 
and workplaces and on school property within the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition for improved cellular telephone coverage. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of Rabbit 
Lake, Hafford, Blaine Lake, Leask, Radisson, Borden, 
Perdue, Maymont, Mistawasis, and Muskeg Lake. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Rabbit Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition opposed to the possible reduction of health services in 
Kamsack. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that health care services in the 
Kamsack Hospital be maintained at its current level of 
service at minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency 
and doctoral services available. 
 

The signatures are all from the community of Kamsack, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
signed by the good citizens of Saskatchewan concerning two of 
the government’s Crown corporations, SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy, who both recently announced some rate increases 
for residential and business customers: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Moose Jaw, Regina, 
Saskatoon, Chamberlain, Holdfast, Emma Lake, Prince Albert, 
Fort Qu’Appelle, Biggar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today too to 
present petitions on behalf of citizens concerned with the 
centralization of ambulance services. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures to this petition come from the community of 
Wynyard. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise with a 
petition in support of comprehensive tobacco control 
legislation. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places and workplaces, and to control youth access 
to tobacco products. 



May 31, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1455 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
The signatures are from Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also have a petition today regarding concerned citizens in my 
constituency and cellular telephone coverage: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Spiritwood, Medstead, Glaslyn, Leoville, Chitek Lake, Big 
River, Canwood, Debden, Shellbrook, Parkside, Shell 
Lake, Duck Lake, and Macdowall. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Leoville, Spiritwood, and Mildred. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by folks concerned about the energy costs. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan customers. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Neilburg, 
Marsden, and Macklin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise with a petition from citizens in rural Saskatchewan 
reference the cellular telephone coverage. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone services to all 
communities throughout the Wood River constituency. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the signators on this are from Coronach and 
Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition. 
The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to call on the 
provincial and federal governments to provide immediate 
financial assistance to the city of North Battleford in order 
to facilitate necessary improvements to the North 
Battleford water treatment plant. 

 
Your petitioners and signatories come from North Battleford, 

Speers, Saskatoon, Glenbush, and Meadow Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) there are hereby read and 
received. 
 
The petitions are 12 in number and they are addendums to 
previously tabled sessional papers and petitions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
welcome and introduce to you, through you to the legislature, a 
number of people who are in the gallery, your gallery, today 
because it’s World No Tobacco Day. And I’d ask them to stand 
as I introduce them. 
 
Mary Smillie, who’s the president of Saskatchewan Coalition 
for Tobacco Reduction; Lynn Greaves, who’s from 
Saskatchewan Public Health Association; Lisa Williams, from 
the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Saskatchewan; Andy 
Caswell, from the Canadian Cancer Society, Saskatchewan 
Division; Shaine Peters from the Students Working Against 
Tobacco; and Dawn Anaquod, who is with the FlyHigher Team 
at Riffel High School. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this Hon. Assembly, I’d like 
to introduce to you 12 grade 5 students from Scotsburn School 
in Estevan. 
 
They are sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they’re 
accompanied by their teacher Carolyn Walliser and chaperone 
Terry Walliser. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I too 
would like to welcome Lynn Greaves, Mary Smillie, Lisa 
Williams, Andy Caswell, Shaine Peters, and Dawn Anaquod 
who are here with respect to World No Tobacco Day. 
 
As Vice-Chair of the Special Committee on Tobacco Control 
and on behalf of the official opposition, I welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is my pleasure today, on behalf of the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena, to introduce a group seated in the east 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, a group of 47 grade 4 students from the 
Wadena Elementary School. 
 



1456 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2001 

 

Along with the 47 students, Mr. Speaker, are teachers Denise 
Nelson and Tracy Ziola and chaperones Lynn Ziola, Kathy 
Kanash, Kathy Kristianson, Danny Yablonski, and Bobbi 
Flanders. I also note that the bus driver is Kerry Holderness, 
even though I don’t believe Kerry is up there right now. 
 
But I’d like all members of the Assembly to welcome this group 
from Wadena, and I’ll be glad to meet with you at 2 o’clock and 
answer any of your questions. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to join with the member opposite in welcoming the 
students from Wadena. 
 
And in particular, I want to take special note of one young 
woman who is here, Kailey Christianson and she has some 
surprise guests today, Mr. Speaker, because the caretakers in 
the apartment that I live in, Iona and Ralph Christianson, are her 
grandparents and they very graciously decided to come over 
and be my guests today so that they could meet with their 
granddaughter. 
 
So I hope that all members of the House will welcome the 
Christianson’s, Ralph and Iona, as well as Kailey. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I 
have other special guests here today as well. There are 36 
students from one of the finest schools in the constituency of 
Saskatoon Southeast. I am referring of course to St. Luke 
School. They are seated in the west gallery giving us high-fives 
because they know what great students they are. 
 
They are great students courtesy of the wonderful tutelage of 
Leona Gusikowski, Gail Dust, and Darryl Holowachuk. And 
they are well-behaved students, courtesy of the chaperoning of 
the Melissa Gusikowski. So I would ask all members of this 
Assembly to please make them welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a government 
member on the Tobacco Control Committee, I too would like to 
take this opportunity to welcome those people who are here for 
No Tobacco Day. 
 
And in welcoming them, I also want to thank them very much 
for the incredible commitment, hard work, dedication that they 
have put into this cause. The amount of information that they 
provided for the committee throughout the hearing process was 
truly wonderful. 
 
I thank them deeply, and I hope that all people here will also 
join in thanking them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I want to introduce a number of guests coming 
from the Athabasca Basin, and these are communities that are 
75 miles south of the Northwest Territories border. They’ve 
come a long way to visit the Assembly today. 
 
I’d like to welcome vice-chief of the P.A. (Prince Albert) Grand 
Council, Ed Benoanie. I’d like to welcome the mayor of Stony 
Rapids, George Mercredi, and the assistant chief to Black Lake, 
Edwin Boneleye. And with the three gentlemen from the far 
North visiting us, of course, we have Fred Beek with SERM, 
and also Nancy Cherney with SERM and they’re here to talk 
about the RAN (representative areas network) program. 
 
But very briefly I want to say a few words in Dene, because we 
often hear Cree and French and other languages on this side of 
the Assembly. And I would say to them in Dene. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Dene.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’m not familiar with Dene, but I think 
the member snuck one in there, and I would remind him of the 
rules of the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the House, a young lady from Aylmer, Quebec who 
is visiting us here in the legislature today. 
 
Her name is Natasha Nystrom. She has just finished her first 
year of a two-year program in CEGEP (Collège d’enseignement 
général et professionnel) where I understand, and in our 
discussion she tells me, that she has had her first political 
science class. 
 
Natasha has a name that is well-known in Saskatchewan. Her 
father has been a Member of Parliament for many years 
representing Saskatchewan constituencies. And I’d like to ask 
all members to welcome her to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to join with the Minister of SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) in welcoming guests 
from the very far North of this province. I had the great honour 
and privilege to share lunch with them today, and so I would 
like to welcome Edwin Boneleye, Ed Benoanie, and George 
Mercredi. 
 
And I’m afraid that my Dene is nowhere near as good as the 
Minister of SERM’s is, and I won’t sneak one in. All I will say 
is, etlanitã. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of the official opposition, I too would like to welcome our 
esteemed guests from the Far North. We welcome you here to 
the legislature today and we certainly wish you the very best in 
all of your endeavours. 
 



May 31, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1457 

 

I ask the members of the Assembly to join with the official 
opposition in welcoming in these great members. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

World No Tobacco Day 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is World No 
Tobacco Day. Why should Saskatchewan be concerned with 
World No Tobacco Day? Saskatchewan loses 1,600 people each 
and every year to tobacco-related deaths — the equivalent of 
four jumbo jets crashing each and every year and killing 
everyone on board. 
 
The average starting age of new smokers is only 13 years of 
age, Mr. Speaker. Tobacco-related deaths are the most 
preventable cause of death in North America. The financial cost 
attributed to tobacco use in Saskatchewan is $266 million in 
health care costs, absenteeism, and lost productivity. 
 
Rural and urban residents in Saskatchewan are in favour of 
banning smoking in public places where children have access. 
Research studies that look at hard data such as sales receipts 
and employment statistics report no loss of business in Canada, 
the United States, or elsewhere in the world which implement 
smoke-free public places and workplaces. 
 
Saskatchewan’s ready to take the next step to protect its citizens 
from the harmful and deadly effects of tobacco. I encourage all 
members of this Assembly and all citizens of Saskatchewan to 
take to heart the 2001 theme for World No Tobacco Day, 
“Second-hand smoke kills, let’s clear the air.” 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
statement is also to recognize World No Tobacco Day. 
 
The United Nations has declared today, May 31, as World No 
Tobacco Day. And here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we 
hope the young people of the province hear our message. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a recent report released by Health Canada 
indicated that teen smoking in Saskatchewan was well above 
the national average. In fact, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s 
young people have the second highest smoking rate in Canada 
— fully 31 per cent of our province’s young people are 
smoking. 
 
Some facts on smokers, Mr. Speaker. Ninety per cent of them 
start in their teen years. On average they start smoking at 13 
years of age and smoke one pack a day. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
important that our young people be reminded once more of the 
negative effects of smoking. Not only is a person’s health 
affected but too soon is a lifestyle. 
 
There is also the financial impact. Over the course of a 
smoker’s lifetime literally thousands of dollars have gone up in 
smoke. 

Mr. Speaker, as Vice-Chair of the Special Committee on 
Tobacco Control, I heard first-hand from young people across 
this province who are very concerned about the high rate of 
smoking amongst their peers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that today’s youth are tomorrow’s 
leaders. All of us have a responsibility to make sure that our 
young people are educated and informed about the dangers of 
smoking and that we do as much as possible to discourage them 
from starting. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Funding for Special Needs Children 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this week, 
when making a statement about Child Care Providers’ Week, I 
spoke about the importance of making sure that children get a 
good start. Making sure that all children, regardless of their 
social and economic circumstances have equal opportunity to 
pursue a healthy and fulfilling life, should be the goal of all 
citizens in our society. And it is a task that this government 
takes seriously. 
 
This is why the Minister of Social Services announced this 
morning that as of June 1, new provincial funding will benefit 
more than 100 special needs children in Saskatchewan. As a 
part of the Kids First initiative, spaces to accommodate a 108 
children will be opened in the Early Childhood Intervention 
Program. 
 
Both infants and preschoolers will benefit from the program. 
Children with developmental delays, FAS (fetal alcohol 
syndrome), autism, attention deficit disorder will receive early 
childhood intervention services in their homes. This program 
will be administered and provided by six community-based 
organizations already involved with providing early childhood 
intervention programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a very wise and progressive man once said, the 
measure of any community is the amount of social and 
economic security which it provides for even its humblest 
citizen. 
 
I believe that this expanded program begins to attempt to 
provide just that — opportunity for even the most vulnerable 
children in our society. And I believe that this government’s 
commitment to the children of Saskatchewan proves that we 
believe every person in this province is valued. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Induction to Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Dennis and 
Jim Korte of the Humboldt area have joined the ranks of the 
baseball legends in the province. The two have been elected as 
members of the Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame. Both 
Dennis, who is the mayor of Humboldt, and his brother Jim will 
be inducted into the Hall of Fame at a ceremony in Battleford 
on August 18. 



1458 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2001 

 

Dennis and Jim have been involved in the baseball scene in 
Muenster and Humboldt since their youth. Both started off 
playing in Muenster, and when Dennis moved to Humboldt 
they played against each other. 
 
Jim is involved as past president of the Saskatchewan Baseball 
Association, president of the local baseball league, a coach, and 
still plays a little twilight baseball. He has also been involved 
on the provincial and national level. 
 
Dennis has also been very involved on the local, provincial, and 
national level. As well he spent a lot of time behind the plate 
calling the game. From 1980 to 1984 he was the national 
umpire supervisor for Baseball Canada. In 1987 Dennis 
received the Saskatchewan Baseball Association’s award of 
merit, and in 1988 he received a life membership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Kortes are well known in the Humboldt and 
Muenster area for their involvement in baseball and are very, 
very deserving of this award. 
 
Congratulations to Dennis and Jim Korte. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Yorkton Hosts Cultural and Sporting Events 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
week I gave two members statements in the time of one. 
Because there is so much good news coming out of Yorkton, it 
has to be done in multiples. Today I’m back to do a repeat 
performance, a double performance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The 54th annual Short Film and Video Festival was held last 
weekend and a great time was had by all. And as national 
recognition for the significance of the international festival, it 
was given the provincial title for Outstanding Cultural Event 
Award by Attractions Canada at their celebrations in Halifax — 
the same event that recognized the Moose Jaw Tunnels, as 
mentioned by the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow on 
Monday. 
 
The film festival was competing against events from all of 
provinces and territories and the award is welcome and 
appropriate. My congratulations again to the officials and 
volunteers of the festival. 
 
And from culture to sports this weekend, Mr. Speaker, Yorkton 
is hosting the Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association 
track and field championships at the Kinsmen Century Field. 
We are able to host this event as a legacy of the year 2000 
summer games. The facilities built for the games enable us to 
bring the track and field meet to Yorkton. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the community spirit that brought the 
summer games is now bringing 12,000 athletes, coaches, 
parents, and track fans to Yorkton and a significant boost to our 
local economy. 
 
So there you are, Mr. Speaker, four good news stories from the 
shining city on the plains of eastern Saskatchewan. And a lot 
more good news to come, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mining Industry in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 
this Assembly today to share some of the concerns of the 
mining industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure, along with other members of 
both sides of this House, to attend a function yesterday to hear 
the president of Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the message brought forth by Logan Kruger is one 
of tax cuts and investment. Logan Kruger told the audience 
yesterday that governments should stop discriminating against 
an industry that provides thousands of jobs and produces 
billions of dollars in exports from this country — both things 
extremely positive for Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Kruger states the mining industry faces more 
red tape and higher taxes here than anywhere else. He says that 
is the wrong message to send investors. The companies that 
want to put their money in Saskatchewan but are unwilling to 
do so until the provincial NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government changes their current unfair policies of regressive 
taxation and bureaucratic brick walls. 
 
One issue that especially bothers the industry, Mr. Speaker, is 
the Saskatchewan resource surcharge — one that the industry 
feels has to be ended to help grow Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my hope, along with my colleagues on this 
side of the House, that those in attendance at this speech from 
the other side of the House were listening carefully to this 
important message and it didn’t just fall on deaf ears over there. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Spring Road Improvements 
 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we saw 
in the budget earlier this year that connecting Saskatchewan to 
the future would mean providing our communities and our 
economy with a safe, reliable, effective transportation system. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say the time is here now. Mr. 
Speaker, earlier this week the Department of Highways and 
Transportation released an additional list of 20 new highway 
improvement projects valued at over $45 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s not enough time to speak about all 20 new 
announcements, but I would like to take the opportunity to 
address the highlights of the spring tender schedule. 
 
(14:00) 
 
And they’re as follows: 139 kilometres of grading in 16 projects 
that will take place on 11 highways; 199 kilometres of surfacing 
in 18 projects that will occur on 11 highways; 252 kilometres of 
construction in 21 projects on 14 highways; and, Mr. Speaker, 
381 kilometres of resurfacing in 33 projects on 19 highways. 



May 31, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1459 

 

And there’s many, many more improvements outlined in the 
spring tendering schedule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
Investigation of Alleged Improprieties at the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s another 
day and another reluctant admission from a Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming official. This time SLGA (Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority) president, Kathy Langlois, has 
admitted to accepting gifts from liquor companies. But she’s 
refusing to say what those gifts were. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as far as we know this is new information. There 
have been no allegations made against Kathy Langlois for 
accepting gifts in violation of section 133 of the Act. So Justice 
Wakeling will not be investigating the matter. 
 
Will the minister of Liquor and Gaming table the list of gifts 
that Kathy Langlois accepted from liquor companies? And will 
Justice Wakeling be instructed to investigate this matter? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
remind the member opposite that Justice Wakeling will be 
reviewing all of the allegations concerning section 133. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the course of doing business people will be 
offered a luncheon to come and hear an individual do a 
presentation. They might be offered, by someone who comes to 
visit from another country, appreciation for the visit — 
protocol-type things. There are a number of things. What is 
appropriate and inappropriate to accept has been judged by 
conflict of interest guidelines. 
 
Since we’re now looking at this question, those are the things 
that will be reviewed by Justice Wakeling. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The information 
that I just brought up in question one was not an allegation, it 
was an admission. And I think that should be brought to Justice 
Wakeling as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s still very unclear exactly what Justice 
Wakeling is investigating. We haven’t been told. We thought he 
was investigating whether SLGA employees accepted trips and 
gifts from liquor companies in violation to section 133 of the 
Act. However Kathy Langlois says he’s investigating whether 
SLGA’s conflict of interest policy contradicts the Act and what 
changes need to be made. That’s a big difference, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s a big difference, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Why won’t the minister clear this up by simply tabling the 
terms of reference for all the investigations? Will the minister 
table the documents that show exactly what Justice Wakeling 
has been asked to investigate, and what the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner has been asked to investigate. Will the minister 
table those documents today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I took notice of 
those questions and I will get that information back to the 
member. But what I will say is what I said about Justice 
Wakeling’s review. 
 
From the harassment charges there were also a few allegations 
that there were inappropriate gifts being received by members 
of the Liquor and Gaming Authority. At the same time they 
cannot be reviewed without looking at the conflict of interest 
guidelines in section 133 in which the Authority operates, to 
make certain that it’s very clear when it is appropriate to accept 
something from an outside individual, and when it is not 
appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are times when we’ve all received a mug; 
when we’ve all received a gift. We have a way to address those 
under conflict of interest guidelines, Mr. Speaker. We want to 
make certain Justice Wakeling looks at all of these things, and 
if there is action needed, the Authority would take appropriate 
action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Whistle-Blower Protection Legislation 
 
Mr. Heppner: — For the minister to use her terms — get back 
to me with the terms of reference — is not good enough. We 
need those terms tabled today so we know exactly what’s going 
on, not presented a year or two from now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the first week of this legislative session, I called 
on the Minister of Justice to support the Saskatchewan Party’s 
call for whistle-blower protection legislation. The minister gave 
one of the more reasonable responses we’ve seen this session. 
He said, and I quote: 
 

I look forward to receiving his legislation on 
whistle-blowers, and we look forward to considering it with 
haste and . . . due regard. 
 

Of course the minister seems to have changed his tune now that 
his government has been caught firing people for reporting 
illegal activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I introduced this legislation about a week ago. Has 
the minister considered it, and will his government support this 
much-needed legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wish to remind all members of the legislature what it is that 
section 74 of The Labour Standards Act does. And it says — 
and this is, by the way, in Hansard, on Tuesday — it says: 



1460 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2001 

 

Discrimination by employer prohibited. 
 
No employer shall discharge or threaten to discharge or in 
any manner discriminate against an employee because the 
employee: 
 
(a) has reported or proposed to report to a lawful authority 
any activity that is or is likely to result in an offence 
pursuant to an Act or an Act of the Parliament of Canada; 
 

Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to hear, we’re one of two 
jurisdictions in Canada that has whistle-blower legislation 
similar to this. One of two jurisdictions in Canada. And I want 
to tell you, Mr. Speaker, the other jurisdiction is not Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — So we’re told this is one of two jurisdictions. 
And what good does it do to those two people they’ve just 
finished firing for blowing the whistle on this government. 
They pass the legislation, then they break it, and they act in an 
ignorant way to their employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other day the Premier made a show of 
demanding that the opposition — and we know how forceful 
the Premier is when he demands, don’t we — supporting his 
strongly worded motion that the government officials obey the 
law. Then before we even had a chance to speak or vote on the 
motion, the NDP adjourned the debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party supports the principle of 
that motion. We support it. But we need more than a motion. 
We need to change the law, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the government and the opposition can agree on 
one thing following the events of the past few days, it is that we 
need stronger legislation to protect government employees who 
bring forward evidence of wrongdoing. 
 
Later today the Saskatchewan Party will ask the government to 
allow a debate on this important legislation. Will the NDP allow 
this debate to continue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to share that I had a note saying, in response to this from 
earlier in the session, that I look forward to reviewing their 
legislation in the hopes that it might advance whistle-blower 
protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to share, I’ve looked at their legislation, 
and in three areas it is sadly wanting, Mr. Speaker. The three 
areas are just this. First, their whistle-blower protection, Mr. 
Speaker, restricts whistle-blower protection to government only 
— government only. Our legislation that’s been in place since 
1994 covers all employees, Mr. Speaker. That’s area one. 
 
Area two, Mr. Speaker, where they’re lacking, their 
whistle-blower protection covers within one year of the offence; 
ours covers for two years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Trew: — The third area, Mr. Speaker, the third area 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Treatment for Patients in Emergency Wards 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During the 1999 
election campaign the NDP made many campaign promises, 
especially to do with health care. So my question will be 
directed to the Minister of Health. 
 
One specific promise was that all patients arriving in emergency 
rooms would get a preliminary evaluation by a health care 
provider within 15 minutes of arrival. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is definitely not the case. We have a 
letter from nurses who work in the emergency room at the 
Regina General Hospital. And they are raising serious concerns 
about how many patients are being forced to wait many hours in 
emergency before being assessed. 
 
These nurses say that this past Monday, for example, the 
average wait in emergency was three to four hours before a 
patient was assessed by a nurse. And then they had to wait 
another hour or more to see a doctor. 
 
They believe the situation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member please put his question. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: 
what does he have to say to these nurses in the emergency ward 
who are doing their very best to cope with this situation? Why 
has he abandoned his promise to reduce emergency room 
waiting times for patients? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We almost set a 
record. This is the 31st day of May and this is the first question 
on health, of me, in question period in this month. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — On this side of the House we are working 
to build a good health system that’s accessible to all . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it almost forgot . . . almost 
made me forget my discussion of lemons earlier in the session, 
but I won’t go there. 
 
But what I would say is we know that all across Canada there’s 
a shortage of nurses and that . . . and other staff. We also know 
in emergency wards right across this country there are peaks 
and valleys in the requirements. 
 
What we know is that in the Regina Health District they have 
had some high demands and basically have procedures in place 



May 31, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1461 

 

to send patients to the other hospital — they send them to the 
Pasqua Hospital when that’s necessary — and that’s the kind of 
thing that is done when there are these extra demands that are 
there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
Minister of Health has memory problems. I think we talked 
about a huge health care crisis; it was called the North 
Battleford water supply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the letter from these nurses, the letter from these 
nurses states that last Monday afternoon there were 52 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The letter from 
these nurses states that last Monday afternoon there were 52 
patients in the Regina General emergency room. They say that 
for one hour and forty-five minutes that afternoon, the Regina 
General Hospital was on bypass to ambulance traffic, meaning 
that all ambulance calls were rerouted to the Pasqua Hospital. 
 
These health professionals believe that the continuing nursing 
shortage and the bed closures, as a result of the shortage, are 
directly influencing the pressures on the emergency room. I 
quote: 
 

We nurses are put in a very difficult position due to lack of 
staffing. We are unable to care for patients properly. We 
are not staffed to deal with the volume of patients who we 
keep for over 24 hours and the unit is not designed for 
patients to stay long-term. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these nurses believe patient care is being 
compromised. What is the Minister of Health doing to 
immediately address these shocking problems in the emergency 
department at the Regina General Hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I notice that the 
remark I made about the number of questions on health has 
actually hit a sore spot. 
 
What I would say is that we are working in this side of the 
House, the government, to improve the health system. And 
we’ve asked the members opposite to participate in that, and we 
are looking forward to their participation as we look at many of 
the recommendations that Mr. Fyke presented. 
 
What we do know is that there is a shortage of nurses and other 
health care providers. We want to thank those health care 
providers who are going the extra mile now, as we deal with 
those shortages. But we are working together with the 
professional organizations, with the unions, to train more 
nurses. We’re also looking at ways that we can encourage some 
nurses who have gone on to other professions to retrain, to 
come back and work in the field. We also are working with the 
health districts so that they can provide the best care possible 
for all of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s just stay 
with the facts. The nurses at the Regina General say that more 
patients are having to stay overnight in the emergency 
department because of bed closures in the wards, due to the 
nursing shortage. 
 
On Tuesday afternoon alone there were 22 patients waiting in 
emergency for a bed on the ward. The nurses are very 
concerned because they know that the summer bed closures to 
allow for staff vacations haven’t even yet begun. They say that 
there are already 45 beds closed at the General Hospital due to 
staff shortages, and there’s plans to close another 48 beds and 
two operating theatres in that hospital. In total over 124 acute 
care beds will be closed by the end of June through to the 
September long weekend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of these facts how does the minister ever 
expect the emergency room departments to cope with the 
pressures on the system with these summer bed closure plans if 
they are already experiencing difficulties with the existing bed 
shortages? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is the first question . . . 
field of questions in 31 days. What I would remind that member 
is that when he ran in 1999 their platform was to freeze health 
spending. 
 
We have increased the amounts over the last two years. We’re 
working with the local communities, the health districts, to 
make sure that we have the services that we need. And what we 
are going to do is continue to improve our system so that we do 
have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. Minister of 
Health, 30 seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s appropriate that 
we thank all of those people who are working very hard to cope 
with the demands. We know that they also require some time 
for vacation. And so that’s what the hospital administrations do 
— is try to organize vacation which will allow for them to get 
some respite and get regenerated for the hard work that’s ahead. 
And what we want to do is make sure that we work to have the 
best workplaces for those people. And we’re working at that 
right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
the Minister of Health: the shocking thing about this letter is the 
way it was signed. It was signed, and I quote: 
 

A group of concerned RNs in emergency who are not 
willing to give their names for fear of being fired for 
speaking out against the NDP government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, they go on to say in their letter, they go on to say 
in their letter, Mr. Speaker, that they feel that there will be more 
resignations throughout the district if staffing is not improved. 



1462 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2001 

 

Yet they summarize all their expressions with a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order. I must be 
able to hear the question in its entirety. Members of the 
Assembly, I just would ask you to lower the noise level so this 
can be heard. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
they summarized all of their frustration on all of these facts by 
expressing a fear of being fired by the NDP because they 
simply raised concerns about the health system that that 
minister is responsible for. 
 
My question is: is it not enough that the NDP government is 
providing no relief for our health care professionals? Must they 
also be afraid that they will lose their jobs if they raise their 
voice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this government cares about 
health care every day, not once every 31 days. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We do not believe in freezing the budget 
in health because we know that there are public demands and 
we have to work together with the health care providers to make 
sure that sufficient resources are there to provide the services 
that people need. 
 
We also know that the workers in emergency wards and other 
places do end up with some very, very stressful days and they 
end up having to work together with their management people 
and also with those of us who have broader responsibility for 
funding of the whole system to try to address those needs. 
 
We also have to work to make sure that we have sufficient 
people trained to do the job. We’re doing that. We’ve increased 
the number of nursing positions. We’re planning to increase it 
again. 
 
And we will continue to work to provide the best health care for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Whistle-Blower Legislation 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, The Globe and Mail recently 
reported that the number of Canadians who still respect their 
elected officials is the same as those who believe Elvis is still 
alive. It wasn’t reported if these are the same people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hear some chirping about credibility. I would 
remind them that when I left cabinet, it took four of them to 
replace me in my cabinet responsibilities. And those four, those 
four did not include the members for Dewdney and Regina 
South. 
 
At any rate, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 

Mr. Hillson: — The Premier has often told us that sometimes 
we have to set aside partisan differences to do the right thing. 
The Whistleblower Protection Act is such a time. 
 
The private members’ motion the NDP adjourned on Tuesday 
and wouldn’t allow to come to a vote has no legal effect. If the 
NDP truly believes civil servants should not be threatened with 
dismissal for doing the right thing, they must support this 
legislation. 
 
My question for the Premier: will the NDP follow its own pious 
pronouncements and set aside partisan differences to do the 
right thing? Or is this another case of preaching one thing and 
doing another? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to stand up 
and talk about our whistle-blower legislation that’s been in 
place since ’94. Our whistle-blower legislation — one of two 
provinces in Canada, one of only two provinces in Canada that 
has whistle-blower legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve already outlined two areas where the proposal 
of the opposition is lacking. Let me point out the third area and 
that is with respect to taking an employer to court. Their 
proposal says you can take an employer to court and you might 
even win some damages. What they don’t say is it’s only 
moneyed employees that can afford the court case. What ours 
says is that Labour Standards will, will take the employer to 
court and will in fact find . . . on a finding of guilt that employer 
will be fined. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve outlined not one, not two, but three areas 
where their proposal is lacking over ours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grants to Third Party 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, when Lynda Haverstock was 
leader of our party, she struck a chord with voters talking about 
the need for a code of ethics. Sadly there hasn’t been much talk 
about ethics lately. 
 
Now the Liberal caucus is asking for another $65,000 in caucus 
grants in spite of the fact the caucus office is doing nothing. The 
last entry on the Liberal caucus Web site is eight months old 
and is two news releases of mine. The most recent statement by 
the Liberal leader on the caucus Web site is a year old. 
 
The Liberal leader does not speak to Liberals. He does not 
attend executive meetings or other Liberal functions. He does 
nothing to inform Liberals or others about where our party 
stands or what it is doing. Most of the caucus staff have been 
dismissed. The last time he communicated with our party it was 
to threaten to sue us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no communicating going on, so why does 
he need another $65,000 in caucus grants to communicate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased to 
answer this question. And I want to say the only reason I will 



May 31, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1463 

 

answer it is because it does, in some small way, refer to an Act 
that’s before this legislature. But I want to say to you that the 
tone of this is totally out of order and I want to tell you why. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our role in question period is to answer questions 
on policy and government programs and I will do that as it 
relates to the Executive Council Act. Mr. Speaker, these 
changes are made to recognize the fact that there is a coalition 
scenario in this province. This legislation never envisioned that 
and what this does is puts the Liberal caucus on a level playing 
field with the Saskatchewan Party caucus and the NDP caucus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I might want to say that 
there was a little release that was released by the Saskatchewan 
Party and it’s nothing but snake oil. It is inaccurate and it’s the 
kind of voodoo economics, it’s the kind of edition that you 
would expect from Conservatives and Alliance and 
Saskatchewan Party people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — It’s touching to see the NDP House Leader get 
up to defend the Liberal leader in this House. It’s just too bad 
the member for Prince Albert spends so much of his time 
standing behind the bull with his mouth open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when opinion polls are published in June, it will 
confirm that the Saskatchewan NDP is going the way of their 
cousins in Ottawa, in Ontario, and BC (British Columbia). 
 
If the Liberal Party in this province’s only role is to prop up an 
unpopular government, we will end up being even more hated 
than the ones we’re trying to save. Mr. Speaker, the Liberal 
Party has placed our party on the Titanic and the iceberg is just 
ahead. 
 
The Liberal leader said in Prince Albert that he would leave the 
coalition after this session. If that is the case, there is no need 
for this legislation. Or was our leader’s commitment to scrap 
the coalition just rhetoric? 
 
My question is: what is this money for? Is it to extricate the 
party from a coalition that has been disastrous or will he 
continue to do nothing to preserve the party he has led with 
such single ineptitude? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m interested very 
much to hear the comments from the former member of the 
Liberal caucus — the member who has done so much for party 
unity in the last three or four months. That particular member 
who basically . . . who went on an agenda of looking after his 
own leadership ambitions and was willing to compromise his 
principles and integrity to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let me just talk a bit about the issue at hand. When we were 
talking about caucus research grants, and I must remind the 
members opposite that they are members of the Board of 
Internal Economy, and what do they say about that in clause no. 
7(2): 
 

. . . in order to assist each caucus in performing its function 

within the parliamentary system, the Board of Internal 
Economy shall provide funding for research, information 
technology, administrative services, and other operating 
expenses of the caucus in the amount calculated in 
accordance with the clause. 

 
And they agreed to provide each caucus with $160,000, plus 
information and technology grants. Those members there 
agreed to that, and now they criticize it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to raise a point of 
order. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. State 
your point of order, please. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in question 
period, the member from Canora-Pelly made some disturbing 
accusations in his line of questioning. I waited until today to 
raise this point of order because I wanted to review Hansard to 
make . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I must be able to 
concentrate on this, Members. I would ask for silence. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I wanted to review Hansard to make 
sure I heard the member from Canora-Pelly correctly. Mr. 
Speaker, I quote from page 1432 of Hansard where the member 
from Canora-Pelly states, and I quote: 
 

Will the Education minister confirm the only purpose of 
this new legislation is to provide another $65,000 payoff to 
the Liberals for agreeing to join the NDP? 

 
Mr. Speaker, on page 1433 of Hansard the member goes on to 
say: 
 

. . . Bill No. 33, legislation that does nothing more than 
deposit another $65,000 in the Liberal bank account as a 
payment for joining the NDP. 

 
He continues on, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

The only purpose of the NDP legislation introduced on 
Monday by the NDP is to funnel another $65,000 payoff to 
the Liberal leader’s office for joining the NDP. 

 
Mr. Speaker, again quoting the member from Canora-Pelly, 
from page 1433 of yesterday’s Hansard: 
 

Money for the Liberal MLAs who sell their support to the 
NDP for $100,000 cabinet jobs. And now for money, the 
money for another $65,000 Liberal payoff. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I refer you to page 141 of Beauchesne's 



1464 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2001 

 

Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 6th Edition. It states, and I 
quote: 
 

Besides the prohibitions contained in Standing Order 18, it 
has been sanctioned by . . . (use) that a Member, while 
speaking, must not . . . 
 
(e) impute bad motives or motives different from those 
acknowledged by a Member. (and) 
 
(f) make a personal charge against a Member. 

 
Beauchesne's also states on page 142, and I quote: 
 

. . . a Member will not be permitted by the Speaker to 
indulge in any reflections on the House itself as a political 
institution; or to impute to any Member or Members 
unworthy motives for their actions in a particular case; 
 

Mr. Speaker, these accusations made by the member from 
Canora-Pelly on behalf of his caucus colleagues are offensive 
and slanderous. Therefore I ask you to rule that the member 
from Canora-Pelly apologize to this Assembly and that he 
unequivocally withdraws his disturbing accusations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the point 
of order, Mr. Speaker. The first . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the point 
of order, the first thing is that under our rules it has to be timely, 
Mr. Speaker. Therefore on points of order they need to be 
raised, in particular dealing with question period, Mr. Speaker, 
immediately after question period, not . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The proper 
procedure is to raise points of orders dealing with question 
period immediately after question period, not a day later, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Further the contentions being made by the Minister of 
Education about the payoffs of this legislation to the Liberal 
caucus is indeed true. They are receiving those funds, Mr. 
Speaker, but in no way, shape, or form did the member from 
Canora-Pelly impugn that this money was being used for any 
illegal activities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I would like to 
bring to the members’ attention on page 141 of Beauchesne’s, 
item 481(e): 
 

. . . it has been sanctioned by usage that a Member, while 
speaking, must not . . . 
 

(e) impute bad motives or motives different from those 
acknowledged by a Member. (or) 

(f) make a personal charge against a Member. 
 
While I find that the line of questioning in yesterday’s question 
period is in order, I find that the use of the language of the 
words, payoff and sell support, to be unparliamentary. 
 
Therefore I rule that the point of order is well taken and I would 
ask the member, who I see is not present today, to withdraw 
those remarks when he returns and to apologize to the House. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Teachers’ Dental Plan 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to outline for all members the substance of the 
amendments included in this Bill. The changes are all minor 
and straightforward and are needed at this time as a result of the 
new provincial collective bargaining agreement for teachers. 
 
The teachers’ dental plan is one of the benefit programs whose 
terms and conditions are negotiated as part of provincial teacher 
bargaining. As members will know, a new collective agreement 
was signed by the government, teachers, and trustees last fall. 
As part of the new agreement, the parties agreed to a minor 
change that will bring greater consistency in the application of 
dental plan benefits to teachers in a small number of registered 
independent schools in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for a number of years now, teachers in the 
independent schools known as historical high schools have been 
eligible for dental plan coverage. These schools have a 
long-standing relationship with the public school system and 
they have received provincial grants through the Department of 
Education. 
 
There are also a number of independent schools that offer 
alternative programs for students with special needs that cannot 
be accommodated within the regular school setting. I am 
referring specifically to Ranch Ehrlo in Regina and to the radius 
program in Saskatoon. These schools are fully recognized by 
the department and also receive provincial grants. 
 
The amendments in this Bill remove the wording that restricts 
coverage specifically to the historical high school teachers. The 
new provisions set out generic criteria that apply to historical 
high schools and alternative schools and could be applied in the 
future to any similar schools that might be established, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The criteria requires any such school to be registered or 
otherwise recognized by the department and to be in receipt of 
operating grants from the department. Coverage will not apply 
if the teachers in the school belong to a trade union and have the 
opportunity to negotiate their benefits directly through their 
own collective agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment does not extend coverage under 
the dental plan to a large number of additional teachers. The 
changes only affects a few teachers and has been agreed to by 



May 31, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1465 

 

the parties to the collective agreement. The additional cost is 
expected to be minimal; perhaps as high as $10,000 a year 
relative to the current plan costs of almost $6.4 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other amendments in this Bill are 
housekeeping changes to repeal redundant provisions and 
update terminology. As I’ve indicated, these amendments are 
required in order to implement the provisions agreed to by the 
parties to the provincial collective bargaining agreement for 
teachers and these effects are to be retroactive to October 11 of 
the year 2000, which was the date on which the collective 
agreement was officially signed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am therefore pleased to move that Bill No. 40, 
An Act to amend The Teachers’ Dental Plan Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as we all know that benefits are very important, 
particularly as they are negotiated through the collective 
bargaining agreements with the civil service, with the nurses, 
the health care workers, with teachers. As well, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re certainly of benefit to those people in those unions and 
to their families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I note that in this particular Bill that the government seems 
to be correcting some of the terminology that is used which, Mr. 
Speaker, is simply a housekeeping item and we find that those 
kind of corrections are proper. 
 
Some of the things though, Mr. Speaker, in light of some of the 
information that is coming forward about the government 
operations, I think, brings into question this very kind of 
benefit, Mr. Speaker, in the sense of how is it being utilized, 
how is it being scrutinized, and is it being done in a proper 
fashion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, we all know that from time to time, in all 
walks of life, a time rises some moral dilemmas, Mr. Speaker, 
in which some moral hazard, Mr. Speaker — I think is a proper 
word for it — and it challenges people’s integrity and 
sometimes they are found to be somewhat lacking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re concerned that when those kind of things 
happens, if other members of the group — in this case the 
teachers’ dental plan — need to have the ability to bring those 
kind of items forward to be dealt with. 
 
As we saw today in question period, Mr. Speaker, the nurses 
have a great deal of concern about some of the things that are 
happening in their workplace and yet they have fear of being 
fired, Mr. Speaker. If they raise those issues with the proper 
authorities, if those issues are found out by the government, 
they may very well be fired, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s why it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that in things like a 
teachers’ dental plan, in all types of government workplaces, 
that there be protections available not just, Mr. Speaker, for 
your teeth but for your very livelihood if you raise issues, Mr. 
Speaker, that are of concern to general society or if they’re 
concerned with the work operations, Mr. Speaker, and how 

things like this plan are administered, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, at this time, I would like to move: 
 

That this Assembly do now proceed to item 13 under 
second readings for private members’ Bills and orders, Bill 
No. 203, The Whistleblower Protection Act. 

 
Seconded, Mr. Speaker, by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
The division bells rang from 14:42 until 14:52. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 24 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Boyd 
Gantefoer Toth Stewart 
Wall Bakken McMorris 
D’Autremont Weekes Bjornerud 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert Hillson 
 

Nays — 27 
 

Addley Lautermilch Atkinson 
Serby Melenchuk Cline 
Sonntag Goulet Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Wartman Thomson 
Prebble Belanger Crofford 
Nilson Hamilton Junor 
Harper Jones Higgins 
Kasperski Trew Osika 
Lorjé Yates McCall 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to respond to the 
ruling on the point of order please. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

RESPONSE TO RULING ON POINT OF ORDER 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to indicate I believe that there was a ruling made by 
yourself that language that was used yesterday during question 
period was unparliamentary. And if you have ruled in that 
fashion, I apologize for the use of that language. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also while I’m on my feet I would also like to 
raise a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — I just would like to interpret to the member 
that I appreciate his apology. I would just ask that he would 
withdraw the remark as well. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that you asked for my 
apology for language that was unparliamentary, and if you have 
ruled in that fashion, I apologize for that language that you have 



1466 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2001 

 

ruled as unparliamentary. 
 
The Speaker: — No, I understand that, Mr. Member. I asked 
for a withdrawal and an apology. I thank you for the apology; I 
ask you for the withdrawal. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Most certainly, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw and I 
apologize for that language. 
 
The Speaker: — Now I recognize the member on his point of 
order. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday also in Hansard, and I would ask for your 
interpretation on the language used by the Government House 
Leader when he suggested, very clearly suggested that the PC 
(Progressive Conservative) metro fund and the Canadian 
Taxpayers Federation are somehow financially connected to the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus and that caucus reamed . . . is 
benefiting from some financial assistance. 
 
I would ask that you would rule . . . take those words under 
advisement and rule on that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, a second point of 
order also, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I understand that during . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’d just as soon take points of order 
one at a time. I want to know if there’s anybody else that has a 
comment on the point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I think if you will 
review Hansard, you will find that the remarks that I made 
were not linked to any individual member of this House. 
 
The Speaker: — Members, if I had a specific reference, I may 
be able to make a ruling at this stage. However, the reference is 
quite general and I would have to look it up. 
 
So I will take . . . I will take the member’s point of order under 
advisement and bring back a ruling. 
 
I recognize the member on his second point of order. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Hansard is available and I 
could quote from that, but I will move to my second point of 
order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier on this afternoon at approximately 2 
o’clock I introduced a school group, and I very clearly stated to 
the people and yourself that I was going to be visiting and 
meeting with that group at 2 p.m., at which time I did. 
 
It is my understanding that reference by yourself, Mr. Speaker, 
was made to my absence in the House, and I would ask that you 
review Hansard for your comments as to the fact that I was out 
of the House, and whether or not you actually made reference to 
my absence from the House. 
 
(15:00) 
 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, the . . . I would 
bring, first of all, to the member’s attention that rulings of the 
Speaker are not to be debated in this House. So I would just ask 
members to accept the ruling of the Speaker. 
 
If the members have occasion, or have question about rulings of 
the Speaker, there are procedures to deal with that. They should 
bring these items to the attention of the Speaker through the 
House leaders and through the Rules Committee. 
 
A ruling of the Speaker has to be final in this House, otherwise 
the House would completely go into chaos. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — On my point of order, I would like to make a 
comment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to make it clear. I am not in any way 
arguing with your ruling. You have asked me to withdraw my 
comments and apologize. I did that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have also made a ruling that you will take my 
first point of order under advisement and rule on that tomorrow. 
I accept that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question that I’m asking is that I believe that 
in this case yourself, Mr. Speaker, you made reference to my 
absence from the House even though I had clearly stated to the 
House that there was a school group that I would be meeting 
with. And I would ask you to review that. 
 
It is not a ruling. It is a comment made by yourself and I’d ask 
for your interpretation of that. 
 
The Speaker: — The Speaker will deal with that matter 
through the House leaders committee. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Teachers’ Dental Plan 
Amendment Act, 2001 

(continued) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to enter into the debate on Bill No. 40, The Teachers’ 
Dental Plan Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as going through it we realize . . . and the speaker before 
me talked a little bit about how this impacts the teachers, as 
well how is it going to impact the many other interested groups, 
whether it is the teachers and how it’s going to impact school 
divisions, that type of thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A lot of this we need to go into further and check out just 
exactly the impact on a number of groups. So, Mr. Speaker, at 
present I’d like to move that I’ll adjourn debate on this Act. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Teachers Superannuation 
and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure today to outline for all members of the Assembly the 



May 31, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1467 

 

background and the major elements of these amendments to 
The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act. 
 
I should perhaps begin by clarifying the pension plan to which 
this legislation applies. There are two superannuation plans for 
teachers in Saskatchewan. All teachers who began teaching in 
the province since July 1980 belong to what is now called the 
Saskatchewan Teachers Retirement Plan, or the STRP for short. 
The STRP is essentially under the governance of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, and the terms and 
conditions of the plan are determined by teachers themselves 
through their own internal procedures. 
 
The other plan, Mr. Speaker, is the Teachers’ Superannuation 
Plan, sometimes known as the old plan. This plan is 
administered by the Teachers’ Superannuation Commission. Its 
terms and conditions are all subject to negotiation through 
provincial collective bargaining and are set out in detail in The 
Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act. 
 
The amendments included in the current Bill all arise from 
negotiations between the parties to the provincial collective 
bargaining agreement. Most of the changes were included in the 
new collective agreement ratified last fall, while others have 
been agreed to since then. 
 
There are four discreet topics covered in the amendments and I 
will outline each of them individually. First, the definition of 
contributory service under the Act is being expanded to cover 
periods of time during which a teacher is in receipt of long-term 
disability benefits provided that teacher subsequently returns to 
teaching. 
 
Under the current legislation, a teacher is able to retire on full 
pension after 30 years of service. That 30 years can include 
periods of time during which a teacher is absent for medical 
reasons and receiving sick pay, and other periods of absence 
such as sabbatical or educational leave. 
 
However, as it stands it cannot include any period during which 
a teacher is in receipt of long-term disability benefits. For 
example, a teacher whose career is interrupted at some point by 
a year of disability would have to work an additional 31st year 
in order to qualify for that pension. In such cases the current 
provisions of the plan leave teachers at a disadvantage solely on 
the basis of having been disabled for a period of time during 
their career. This is considered unfair and inappropriate. 
 
The proposed amendment will eliminate the problem by 
allowing a teacher to count such periods of time for purposes of 
pension eligibility. In a related amendment, Mr. Speaker, the 
Teachers’ Superannuation Commission is being given the 
authority to make regulations prescribing the minimum amount 
of time for which a teacher must return to service following a 
disability in order to qualify for these new provisions. I 
understand that the commission’s intention is to prescribe a 
minimum period of 40 days of teaching service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second amendment deals with restrictions on 
the ability of superannuated teachers to provide teaching service 
without having their pension reduced. The current provisions 
state that a retired teacher can teach up to 120 days in the year 
following retirement, but only 60 days in any subsequent year. 

If a retired teacher goes beyond these limits the teacher loses 
one day of pension for each additional day taught. These 
restrictions have now come to be seen as inappropriate and 
problematic from several perspectives. 
 
There are boards of education, particularly in the northern and 
rural areas, who have indicated that they find themselves 
needing to rely more on retired teachers to provide service as 
substitutes or on temporary . . . as substitutes or on temporary 
contracts during a school year. The current restrictions make it 
difficult for them to meet their staffing needs and to maintain 
program offerings. 
 
At the annual convention of the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association last November, trustees passed a resolution calling 
for the legislation to be amended to eliminate these restrictions. 
 
As well, there was an issue about the appropriateness of these 
restrictions in the context of the province’s legislation 
governing pension plans as a whole — The Pension Benefits 
Act. Under this Act, a pension plan is not allowed to reduce a 
member’s pension simply on the basis of the member’s 
employment activity following his or her superannuation. 
 
The Saskatchewan Teachers Retirement Plan is subject to the 
provisions of this legislation and has been advised that it cannot 
legally have a 120-day, 60-day rule, or any similar rule in the 
plan. Although the Teachers’ Superannuation Plan is not subject 
to this general legislation, it seems inappropriate to retain the 
restrictions in this plan when they are not allowed in the new 
teachers’ pension plan. 
 
At its annual spring council in April, the Saskatchewan 
Teachers Federation Council also passed a resolution 
supporting legislative amendments to eliminate these current 
restrictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given all of these considerations, the parties to the 
provincial collective agreement have signed a memorandum of 
agreement that the necessary legislative amendments be made 
to eliminate the current restrictions effective July 1 of this year. 
 
The third amendment in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is intended to 
address a small number of cases in which the surviving spouse 
of a deceased teacher is unable to receive that teacher’s own 
contributions and interest from the Teachers’ Superannuation 
Plan. The principle now followed is that with respect to any 
individual teacher, the minimum amount that the plan should 
pay out is the money that the teacher contributed, plus the 
interest that has accrued on those contributions over the years. 
 
While the current provisions of the legislation ensure that this 
happens in virtually all cases, there are a small number of cases 
which have fallen through the cracks, so to speak. The proposed 
amendment will eliminate this problem. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, this Bill includes an amendment dealing 
with cases in which a teacher takes a deferred salary leave and 
chooses to purchase that period of time for pension purposes. In 
the case of teachers in the Teachers’ Superannuation Plan, the 
legislation currently provides that the government will make the 
employer contribution to go along with the teacher’s own 
contribution. 



1468 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2001 

 

The proposed amendment will extend this process such that the 
government will now also make the appropriate employer 
contribution with respect to a teacher in the new plan or the 
Saskatchewan Teachers Retirement Plan, who takes a deferred 
salary leave. 
 
This amendment is consistent with several other situations in 
which the government makes the employer contribution for 
periods of leave that have been purchased by teachers in the 
STRP. 
 
As I’ve indicated, Mr. Speaker, these amendments are all 
required as a result of changes to the Teachers’ Superannuation 
Plan that have been recently negotiated within the provincial 
collective bargaining agreement. They have the full support of 
both the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am therefore pleased to move that Bill No. 41, 
an Act to amend The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 
Benefits Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege again to stand and enter into debate on second reading 
of Bill No. 41, The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 
Benefits Act. 
 
And after listening to the speaker . . . after listening to the 
Minister of Education talk about some of the different changes, 
the amendments that will be made with this Act, a lot of them 
sound relatively straightforward. 
 
I was interested in a couple of them. The one, the second 
amendment, that he was talking about was the fact of retired 
teachers and the length that they worked, 120 days I believe it 
was, their benefits would be docked one day. 
 
And I was interested in that, Mr. Speaker, when . . . I guess a 
concern I would have on that is that divisions, and I don’t think 
. . . or particularly schools would hopefully be looking at trying 
to bring new teachers into the force all the time as opposed to 
just relying on retired teachers. 
 
I know of a number of people that have been through the 
university that are looking for a job, and they seem to have a 
tough time, whether it’s that they don’t want to be in the 
location or they don’t want to be working part-time. But 
sometimes it’s almost too easy for schools or departments of 
education to just rely on the people that have just been there, the 
retirees, and keep bringing them back. 
 
The minister cited situations in the North where perhaps finding 
teachers to fill the spots of a retired teacher are difficult. And, 
Mr. Speaker, if this is kind of what it’s targeted for, I can 
certainly see that. But we do see some areas where it would 
raise some concern. 
 
I guess on the disability part where teachers are disabled for 
whatever reason and have to miss some time, a number of the 
changes deal with that, a number of the amendments deal with 
that. And at first glance it looks relatively straightforward. 
 
I was interested to hear that the minister had talked to the SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association). They’ve 
consulted with them as well as the STA and have found that 
both of those groups are in favour of it. I just would be very 
interested in talking to some individual teachers and passing the 
information on to them to see. 
 
I was interested in one situation that I was involved in where I 
was talking to . . . stopped in a community and was talking to a 
couple of teachers. And I was saying what Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation, STF, what their ideas were and what they 
were bargaining for and negotiating for. 
 
And he said, yes, but you’ve got to realize that’s not all 
teachers. That’s not the way we all feel. And they really felt that 
their voice wasn’t being heard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this is another example of before we’d want to see this Bill 
move on any further, although the minister has talked to the 
STF, I think there are other interested parties, teacher 
individuals that may want to comment on this. 
 
One other area that I was interested in, and I’m not real familiar 
with the area, but the minister was talking about teachers that 
were out of the plan and were going to buy back in and pay 
their way in, although they don’t have an employer per se to 
match their contributions. And the minister was talking about 
the government would then match their contributions. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And that’s all well and fine, but I would be very interested in 
knowing what the cost to the provincial government will be, 
and how widespread this is, and what is the need for this, how 
large a need is there for this? 
 
I certainly realize that, you know, if they’re contributing and 
they don’t have an employer to match that contribution, of 
course only half the amount will be going in and the 
government is going to step in here and pay the other half. 
 
And I guess my question would be, and maybe we’ll be able to 
get into it in Committee of the Whole, but what is the estimated 
cost to the provincial government for the government to pick up 
their share, to pick up the employers’ share for teachers that are 
buying back in? 
 
And so those are just a couple of the areas when listening to the 
Minister of Education going through his second reading of this 
Bill that raise, I guess, a red flag with me and certainly raised 
some questions that I would have in this area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So until a number of those questions that I feel comfortable 
have been answered completely, whether it’s individual 
teachers or the government opposite, Mr. Speaker, I would 
move that we would adjourn debate on this Bill right now until 
some of those questions are answered. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 



May 31, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1469 

 

Bill No. 3 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Lorjé that Bill No. 3 — The Historic 
Properties Foundations Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to rise to discuss Bill No. 3, The Historic Properties 
Foundations Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when looking at this piece of legislation, I notice 
one piece . . . one of the clauses that jumps out immediately is 
under section 5(2), and it states: 
 

All property of a foundation, all money acquired, 
administered, possessed or received from any source . . . (or 
any) profit earned by the foundation are the property of the 
Crown and are, for all purposes, including taxation of 
whatever nature or description, deemed to be the property 
of the Crown. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that this clause will take any 
gift bequests, donations, and grants which will be then used to 
enhance historic properties and put them under the authority of 
a new Crown foundation. 
 
The concern here is that, for example, will the money be 
directed to the proper destination? I have concerns over this. 
We would want to be ensured that this proposed Crown 
foundation receives any monies for a specific historic property, 
that indeed it makes it to that structure and not go toward 
anything else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my concerns also are over this proposed Crown 
foundation and that the board will be appointed to oversee it. 
Who will be on that board, Mr. Speaker? How many people will 
there be? For how long will they be selected? 
 
We are getting phone calls at our office on that, and also on 
what I had mentioned previously. People want assurance that 
any money that they donate or bequest makes it to where it is 
supposed to go. They want to know if that will happen or if any 
. . . if the government will just say thank you for the cash and 
place it wherever they please. There has to be a system of 
checks and monitoring in place to make sure that this does not 
happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I should say that we on this side of the 
House recognize and value the importance of many historic 
property sites around Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, one being 
Government House in Battleford which is in my home 
constituency of Battleford-Cut Knife. As a matter of fact, the 
member from North Battleford has spoken in this Assembly 
recently on this structure’s importance. 
 
We held a joint news conference this week along with Mayor 
Gail Sack regarding Government House restoration. 
Government House was built back in 1876 as the seat for the 
government of the then North-West Territories. Two-thirds of 
Canada were actually governed from that location at one point 
— my, how times have changed. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we understand the importance of historic 

properties and the need to preserve them. So we can appreciate 
this piece of legislation. However, Mr. Speaker, more time is 
needed to study the particular clauses of this Bill, especially the 
ones I’ve noted, just to make sure that everything is done 
correctly to ensure that the money that comes into this Crown 
foundation goes to its proper destination. I would like to think 
that the Liberal $65,000 would be a good start for this 
foundation. Or is it just another attempt by this government to 
impose its will on the people by having to intrude on every little 
detail in their lives? 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill 29 — The Student 
Assistance and Student Aid Fund Amendment Act, 2001, be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to have 
the opportunity to speak to Bill No. 29, the student assistance 
and student aid fund amendment. 
 
I understand, Mr. Speaker, where the Royal Bank has had the 
responsibility of the student loans for the last five years, has 
passed that back to the province once again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had three children go through the student loan 
system and attend at university, and we’re very thankful — 
them and myself — that their student loans were available. But 
I believe there’s a number of problems, Mr. Speaker, with some 
of the rules that we have set up right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, number one is for a student that comes out of 
university and can’t find a job right away. I believe one of the 
things, when the Royal Bank took student loans over, that the 
six-month interest-free period was removed. And that definitely 
hurt students who could not find a job right away, or if they 
could find a job, who needed that breathing space before they 
started to pay their student loan back. 
 
The other problem, Mr. Speaker, that many times I’ve had calls 
to my office with students that were out of work for, say, a year, 
year and a half, two years, and I know there’s adjustments made 
for those students. But it still puts them in a precarious situation 
and in a spot that many of them don’t know how to get out of. 
And it used to be that many of them would see no other 
alternative than declare bankruptcy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember too, in the ’99 election, that the 
Liberal Party at that time made election promises. They talked 
about a thousand dollars towards tuition each year for students. 
And I believe the NDP promise was for free tuition also for 
students, one year free tuition. Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it 
amazing that then, yesterday . . . Nothing, by the way, Mr. 
Speaker, ever came of those Liberal and NDP promises. 
 
And then now, a Bill introduced yesterday would hand $65,000 
to the so-called Liberal Party, so-called Liberal caucus, which I 
don’t believe is a caucus, Mr. Speaker. They sit on the 



1470 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2001 

 

government side. Both the member from Melville and the 
Education minister are members of the government. What on 
earth would they need research money for to hold a government 
accountable, when for all intents and purposes they’re part of 
the government? 
 
We’re talking, I know, only $65,000 in this case, Mr. Speaker. 
But that thousand dollar promise that that Education minister 
made in the last election, that $65,000 would have honoured 
that thousand dollars towards tuition for 65 students. Isn’t it 
funny where that minister, that member’s priorities disappeared 
right after the election, right after the formation of the coalition 
government, and right after the time that that minister got his 
portfolio and his 100-and-some thousand dollar a year job. You 
know what happened, Mr. Speaker? He forgot the students and 
remembered whose pocket he wanted to line. It was his, Mr. 
Speaker, not the students in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how soon we forget that the promises that we 
make . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the . . . Order. 
Order. I would just ask the member of Saltcoats to be very 
careful in any use of language in terms of imputing motives on 
other members. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
find it amazing how priorities can change when certain 
situations arise where it could be to the benefit of the 
individual, rather than worry about election promises made that 
would help . . . promises that would have helped every student 
going to university in this province. 
 
All of a sudden those promises disappear — both from the 
Liberals, both from the NDP. We see no sight of that and guess 
what? At the same time we see tuition fees going up — I 
believe close to 9 per cent for the University of Regina, 15 per 
cent for the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) — and at the 
same time, Mr. Speaker, we hear that less jobs in this province 
all the time for young people. So what we’re doing in essence is 
chasing our young people out of this province and making it far 
harder for students to have the opportunity to go to university, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need young people in this province, and the 
sooner that government — both Liberal and NDP — get it 
through their minds that without these young people this 
province is going backward, not forward . . . and that Education 
minister should know better, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to talk about the students out there 
that finish university and have a 30, 40, $50,000 student loan. 
Those people are put back. It takes them 10, 15 years to catch 
up when they’re in that position and what they have to face is 
nothing but an increase in tuition fees. It’s a bad spot to put 
these young people in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a news release from the Students’ 
Union. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from this news release. It 
says: 
 

The University of Regina Students’ Union is shocked and 
concerned that the University of Regina has chosen to hike 

tuition 8.95 per cent (almost 9 per cent, Mr. Speaker) and 
restrict accessibility to post secondary education for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Something that I had just mentioned, Mr. Speaker. It goes on to 
say: 
 

This decision comes despite the fact of opposing Statistics 
Canada reports which show conclusively that higher tuition 
costs are restricting access to post secondary education and 
widening the gap between middle and lower class 
participation numbers. 
 
A recent Stats Canada Report showed that university 
participation rates for young people from low and middle 
socio-economic status groups has widened significantly 
over the last years. In 1986 the university participation rate 
of lower class was 13.7 per cent and 14.5 per cent for 
middle class. 
 
In 1994 this gap has widened to 18.3 per cent and 25.3 per 
cent respectively, Mr. Speaker. The continuing increase of 
the cost of tuition has only widened this gap further. 
 

It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In 2000-2001, Saskatchewan boasted the highest overall 
tuition increase at 7.7 per cent. With the increase at the 
University of Saskatchewan at 15 per cent this year, and the 
University of Regina at 8.95, Saskatchewan will once again 
be taking the lead in restricting accessibility for post 
secondary education. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan must make a stronger 
commitment to the development of our educational 
institutions and ensure that education remains accessible to 
all people. 
 

I hope someone on the government side paid attention to that 
news release, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When it comes to student loans, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to 
touch today on where two parents are working, middle-income 
people, and they don’t qualify for student loans for their kids 
because according to the regulations their income is too high. In 
many cases, Mr. Speaker, these parents who have 
middle-income jobs haven’t the money, especially if they have 
more than one child in university — and many have three and 
sometimes probably four in university — certainly cannot 
afford to pay for it themselves, have to go to the bank and try 
and borrow money rather than that money coming from a 
student loan. 
 
So if we change the rules and regulations that these students 
would fit under and make the student loans accessible to those 
type of people; I think that’s a need we should definitely look 
at, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again, I’d like to talk about the problem that 
students also have when they leave university and don’t have 
access to a job right away, the hardship that’s placed on them 



May 31, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1471 

 

by removing the six-month interest-free period. And then also 
the rules that we have in place dealing with those students when 
they’re out of work for possibly a year or two years, the 
pressure that we put on these students. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we will have actually more questions about 
this Bill, and we’re doing more checking to find out where 
students and parents sit on this issue. So at this time I’d like to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 17 — The 
Professional Corporations Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be 
able to add some comments from this side of the House in terms 
of The Professional Corporations Act. These provisions that 
were outlined by the minister, I think are very positive. 
 
We would be very supportive of these because I believe it is 
going in the right direction. We’ve talked about other 
incorporations, and limited partnerships that I think are very 
important. 
 
Some of the suggestions that we’ve made, and concerns raised 
with the other issues earlier on, apply to this. And I’d like to 
just relay one or two of those to you, if I could, Mr. Speaker, 
because I think it’s important to put them on the record that we 
not only support this, but we want to make sure that there’s 
other items that are going to be included, both in the discussion 
that will be upcoming, but also in the regulations that will be 
implemented on the basis of these amendments. 
 
One of the things that we want to do, Mr. Speaker, is certainly 
to keep the people, the professional people, in Saskatchewan, 
that are here. We also are very anxious to make sure that we put 
the conditions in place that will be attracting other professions 
back to Saskatchewan. This is certainly a step in the right 
direction. 
 
One of the concerns that I have though, Mr. Speaker, would be 
that the conditions that apply to these amendments to The 
Professional Corporations Act are similar to the ones that apply 
to the medical profession. And we also want to make sure that 
those conditions are similar and compatible with the conditions 
that presently apply in other provinces. 
 
Particularly in areas where I’m from, I want to make sure that 
the conditions are similar to the Alberta jurisdiction, because as 
you know, there’s very much of a recognition of responsibility 
between the two sides of the border. And we want to make sure 
that whether . . . a professional accountant or a lawyer or a 
dentist on one side of the border is not at a disadvantage or an 
advantage to his counterpart on the other side of the border. 
 
So that kind of accountability and that kind of similarity 
between the two provinces I think is very important. And we 
want to make sure that that is addressed in this legislation. 
 

Another concern that we have with this legislation is, is it going 
to be sending the right signals? I think the signals are certainly 
important. The signals about the advantages of incorporation for 
these professionals, as far as it goes, I think is very important. 
 
Some of the other signals that we want to make sure that come 
into effect with this, is that the confidence of the patient or the 
client to these professionals becomes paramount . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask leave, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 
apologize to the member from Lloydminster. It gives me a great 
pleasure today to recognize a number of young hockey players 
coming from northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They have 
travelled a long ways to join in the AAA Major Atom hockey 
tournament being held here in the city from May 31 to June 3. 
 
And it gives me great pleasure to see some of the players come 
from Lac La Ronge, from Meadow Lake, and from my home 
community of Ile-a-la-Crosse, Loon Lake, and of course, 
Beauval, and Canoe Lake as well. 
 
These hockey players have put on many miles, Mr. Speaker. 
And I can say that, as their MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly), I’m very, very proud that they have come forth to 
challenge from the North. And I wish you every success. 
 
What I do want to say, Mr. Speaker, as well is the parents that 
are here today, one is Louis Gardiner. And Louis played in the 
WHL (Western Hockey League) with the Flin Flon Bombers 
when he was younger. And he was quite an accomplished 
hockey player himself, a junior hockey player. And he was one 
of the, of course, better players in my community, and I was 
second. 
 
With Louis of course are other people that were no slouches 
themselves. Terry Helary from Lac La Ronge, and Bobby 
Merasty from Meadow Lake. And Bobby’s here with I believe 
his daughter or his wife — I’m not sure — Bev. And we also 
have Louis’s wife, Mary. 
 
And if I could take a few minutes to introduce the hockey 
players and have them stand. We have Louis Gardiner Jr., from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. We have Ty Gardiner from Ile-a-la-Crosse. T.J. 
Hood, from Beauval. Jermey Lovoillte, from La Ronge. Blake 
Norman, from La Ronge. Mitchell Helary, from La Ronge. Eric 
Merasty, from Meadow Lake, Tyson Crookedneck, from Loon 
Lake, And Craig McCallum, from Canoe Lake. 
 
And I just want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that of all the hockey 
moms there are in northern Saskatchewan, Mary’s one of the 
better ones. In fact she made a comment about my hockey 
career, Mr. Speaker. She made the comment at a fundraiser and 
said: what does Buckley Belanger’s hockey career and the 
Titanic have in common — they’re both pretty awesome until 
they hit the ice. 



1472 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2001 

 

I want to thank them all for coming and good luck in your 
tournament. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I welcome our guests. But once again I 
remind the member to refer himself as the member from 
Athabasca or the Minister of Environment and Resource 
Management. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Professional Corporations Act 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would like 
to pause and also welcome the young guests and the members 
that have just been introduced. It’s a pleasure to have you here 
and to observe what’s going on in the House this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to continue on with some of the discussion 
that I initiated earlier about the importance of this kind of 
legislation. And I was talking about the signals that it sends out 
to the other parts of the community about wanting to make our 
system a bit more friendly and attract the people back to the 
province; but particularly to make sure that the people in this 
province have the competitive advantage as some of the 
provinces around us, and particularly in my area to people in 
the province to the west. 
 
These signals that I referred to being very important are in fact 
those associated with corporations . . . advantages of 
corporations in other areas of business and opportunity. Usually 
you think of taxation as the main advantage of a corporate 
structure. And while taxation is a concern and a benefit to a 
great extent in professional corporations, it’s not the only 
advantage. 
 
And I would hope that some of the other advantages can also be 
worked into the professional advantages that are being initiated 
by the incorporation that we’re referring to here. 
 
Some of the other potential advantages would be for the actual 
personal protection of the professional himself, and that 
personal protection is very important as a backup to the person 
wanting to do business and to continue to want to do business in 
this province. 
 
I’ve had a recent experience, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with the 
professional incorporated dentists in both of our provinces, and 
it seemed to me the willingness of the professional that was 
incorporated was much more willing to go the extra step and to 
provide the services needed because he knew that his business 
was going to be able to be protected both tax wise and through 
other regulations in a neighbouring province. And so I’m very 
pleased to see this also going to be applied to our Saskatchewan 
professionals here. 
 
The other item that I wanted to highlight along with the 
advantages of this particular legislation was to make sure that 
the services that will be supplied by incorporated professionals 

is not going to be under suspect in terms of a different kind of 
professionalism under the new title. It’s very important, and I 
think the Act goes to great lengths to describe how the 
professional is going to have to designate his incorporated 
profession, and I think that’s important for people to recognize 
who will be incorporated, who is not. 
 
But it should not in any way give the people an indication that 
the service is going to be any different, the professional 
responsibility to the client or the patient is going to be any 
different, and I want to make sure that that aspect is highlighted 
in the Act and also in the regulations because I think that really 
is very support. 
 
In order to try to stop the outflow of these professionals that I 
talked about earlier is an important advantage of this. I have to 
note though, Mr. Speaker, that even though the incorporation of 
the medical profession which was accomplished in an earlier 
session was an advantage and perceived to be an advantage, I’m 
not aware of any documentation that has indicated that the slow 
. . . that has slowed the outgoing of our professionals out of the 
province. This being one of the advantages; again it’s not the 
only advantage. So there are other regulations that seem to be 
discouraging some of our professionals in this province. 
 
And also, these regulations lead to uncertainty. That uncertainty 
is certainly not the right signal that we want to have associated 
with this new legislation or associated with the desire to come 
and stay here in this province. 
 
The responsibility of the professional to the client is very 
important, and that confidence has to be maintained. And I 
noticed that the minister in his comments with regards to this 
Act highlighted that specifically. And I want to make sure that 
there is provisions in this Act that will make sure that that 
confidence between the professional and the client or patient 
remains without undue suspect because of the word corporation. 
 
Often the word corporation, being rather a foreign word in a 
private sense here in this province, causes people to worry. And 
I want to alert that that has to be overcome. And as this 
legislation is rolled out to the public, it has to be presented in 
such a way that that confidence is maintained and that the rights 
and privileges of the client professional relationship is 
maintained. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason that I’m reluctant to allow this to move 
ahead would be the time that is still needed to make sure that 
the amendments to this Act are in fact compatible with the other 
professional Acts in our neighbouring provinces. Because you 
know that that seems to be an attraction for our professionals 
both in Canada and also going into the United States. 
 
But to make sure that the compatibility is in place between our 
two provinces, further study and further consultation on our part 
would be a very useful and desirable thing. And for that reason, 
Mr. Speaker, I would now move that we adjourn debate on this 
amendment. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(15:45) 
 



May 31, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1473 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Women’s Secretariat 

Vote 41 
 
Subvote (WS01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Would the minister please introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, I have with me 
today, Joan Pederson, who is to my immediate left and she’s 
acting executive coordinator of Women’s Secretariat. Behind 
Joan is Cheryl Senecal, the senior policy analyst for the 
secretariat. 
 
Mr. Chair, the last time a question was asked on the 
partnerships for 1999-2000 and the year previous to that, I 
believe, 2000-2001. We don’t have the listing made yet for 
2000-2001, but I could table for the members opposite the 
1999-2000. And we tabled the other one the last time, so. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And, Madam 
Minister, I’d like to thank you for this opportunity, as well as 
your officials, I’d like to welcome you as well. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like to talk a little bit about Aboriginal 
women, many of whom face social and economic barriers to 
both race and gender. 
 
About a year ago, your department released a report entitled 
Profile of Aboriginal Women in Saskatchewan. This report dealt 
with many of the social issues facing the province’s Aboriginal 
women, such as education, employment, income, housing, 
families, violence, and health. 
 
And the report indicated that Aboriginal women over 15 years 
of age are less likely to participate in the workforce and are 
more likely to spend a great deal of time caring for children and 
seniors on an unpaid basis. And it also indicated that Aboriginal 
women are more likely to have children living with them than 
non-Aboriginal women and are also more likely to be single 
parents. 
 
What specifically has your department done in the last year to 
address these issues and what are some of the goals and 
objectives for the next fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Through the work of the secretariat, 
Mr. Chair, this government continues to work towards ensuring 
that effective legislation, policy, and programs are developed to 
meet the needs of First Nations people and in particular, 
Aboriginal women. 
 
There’s been three comprehensive intersectoral initiatives, 
including the Aboriginal Internship and Management 
Development Program, the Early Childhood Development 
strategy and the Metis and Off-Reserve First Nations strategy 
that will help to improve the status of Aboriginal women and 
their families. 
 
There are programs now available through Post-Secondary 

Education and Skills Training that we’re working on with them. 
 
The Women’s Secretariat also maintains a close working 
relationship with representatives of the Aboriginal women’s 
organizations to build their capacity to better serve their clients 
and to articulate the issues to government. 
 
Recently we’ve published a statistical update of the first 
reporting and it’s being distributed. 
 
We would participate in a variety of community-based and 
intergovernmental working committees to integrate the 
perspectives of Aboriginal women into the decision-making 
processes. 
 
And we acknowledge the important role of government at all 
levels that they would play a role when it comes to working 
closer with and addressing the issues that the member opposite 
has outlined. 
 
As a secretariat, we also would be working with those 
organizations on a continual basis to hear their issues and their 
concerns and help to put those into all initiatives across 
government. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. Madam Minister, the report also says that there have 
been some significant gains for Aboriginal women in terms of 
educational levels. And you did mention post-secondary 
education in your answer just previous. 
 
Do you know how many Aboriginal women attended a 
post-secondary institution last year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — We don’t have with us those statistics, 
and we will try and get that from the Post-Secondary Education 
and Skills Training area to be able to respond to that member’s 
question. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, I would appreciate that. And 
if you could also at the same time get me the information as 
how they compare to the numbers two years, five years ago, and 
ten years ago, I’d greatly appreciate that. 
 
Even though we’ve heard that the statistics appear to be 
improving, Aboriginal women do say that their main concern is 
lack of access to education, which then leads to lack of access 
to employment. 
 
Could you explain this contradiction in how the reports say 
there have been gains and yet the Aboriginal women themselves 
still find that that is their main concern? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I would answer in this way, Mr. Chair, 
and I think what the member opposite is saying that there have 
been strides made in access to education for Aboriginal women. 
And the steps that are taken are never enough. 
 
And we identify that as a continuing issue and we have to 
maintain the profile of that and continue to work with women 
so that they are able to access the training and the job training 
initiatives to have programs that will get women into work 
readiness areas and situations. 



1474 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2001 

 

But then the next step is when women have the skills and 
they’re trained, then employment equity becomes very 
important. And this government’s committed to principles of 
employment equity and recognizes that that’s one method of 
enhancing employment opportunities for designated groups, 
particularly Aboriginal women. 
 
So the fundament goal of employment equity is to achieve a 
workforce that reflects the composition of Saskatchewan’s 
working age population; as well, to reduce the social costs of 
discrimination by improving the access of designated groups to 
employment. 
 
Many people now are beginning to understand that employment 
equity is also good business. And certainly in the area of the 
Public Service Commission working to help in all of those areas 
meet employment equity guidelines and strategies within 
government, but outside of government to help people to 
recognize and utilize the value that is placed on a diverse 
workforce. And this gives business a competitive edge in 
understanding the barriers and analyzing the markets. 
 
So when people begin to understand it costs them and it costs 
government not to address the challenge of diversity in the 
workplace and inclusion in the workplace, then we begin to see 
slowly that those strides will also be made. Thank you, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You talk about 
your government’s commitment, and I was just wondering if 
you could explain in detail how your department . . . like the 
changes they have made in the last year to improve access to 
education and employment for Aboriginal women. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Just by the way the question was 
crafted, Mr. Chair, and I know the member opposite would 
know that, that Women’s Secretariat doesn’t do those programs. 
We would work with Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training to make sure that Aboriginal women are thought about 
continually, that employment equity initiatives are thought 
about. 
 
But in that way I can point out to the member that The 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies Act that has 
gone forward now has the institute that issues certificates and 
diplomas, and it’s recognized by employers in post-secondary 
educational institutions. 
 
Working with Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 
through the Saskatchewan training strategy and the vehicles of 
the Provincial Training Allowance and the Saskatchewan 
student loan bursary for single parents has created opportunities 
for Aboriginal women to participate in skills training. Along 
with Social Services, Post-Secondary Education has made 
improvements to students’ assistance programs. 
 
In the area of recruitment, in SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) and regional colleges’ 
programs there’s a priority for these institutions, particularly in 
the area of non-traditional programs. And a policy has been 
developed for the creation of the SIAST employment equity 

program to reduce discriminatory barriers and create work 
places that recognize values and accommodates diversity, and 
ensures fair and equal access to employment opportunities. 
 
There’s the multi-party training plan for the mineral sector, 
which continues to provide training opportunities for women in 
the North. The Indian and Metis education development 
program was created to encourage innovative and responsive 
and culturally affirming supports to assist Aboriginal students 
in achieving their educational potential within Saskatchewan 
schools. 
 
These programs are supported through this fund, the IMED 
(Indian and Metis education development program) program. 
And education is also available about violence and intervention 
strategies. 
 
The Saskatchewan Indian Federated College, the northern 
teacher education program, NORTEP, the Northern 
Professional Access College, and the Gabriel Dumont Institute 
provide a broad range of university programs specifically 
targeted to address the needs of First Nations students, 
Aboriginal students in the North, and Metis students. 
 
Aboriginal women are highly represented in the post-secondary 
educational programs, representing about 70 per cent of the 
students attending SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College) courses, for example. 
 
There’s in Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, the 
developing initiative called northern health science access 
programs, and there are a number of others that we’re seeing 
that are still in the developmental stages. 
 
There are others within different areas, but I think that gives 
you a good idea of where we’re beginning to work on these 
issues and have programs develop, and colleges themselves like 
the Indian Institute of Technology who are offering the 
diplomas and the educational opportunities. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister, for that in-depth 
answer. I was going to ask you in my next question what 
programs and services you had in place in conjunction with 
Post-Secondary Education, so you’ve already answered that. 
And I thank you for that. 
 
Madam Minister, a recent report from the city of Saskatoon 
says that Saskatoon’s Aboriginal population has more than 
doubled in the past 12 years, which has brought issues such as 
housing, education, and business to the forefront in the city. 
 
Have you seen this report yet, and if so, do you have any 
specific measures in place to address those issues that been 
identified, particularly as they apply to Aboriginal women? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — We haven’t seen that report yet, Mr. 
Chair. But we know that those are issues, certainly, because we 
know of those statistics. And when you’re talking about the area 
of housing and education, I think we’ve covered some of the 
education but would still continue to work on those. Housing, 
Women’s Secretariat is now involved with Municipal Affairs 
on housing programs, and there are many now that are 
beginning to take effect. 



May 31, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1475 

 

The neighbourhood home ownership program, and I believe in 
Saskatoon there are programs through municipal housing — the 
quint program and other programs like that that have our input. 
 
I’m sorry, I’ve forgotten the third one, Mr. Chair, so if the 
member would like to say that again, I will try to give her input. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — I was wondering, Madam Minister, what 
specific measures that you have in place to address the issues of 
Aboriginal women with housing, education, and business. 
 
Madam Minister, also with the demographic shift in Aboriginal 
population expected within the next two or three decades, 
which will mean challenges for all sectors of the province as 
they will have to find ways to serve a young Aboriginal 
population in tandem with an older, non-Aboriginal population. 
Since roughly half of the Aboriginal population is female, what 
role do you see your department playing in the coming 
demographic shift? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair, we certainly agree with 
what the member is saying, and statistically that’s been proven. 
And again we’d say that research reveals that Aboriginal 
women are the most at-risk population in our province. They 
have the poorest health, the shortest lifespan, the most children, 
the lowest labour force participation rate, and the highest hours 
of unpaid work caring for children and extended family 
members. She’s highlighted all of that for us. 
 
And again, since we don’t deliver specific programs, we would 
say it’s very important for us, and particularly Women’s 
Secretariat, to talk about the importance of gender-based 
analysis and to continue to share with all departments that 
whatever programs and policies are developing, gender-basis 
analysis is done on those. 
 
And then to say, with those kinds of issues at hand, that we 
have to also break that down further to say, at that table when 
we’re going to develop programs and policies that would 
further the goals of Aboriginal women in employment equity 
issues, housing, education, business initiatives, we also do that 
for taxation initiatives, other programs or areas where 
government is going to put emphasis, that we are indeed raising 
the levels of women and mature young Aboriginal women 
involved in all of those areas. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. One of the main issues that your department remains 
focused on is the issue of pay equity. Obviously this is an 
important issue for both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal women 
across this province. 
 
Do you have a breakdown of what Aboriginal women are paid 
in contrast to their male counterparts? And at the same time, if I 
could get a breakdown of what non-Aboriginal women are paid 
in contrast to their male counterparts. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Well first, Mr. Chair, I would say in 
1998, the Canadian wage ratio was 72.2 and Saskatchewan had 
the best ratio. We go down the chart, women, it was the average 
wage earnings of a full-time, full-year worker for women was 
27,471, compared to the male which was $35,925. 
 

So the earning ratio, women earning to men’s earnings, was 
about 76.5. 
 
Then we would take that information, and the statistical update 
that we’ve done on Aboriginal women; it would say the average 
personal income is much lower for Aboriginal women than for 
non-Aboriginal women. 
 
In 1995, the year prior to the census, the average income for 
Aboriginal women, including the 9 per cent with zero income, 
was 10,200 compared with 16,300 for non-Aboriginal women. 
 
We don’t have that same type of wage comparison — 
Aboriginal women to Aboriginal men — but it’s certainly the 
area when we’re looking at trying to develop our statistics and 
update them, that we would take that into consideration and try 
and develop those comparisons and analysis. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you just 
explain some of the initiatives that you are pursuing in this area, 
and outline them for me here today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — In the area of pay equity, of course the 
work done on gender-based analysis and then developing an 
initiative that is structurally sound and would carry us over the 
years to make certain that that isn’t . . . the integrity of that isn’t 
diminished and that it becomes a structural process within the 
employment areas and the pay levels was very important to us. 
 
What we’ve been doing is, we believe, our pay equity policy is 
well developed now building upon the respect for the collective 
bargaining process. It’s been proven to be a fair and reasonable 
approach so now the pay equity initiative for Saskatchewan 
continues to be implemented. And it covers about 60,000 
workers in government departments, in the Crowns, CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), Treasury 
Board agencies, boards and commissions, SIAST, regional 
colleges, as well as the health care sector. 
 
Many other groups that have funding from government were 
saying they would really like to look at what type of an 
initiative would be carried forward with the job evaluation 
processes, the structural parts of that in place and would be 
looking at following those kinds of initiatives. 
 
We also know that pay equity is a part of a strategy to reduce 
the portion of the wage gap between male and female wages 
caused by systemic discrimination, so we needed to address that 
and the undervaluation of work traditionally done by women. 
 
So it involves applying the principle of equal pay for work of 
equal value. At this point, we have it in place, as I said, for 
about 60,000 workers and then we would continue to monitor to 
make certain with each collective bargaining process that that 
integrity is maintained. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
Madam Minister, I have just one more question for you, and in 
advance of that, I’d like to thank you and your officials for the 
time you have given us here today. I sincerely appreciate it and 
I’m sure we’ll have some more later on. 
 
But earlier on you mentioned the Quint program in one of your 



1476 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2001 

 

answers. Does the Quint program in Saskatoon receive funding 
from the government, and if not, could you tell me in what 
manner the government does support this program? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I think what I can say is that I know 
that Quint does benefit from some of our policy and program 
initiatives. It’s a program that Municipal Housing looks at, and 
certainly through our work with Municipal Housing we’re 
beginning to analyze that. I know they’re a private sector 
involvement and the city has a role to play. 
 
But further to that, we’ll get that information to you as quickly 
as we can. I’m hearing that this is the last question. 
 
The member expresses appreciation to the officials from 
Women’s Secretariat. I can tell you I had the opportunity to be 
with them earlier today. This is a mighty group of women who 
need us all to pay attention to the gender-based analysis issues 
and the role that we play, too, lends into government. So we 
appreciate the support from the member opposite. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee 
report the Women’s Secretariat. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Would the minister please introduce his 
officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me this afternoon Steven Pillar, who is the associate 
deputy minister; Rod Wiley, who is the executive director of 
finance and management services; Lauren Donnelly, executive 
director, acute and emergency services; Duncan Fisher, 
assistant deputy minister; Bert Linklater, executive director, 
district management services; Marlene Smadu, principle 
nursing adviser; Lawrence Krahn, assistant deputy minister; and 
Kimberly Wihnan, who is the assistant to the deputy minister. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
committees. Minister, and officials, welcome. I see by the clock 
we have about 40 minutes or so today and I’ll try to make it 
productive. 
 
Minister, since this is really the first time that we’ve had to talk 
about the department — I know we’ve had one opportunity in 
estimates before, but I think we spent the day pretty much on a 
specific area of the province, so I’d like to back up and kind of 
look at the big picture today, if I could. 
 
Minister, first of all, I would like to talk about today primarily 
the overall organization and structure of the department itself in 
terms of how you organize things and get things done. 
 
On the department Web site, I see the structure under the 
deputy minister, Ms. Glenda Yeates, and then there are four 
main associate or assistant deputy minister positions. And I 

would like to start by talking, first of all, to the deputy minister. 
And I’d like the minister to indicate in general terms the 
responsibilities of the deputy minister, and if you would, I 
recognize on the Web site, there are some general credentials of 
the department heads, or the associate and assistant deputy 
minister. 
 
And I’d like to ask, first of all, the deputy minister of Health, 
Ms. Glenda Yeates, what are her responsibilities, and if you 
could, give me some general background as to Ms. Yeates 
credentials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. I appreciate 
the opportunity to talk about the individuals who are key in 
running our health system in Saskatchewan. Glenda Yeates, as 
the deputy minister, has overall responsibility for the health 
system in Saskatchewan, and has obviously a number of people 
working with her in the department. 
 
But her job also includes very key liaison with major players 
within the health system, including SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations), including the various 
professional organizations. And she has many other people that 
assist with that. 
 
Glenda Yeates, her education is a . . . she has a master’s degree 
in public administration from Queen’s University. And she 
obtained that in 1981. 
 
And I think basically she’s been working with the 
Saskatchewan government ever since she finished her training 
— first in the Department of Finance in various positions, and 
then in Health. And for two years she was the deputy minister 
of Social Services. And now she’s been the deputy minister of 
Saskatchewan Health from July 1999, so approximately two 
years. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, are there 
associations of deputy ministers on a national basis or a 
Western Canadian basis? Is there an organization or a structure, 
a liaison between deputy ministers in various jurisdictions as 
well as the Government of Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer is yes. And I’m not sure if 
you want me to talk more about that. 
 
But basically what happens . . . in most of the major 
departments within provincial governments there are liaison 
committees of senior administrators. And I know that Ms. 
Yeates has been involved with quite a number of those 
organizations over the years, both in Health and in Social 
Services, when she had that role. 
 
She also has some other roles of a national nature at the present 
time which include the liaison deputy minister on the 
federal/provincial/territorial Advisory Committee on Health 
Infrastructure. So she’s a key person there as they’re moving 
towards the Canadian health information network and related 
things. 
 
And she’s also a board member on the Canadian Health 
Services Research Foundation, which evaluates health research 
issues across the country. 



May 31, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1477 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. In addition, Minister, 
is there working committees made up of deputy ministers, 
interdepartmentally, within the government? And I think for 
example of an obvious one between Health and Post-Secondary 
Education, between Health and Social Services, Health and K to 
12 education perhaps. 
 
There are many overlaps of service programs and service 
delivery in the province. Is there an association or a committee 
of deputy ministers inside the province, intersectorally, and 
what would such a committee function like? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer to that is, yes, it often 
happens around particular issues. And for example, I know that 
Ms. Yeates was Co-Chair of the deputy ministers’ steering 
committee on poverty reduction, from the years ’97 to ’99. 
They were the ones that were working very carefully to bring in 
our Child Benefit in Saskatchewan and had a great deal of 
influence on the National Child Benefit which, I think, is 
something we’re all proud that Saskatchewan provided 
leadership there. 
 
Also around some of the early childhood development issues 
there have been very clear interdepartmental co-operation, and 
the deputy ministers co-operate; and also at other levels within 
the provincial bureaucracy, there are similar liaison functions. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Are there particular functions, for example, 
between the Department of Health and the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education specifically targeted at education 
programs in the medical colleges, the nursing colleges, the 
technical colleges, and an identification of demographic needs 
and things of that nature? Are those things an ongoing thing or 
are they ad hoc? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think there are a number of mechanisms 
that would fit into the category of the kind of question that 
you’ve asked. As it relates to the nursing, there are some very 
clear work plans that are joint Health and Post-Secondary 
Education as we develop the increased number of nursing 
spaces, as we look at some of the issues around encouraging 
more Aboriginal people to go into the nursing field. So there are 
some things there. 
 
There’s also a specific committee called, I think, the Health 
Sciences Advisory Council which includes members from the 
Department of Health and from the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education. It also includes members from the 
health districts and from the universities for . . . I think, yes 
primarily the universities and the medical school to deal with 
some of those kinds of issues as it relates to health sciences. 
 
And so what we’re seeing is a continued discussion and 
development of these co-operative processes because there are 
some major challenges around educating the next generation of 
health providers. And the Department of Health is working very 
closely to try to deal with that particular issue on a broad basis. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, in your structure below the deputy minister, you have 
associate deputy minister and assistant deputy minister 
positions. Can you help me with what’s the difference between 
the two? 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There’s a simple answer. Basically the 
associate deputy ministers are appointments of Executive 
Council by order in council. So they’re appointed by the 
Executive Council, by the Premier. And the assistant deputy 
ministers are people who are appointed by the deputy minister. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I now for 
sure have learned something today. 
 
In your structure you have associate deputy minister, Mr. Pillar. 
Would you mind outlining the responsibilities that fall under his 
jurisdiction, and as well some background on his credentials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Pillar’s list of items isn’t as long 
maybe as some of the others but they are crucial issues. The 
first one is district management services, so it’s all the 
relationships with the districts. Secondary is finance and 
management services, the managing of the $2.2 billion that 
flows through the Health department. And the third area are all 
of the labour/management issues. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And if you could, Minister, Mr. Pillar’s 
credentials. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Okay, thank you for that opportunity. I’m 
very pleased to provide that information about Mr. Pillar who is 
sitting beside me here. Mr. Pillar has . . . his education, he has a 
Bachelor of Arts from York University, Glendon College there. 
He also has a masters of public administration from Carleton 
University. 
 
He’s worked within the public service for 20 years plus, I think 
I would say. And basically he spent many of those years within 
Saskatchewan public service. And he’s been the associate 
deputy minister of Saskatchewan Health from July 1988 to the 
present. 
 
Ten years prior to that he was the chief financial officer for the 
Delta School District in Delta, British Columbia; and he came 
back to Saskatchewan in 1998, where the previous 
approximately 10, 11 years he had been within the civil service 
in Finance and other parts of the provincial government. 
 
And so basically he has been raised and educated in Ontario, 
but his career has been in Saskatchewan and British Columbia. 
And he’s provided very good service to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I 
certainly want to go over the general structure today, but we 
will have opportunities in the future to kind of delve a little 
more deeply into the individual areas of responsibility. I want to 
make sure that I have time to cover the general structure first. 
 
So I’m not just passing on the opportunity to talk about district 
issues and financial issues and those things; we will do that at 
some length into the future. 
 
Mr. Minister, assistant deputy minister, Lawrence Krahn, has a 
number of responsibilities in departments underneath his 
jurisdiction, looking at the organizational chart. And I would 



1478 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2001 

 

like you to please outline his responsibilities in general, and 
also Mr. Krahn’s credentials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. Mr. Krahn, 
as assistant deputy minister, has responsibility for the medical 
services and health registration aspects. There’s actually two 
parts to that — there’s the health registration plan but also the 
medical services. In his responsibility are many of the issues 
around dealing with the doctors and their compensation issues 
and all of the other recruitment, retention kinds of issues. 
 
He’s also responsible for the drug plan and extended benefits. 
He also has responsibility for the provincial laboratory services 
and the corporate information and technology services. 
 
Mr. Krahn has had 28 years in government service. Before he 
was in government service, he worked for the Bank of Montreal 
in Saskatchewan and Manitoba and was in some of the various 
managerial positions there. 
 
Then he started out in Saskatchewan Health, back in 1974, 
working in finance and administration. And basically he’s 
worked in quite a number of different areas within the 
department over all of these years and was appointed to 
assistant deputy minister just a number of months ago. 
 
But basically he brings a broad experience within the 
department and skills in the financial field. And he also has 
served the citizens of Saskatchewan for a long time and done a 
very good job. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister. And as 
well in this area there are a number of issues that we’ll want to 
talk about in more depth as we have further opportunities. 
 
I note as well assistant deputy minister, Duncan Fisher, has a 
number of responsibilities. Would you outline for us, Minister, 
in general, Mr. Fisher’s responsibilities as well as his 
credentials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Fisher’s responsibilities include the 
acute and emergency services in all of the areas there. That 
obviously includes the whole EMS review and those kinds of 
issues. 
 
He has the community care and all of the related issues there — 
the home care issues, population health services, and basically 
all of the things that we do that look at the broad population and 
the health of the population on a broad basis. And the primary 
health services area — the everyday kinds of health issues that 
are further developing. 
 
And one of the special areas that he’s had responsibility and has 
worked on for a number of years, both in his previous positions 
within the Department of Social Services and now in Health, 
has been the Kids First program or the Early Childhood 
Intervention Program and so he’s continuing with 
responsibilities there. 
 
Mr. Fisher has been working for the government just over 12 
years. He has a Bachelor of Arts degree from Princeton 
University. And I think he’s behind me. He also was fairly 
well-known as a hockey player in his day. 

He has served in various positions within the provincial 
government. His first few years of government work were 
actually in New Jersey and he came back to Saskatchewan to 
work in continuing care in Saskatchewan Health. 
 
Worked in Saskatchewan Finance, Saskatchewan Health. He 
also spent approximately six years working for the Regina 
Health District as vice-president of community services, and 
then returned to the provincial government in November of 
1998. 
 
Since January of this year, he’s been the assistant deputy 
minister in Saskatchewan Health. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much. When the minister 
mentioned that Mr. Fisher had some notoriety on hockey, I’m 
reminded of the member from Athabasca’s comment this 
afternoon where he said he and the Titanic had something in 
common — they both look good until they hit the ice. So we’ll 
hope that his hockey career is not the same. 
 
Mr. Minister, the principal nursing adviser, I know the member 
from Last Mountain wants to make sure that I understand that 
she was born and raised in Cupar. But other than that, Mr. 
Minister, would you outline again the responsibilities of the 
principal nursing adviser and her credentials as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. Ms. Smadu’s responsibilities include 
primarily working in nursing policy issues, and that includes 
both working very closely with nursing organizations including 
SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association) and the 
psych nurses and the LPNs (licensed practical nurse) and also 
with SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) and the other labour 
organizations. And she also has a role, a broader role in the 
whole health provider, education, and recruitment/retention 
issues that we’re looking at on a broader basis. 
 
Ms. Smadu has basically a background obviously as a nurse. 
She graduated from the Grey Nuns Hospital School of Nursing, 
and then went on and got her Bachelor of Science in nursing 
from the University of Saskatchewan; got her masters of adult 
education from St. F of X (St. Francis Xavier) in Antigonish, 
Nova Scotia; and then finally her doctorate in education from 
Nova South Eastern University in Florida, about six years ago. 
 
She’s worked within the government service for 19 years. And 
prior to taking on this role last summer, which is a crucial role 
as we see in the future of health care in Saskatchewan, she was 
an assistant deputy minister in Saskatchewan Health for two 
years. 
 
And prior to that she worked as the executive director for 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, and before that 
as an educational consultant at SRNA. And previous to that she 
was the nursing educator at Wascana. 
 
And I don’t have here about the roots for her, but I know that 
she’s very proud of her roots in the constituency of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, on the 
structure . . . the positions on your Web page that are on the 
right-hand side of the illustration, with the principal nursing 



May 31, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1479 

 

adviser, communications, policy planning, and human 
resources. They are all sort of separate standing agencies, are 
they not? And am I interpreting the structure correctly — there 
are the three deputy ministers with those three broad areas of 
responsibilities, and then these four areas on the side are 
separate agencies. Is that correct? 
 
And if it is, could you then outline the responsibilities of the 
communications department, and the credentials of the 
individual in charge of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Okay, we’ll start off with the . . . first with 
the communications area. And basically what I would say is 
each of these three areas — communications, policy and 
planning, and human resources — are branches within the 
department and they are headed by executive directors who 
report directly to the deputy minister. 
 
The principal nursing adviser has a role that’s not exactly the 
same as that but she also reports directly to the deputy minister. 
The head of the communications department, the executive 
director is Marg Moran McQuinn, and she’s worked for the 
government for 26 years, has a Bachelor of Science in home 
economics degree from the U of S and she’s served in this 
position since last July. Prior to that she worked in 
communications in a number of different departments over the 
years — Economic Development, Energy and Mines, Executive 
Council — and she’s worked in a number of different areas. 
 
When she first started out in government she was in the 
Department of Consumer Affairs. But she has broad experience 
in communications and has the responsibility in that area. 
 
The second area is the policy and planning branch and the 
executive director is Patrick Fafard. Patrick holds a Bachelor of 
Arts from the University of Alberta, Master of Arts from York 
University in Toronto, and a Ph.D. from Queen’s University. 
He’s served as executive director, policy and planning branch, 
from November ’99 to the present. He was seconded for a while 
working with Mr. Fyke. Prior to that he had worked in 
Executive Council. 
 
In 1998 is when he came to the civil service in Saskatchewan 
and he left a job at Queen’s University as assistant professor in 
the School of Policy Studies. Prior to that he’d been a lecturer at 
the University of Waterloo. He had worked in the Ontario 
government — Intergovernmental Affairs area — prior to going 
back, getting his doctorate, and going into teaching. So 
basically he’s worked for the Ontario government, the Alberta 
government, and the Saskatchewan government now for the last 
three years. 
 
 (16:45) 
 
And the third area is human resources. The executive director is 
Kelly Kummerfield. She’s worked for the government for 10 
years. She has a Bachelor of Admin from the U of R 
(University of Regina) and a certificate of health care 
administration. She’s worked as the executive director in this 
branch for the last six, six and a half years. Prior to that she’d 
worked in Saskatchewan Health as the assistant director. She 
also spent a number of years as the director of human resources 
for the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation, and prior to that with 

the City of Regina. 
 
So she’s also somebody who brings experience from another 
place and then many years of experience within the department. 
And all of these people have I think good credentials and good 
perspective and good experience to help us provide good 
service for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
Minister, I appreciate the overview. The member from Regina 
South questioned the appropriateness of asking you to outline 
the structure and the individuals with their credentials in these 
departments. 
 
I think that I certainly want to be on the record as saying there 
was nothing derogatory intended by this process. I think by 
putting these credentials on the record it is pretty clear that 
individuals have credentials and have impressive credentials in 
their respective fields. And I think it’s important to understand 
not only in this House but the people that are watching is the 
qualifications of people and their experience in terms of running 
a very, very complicated and complex department. And I think 
that that is an important exercise. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the brief time that we have I understand that 
there is work being done in the department in terms of setting 
up working committees — I don’t know what the right 
organizational word is — in looking at the implications of the 
Ken Fyke report. You mentioned that Mr. Fafard had spent 
some time assisting Mr. Fyke, and I wonder if you would 
outline the organizational structure that you’re putting into 
place in order to prepare to respond or to evaluate the 
implications of the Ken Fyke report. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I appreciate this question because it gives 
me a chance to talk a little bit about the importance of working 
together with all of the people within the province as we 
respond to a number of the challenges that Mr. Fyke has 
identified. 
 
What we are working on within the Department of Health, and 
actually within the province, is to take a look at a number of the 
issues that have been identified and work together with people 
within the Health department, other government departments if 
that’s appropriate, health districts, professional organizations, 
and other places. 
 
And we have sort of seven areas that we’ve identified but I like 
to think there’s really eight committees. And I’m very pleased 
to congratulate you on being on the eighth committee, which is 
the Standing Committee on Health which is listening to the 
public’s responses because in many ways that’s a very crucial 
part of what we’re doing. 
 
So we have the Standing Committee on Health and all of the 
work that, that’s going to be done there as we have people give 
very, I think, formal responses but also suggestions about what 
things are . . . the medicare commission got right, what things 
they didn’t get as right, and also how it will affect different 
parts of the province. 
 
But we’re looking at the seven areas. Sort of primary health 
care and rural infrastructure, how that fits together. This also 



1480 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2001 

 

includes many, many of the issues that are pan-province, they 
cover the whole province. 
 
We have another committee that looks at specialized services 
but that includes many of the issues around the education of our 
health providers and the College of Medicine and all the health 
sciences issues. 
 
We have people looking carefully at finances, accountability. 
Sort of the governance of the districts and how we can actually 
measure the effectiveness of some of the things that we do 
within the health system. 
 
We have a very good idea, innovative idea, around a quality 
council for Saskatchewan but it’s one that we don’t necessarily 
have a lot of other examples of how this might work and so we 
have a group that’s taking a look at that. 
 
We have groups working around the human resources issues. 
We all know that a very large percentage of what is spent in 
Health relates to making sure that the workers are properly 
resourced. And so that’s a key issue. 
 
We have some of the . . . another area that’s basically financial 
ones around long-term sustainability. That’s one that has many 
ties with what Mr. Romanow’s looking at too which is longer 
term financing of health in Canada. 
 
And then we also have a group that’s looking at how you 
allocate funding to Health boards and other groups within 
Saskatchewan that are providing health services. 
 
Basically what we’re trying to do is respond and figure out all 
of the different places the different issues will arise. And what 
we’re trying to do, obviously, is to listen carefully to what 
people say. And as I say, the Standing Committee on Health in 
that process will be very helpful as well. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister. In terms of 
these committees, are they internal to the Department of 
Health? I believe you said that there was some communication 
happening, but are the formal committees internal to the 
Department of Health or are they including people from the 
medical professional associations, SAHO, the SRNA, the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, etc? How is the makeup of 
these committees structured in general and specific? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What I would say is in every area we will 
include internal departmental people, health district people or 
representatives, and external people which includes the college 
. . . yes, the College of Physicians and Surgeons, the SMA, 
(Saskatchewan Medical Association), the nursing organizations, 
basically a broad spectrum of people that we know that are 
crucial to, you know, working with the health system. 
 
And we’re also obviously being very cognizant of all the 
different parts of the province in trying to make sure we hear 
very carefully what people say from some of those areas. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — With leave to introduce a guest. 
 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well it’s a surprise even to me, Mr. 
Chair, but in the gallery above there, my granddaughter, Serena 
Thompson, has come to the legislature. And we’re going to the 
Hellenic Pavilion after . . . Mosaic to receive an Athen’s 2004 
pin. 
 
So if everybody could join me in welcoming her to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much. I’m always happy to 
make time for grandparents. Being one myself, I appreciate the 
opportunity. 
 
Minister, do any of these committees that you’re structuring 
supersede some of the round table committees that have been 
struck in terms of the nursing profession? And there’s, I 
believe, I’m aware of a number of round table committees that 
are operating currently. Are any of these committees being 
rolled into the special work that you’re doing in regard to Fyke 
or they will continue on their projects independently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s my understanding that all of those 
round table type of committees will continue. 
 
Often many of the people that are involved in those will also be 
working with us as we look at Mr. Fyke’s report and listen to 
the people of Saskatchewan as we figure out our overall vision 
and plan for the province. 
 
But clearly the various issues that the different specific 
committees are working on, they will continue and there’s no 
plan to supplant them with this. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I’m sort of being notified that we’re drawing to the 
end of our time. 
 
Before I take my seat, I would first of all like to express my 
appreciation for the department officials. I have had the 
opportunity of working with departmental officials in past 
experiences on Public Accounts and at different times in the 
past. And I certainly want to thank them for their support of 
yourself today in the answering of these questions in estimates 
and look forward to the oncoming hours that we will spend 
doing this in more detail. 
 
And finally in expressing my thanks, is to also ask the minister 
where the globals are at in terms of their preparation for the 
global questions that generally are prepared in order for us to 



May 31, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1481 

 

make this process easier? 
 
So I’ll take my seat and await that answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — They’re coming soon, is the message I 
have. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, because I will not 
be in attendance at the House tomorrow, I would like to bring 
down a ruling on the point of order raised this afternoon by the 
member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
The member asked the Speaker to examine remarks made in 
yesterday’s question period by the Government House Leader 
to determine whether statements referring to the PC metro fund 
were in order. I deferred my ruling so I could obtain the specific 
remark, and I thank the Opposition House Leader for 
identifying the specific remarks. 
 
I’ve examined the remarks of the Government House Leader 
from page 1433 of yesterday’s Hansard to see if any statements 
made by the Government House Leader would impugn 
dishonourable action on any member or members of this House. 
 
While I do not find any specific language that I can require the 
member for Prince Albert Northcote to withdraw, I do ask 
members to be very careful and measured in their remarks. The 
nature of the tone and wording of remarks posed as questions 
prompt responses of equal tone and wording, and vice versa. 
 
Statements made in the emotion of debate occasionally come 
very close to impugning dishonourable motives without actually 
doing so, by using broad references. 
 
Therefore, while the specific point of order is not well taken, I 
do urge members to be careful not to impugn bad motives on 
other members, either directly or indirectly, by using broad 
references. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 
 


