















































Hansard: March 29, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 227 
 March 29, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people in Swift Current and across southwest Saskatchewan 
who are concerned about the hospital, the regional hospital in 
Swift Current. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Swift 
Current, Lancer, Waldeck, Herbert, McMahon, Wymark, 
Neville, and Neidpath, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the good citizens of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency who are concerned about 
maintaining ambulance service in their area. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the prayer is signed by the good citizens of Viceroy. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of the citizens of Assiniboia. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitioners come from Assiniboia, Limerick, Wood 
Mountain, and Crane Valley. 
 
I so present. 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 

 
Opposition to the centralization of ambulance services; and 
 
A request for a new hospital in Swift Current. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly and to the 
province, I would like to introduce very many individuals who 
are seated in the galleries. Mr. Speaker, these visitors are 
Saskatchewan volunteers. 
 
Today the Premier and I had the pleasure of unveiling 
Saskatchewan’s pin to celebrate the International Year of 
Volunteers this year. And these many individuals came on 
behalf of the following organizations to observe that unveiling. 
 
We have representatives today here from the Salvation Army, 
both from Regina and across the province; from the 
Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard of Hearing Services; the Canadian 
Hard of Hearing Association, Regina branch; St. Augustine 
community school here in Regina; Sask Sport; the South 
Saskatchewan Community Foundation; the Sask Sports Hall of 
Fame & Museum; the MacKenzie Art Gallery; IODE (Imperial 
Order of the Daughters of the Empire), Pasqua Hospital 
auxiliary, Santa Maria hospital . . . or Santa Maria auxiliary, 
I’m sorry. 
 
And last but not least — and I hope I haven’t missed any 
organizations; if I have, I apologize, and I’m sure that other 
members will correct my errors — but last but not least, we 
have representatives here from the Saskatchewan Division of 
the Canadian Cancer Society. And they were the recipients of 
the first of 12,800 pins for their very many volunteers across the 
province. 
 
The guests, Mr. Speaker, will order pins on behalf of their 
organizations to distribute to their volunteers and, in total, they 
will be giving away 450,000 pins this year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I hope you don’t consider this as a prop, but 
as you know, each and every one of us, I’m sure, in this 
Assembly came to our elected positions by virtue of the 
volunteer work that we did in our home communities. And so I 
would ask you if you could have one of the pages come and 
distribute a pin to each member of the Assembly. 
 
And I would ask that all members join with me in welcoming 
these fine and many volunteers. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the hon. member, and with leave of 



228 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2001 

 

the Assembly, we’ll have the pins distributed. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 
opposition we too would like to welcome the volunteers that are 
here today and recognize your valuable contribution to our 
communities. You truly are the backbone that makes 
Saskatchewan work and we’re proud to have you here. And 
again, welcome on behalf of the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Role of the School Task Force Report Released 
 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to 
creating a society that benefits all of its members. And without 
a doubt, education plays a crucial role in making this happen. 
 
Yesterday I attended the release of the final report of the Role 
of the School Task Force and I was inspired and excited by 
what Dr. Tymchak and the task force have brought together. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to commend and 
congratulate the task force on their excellent work, and on this 
day before the budget, I would also like to state my support for 
the strong indication given yesterday by Minister Melenchuk 
that this report will not be sitting on the shelf. 
 
I would also like to commend the task force for drawing so 
much inspiration from the motto of the community schools 
approach to education. This approach brings people together 
around their schools to build — what else? — stronger, better 
communities. 
 
Community schools were first established in the early 1980s by 
the Blakeney government. One such school was Kitchener 
Elementary in north central Regina. It was entirely fitting then, 
Mr. Speaker, that Kitchener was chosen as the site of 
yesterday’s announcement. And I have first-hand knowledge of 
the excellent community school education to be gained there 
because I am a proud graduate of Kitchener Community 
School. 
 
So let me also extend my congratulations to the staff and 
students of Kitchener for being such wonderful hosts and for 
serving as an inspiration for the future of education in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I believe I heard the member refer to a 
member by name rather than the proper title or constituency. I’ll 
check the record. But would the member please be aware of 
that. 
 

Emergency Services Building in Gull Lake Opened 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Thursday, March 1, I had the opportunity to attend the grand 
opening of the Emergency Services Building in Gull Lake. This 

facility was initiated by the town of Gull Lake, the village of 
Carmichael, and by the surrounding rural municipalities of Gull 
Lake, Webb, and Carmichael, as well. 
 
There were major corporate donations to help underfund some 
of this. And a substantial contribution came from the Centenary 
Fund, for which I am grateful on behalf of those communities. 
 
Six local contractors and eight out-of-town contractors provided 
services for the construction of this new facility. 
 
Local dignitaries, Howard Wedrick, the project chairman; Cecil 
Dutton, councillor for the RM (rural municipality) of Gull 
Lake; and Ken Wiebe, the mayor of Gull Lake as well as 
Dennis Fiddler, the reeve of the RM of Webb, and Blake 
Campbell, the CEO (chief executive officer) for the Gull Lake 
ambulance service, acknowledged the many hours of volunteer 
labour involved in bringing this fine project to fruition. 
 
Kevin McEown, the fire prevention officer from the Fire 
Commissioner’s office in Saskatoon, was on hand for the 
ribbon-cutting ceremony. And following that there was a tour of 
the building and viewing of equipment by the individuals in 
attendance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very encouraged to witness the co-operation 
and concerted efforts of many people who made this project 
possible. And I am certain the emergency services available to 
the communities surrounding Gull Lake will be further 
enhanced because of this project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Greenhouse Gas Technology Centre 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think most of us 
in the House were somewhat concerned this morning when we 
learned that the American President had said that the US 
(United States) will do nothing to further their participation in 
Kyoto and the agreements that we have signed to reduce 
greenhouse gases. 
 
He uses as the argument for this, that they will not do anything 
to harm their economy. 
 
On this side we know, Mr. Speaker, that you cannot have a 
healthy economy without having a healthy environment. And as 
such I am particularly pleased to reiterate the commitment that 
our government has made to the creation of a new greenhouse 
gas technology centre to be opened at the University of 
Regina’s campus in the next couple of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this centre will serve as a place for partnership 
between the federal government, provincial government, 
academics, and business in terms of working for ways to reduce 
the harmful emissions. 
 
Clearly Saskatchewan’s economy is dependent upon petro 
chemicals and our extraction of oil and natural gas. We 
understand the impact that these fossil fuels do have on the 
economy when they are used, and as such, we are particularly 
pleased to see that we are working towards ways to mitigate, to 
mitigate the impact of these, these fossil fuels on our, on our 



March 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 229 

 

environment. 
 
This will be one of the pre-eminent centres for developing 
greenhouse gas technology into the future. And the centre will 
make a major global contribution to the critical environment 
and economic challenges we face. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Avonlea Hockey Team Wins Provincial Title 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the Avonlea Prairie Thunder 
midget girls’ hockey team defeated the Regina Sharks recently 
3 to 2 in double overtime to become SHA (Saskatchewan 
Hockey Association) Senior B provincial champs. 
 
The Avonlea girls will now represent Saskatchewan in the 
Western Canadian Shield to be held April 6 to 8 in Regina 
including teams representing the four western provinces and the 
territories. 
 
The team is coached by Mr. Wayne Watson and Mr. Brad 
Mohr. The manager is Carol Holland and trainer, Carol 
Hubbard. 
 
Avonlea Prairie Thunder have been league champs the last three 
years and this is their second provincial championship. 
Congratulations to the Avonlea Prairie Thunder, their coaches, 
manager, and trainer, and good luck as they represent 
Saskatchewan in the Western Canadian Shield. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Athletes Win Sask Sport Awards 
 
Ms. Junor: — I’m proud to acknowledge the accomplishments 
of two exceptional athletes from my constituency of Saskatoon 
Eastview. At the recent 2000 Sask Sport Athletes of the Year 
award banquet, Howard West won the Master Athlete award. 
 
Mr. West has set several indoor and outdoor records. An 
example of some of the sports Mr. West has excelled in are shot 
put, javelin, weight throw, hammer and discus. 
 
At the Canadian Master Championships Mr. West won five 
gold and three silver medals. At the World Association of 
Veteran Athletes and Pan Am Championships, he won three 
gold medals, two silver medals and a bronze. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. West is a remarkable 87 years old and an 
inspiration to all of us to get active. 
 
The second athlete I want to congratulate is Jean-Pierre Sequin. 
Jean-Pierre, a 15-year-old fencing champion, was a finalist for 
the youth male award. He is currently ranked first in Canada in 
cadet men’s epee and second in junior men’s epee. 
 
Both Howard West and Jean-Pierre Sequin are shining 
examples of athletic excellence. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in congratulating my 

constituents and all the other fine athletes who were finalists 
and winners in their categories at the awards banquet. 
 

Watrous Farm Dealership Wins Award 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Barry Nelson from the John Deere Marketing Centre in Lenexa, 
Kansas, recently informed Brad Westby that Westby Tractor 
and Equipment Ltd. of Watrous has been named winner of the 
prestigious John Deere Performance Excellence Dealership 
award. 
 
The annual award is based on excellence in customer 
satisfaction, market coverage and operational performance. 
Verle Hearn, manager of dealer development at the John Deere 
market centre said, this is a significant accomplishment and 
demonstrates this dealership’s commitment to its customers, its 
employees and John Deere. 
 
Less than 20 per cent of John Deere’s independent North 
American dealerships meet the criteria to be eligible to receive 
this award. 
 
I would like everyone to join me in congratulating Brad on this 
outstanding accomplishment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Doctors 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. New doctors are 
calling Shaunavon, Saskatchewan home, Mr. Speaker. Dr. Ivo 
Radenski arrived in Shaunavon February 2nd of this year, and 
opened his practice at the local medical clinic on February 5th. 
 
Meanwhile another physician was also beginning work in 
Shaunavon, Saskatchewan. Dr. Wassefall is set to join Dr. 
Vogel at the Shaunavon Medical Clinic in the middle of 
February. Dr. Vogel was tight-pressed being the only doctor in 
town. The addition of these two new doctors will benefit the 
rural community greatly. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Dr. Vogel was recently honoured during a chamber of 
commerce annual general meeting for his great commitment to 
the Shaunavon community. 
 
No matter how you look at it, Mr. Speaker, the addition of these 
two new doctors in Shaunavon, along with two other new 
doctors in Rosetown, is good news for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Our health care system is strong and thriving, Mr. Speaker, and 
we have committed to keep it that way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Tax Provisions in Budget 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 



230 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2001 

 

for the Minister of Finance. The minister is dropping some very 
disturbing hints about tomorrow’s budget. In spite of a surplus 
of hundreds of millions of dollars, it sounds like none of that 
money will be going back to Saskatchewan people in the form 
of personal tax cuts. 
 
The minister says there will be no cut in the gas tax, no cut in 
the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) expanded PST (provincial 
sales tax), and no further reduction in income tax. In other 
words, no tax cuts for Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister really believe he’s gone far 
enough in cutting personal taxes. What tax relief will taxpayers 
see in tomorrow’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, tomorrow I will stand in my 
place and I will deliver this government’s new budget. And that 
budget, Mr. Speaker, will be a message of hope and optimism 
to the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And the reason for that, Mr. Speaker, is 
because we on this side of the House believe in our province. 
We love to live in Saskatchewan, we believe we have a 
tremendous future, and we have confidence in our future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That member will continue to spread his 
gospel of doom and gloom, Mr. Speaker. That’s what he will 
do. 
 
What we will do, Mr. Speaker, is provide the people of 
Saskatchewan with a positive vision of the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That response is 
certainly disappointing. The minister obviously thinks he’s 
done enough. His verbal dexterity is frightening because while 
he’s patting himself on the back with one hand, he’s reaching 
into taxpayers’ pockets with the other. 
 
Last year’s income tax cut was wiped out by the PST increase. 
This year’s income tax cut will be wiped out by higher 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy bills. And there’s more increases 
on the way. 
 
So while the minister’s bank account is filling up with record 
oil revenues — and maybe that’s why he’s in such a good mood 
— the NDP is leaving with Saskatchewan families less and less 
money in their bank account, and maybe that’s why they’re so 
upset. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Minister of Finance really believe that 
he’s gone far enough in cutting personal taxes. Why is he 
refusing to give some of the surplus that he has back to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 
wondering why I’m in a good mood. I am in a good mood 
because I enjoy living in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I’ve got news for the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, the leader of the so-called Saskatchewan 
Party — I think it’s really the anti-Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the news I’ve got for the member from Rosetown-Biggar is 
this. The sky is not falling, Mr. Speaker. People are working. 
Unemployment is low. Taxes are coming down. And we have a 
tremendous future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I know that’s very disappointing to the member opposite 
because most people, Mr. Speaker, are too busy working to 
listen to his message of doom and gloom and his Stockwell 
Day-inspired, voodoo snake oil economics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s astounding to believe that 
this government actually thinks . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Members will allow the member 
to put his question. The member for Canora-Pelly, will you start 
over. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, it’s astounding to believe that this 
government actually thinks that it has cut taxes enough. This 
only shows how out of touch the NDP really is with 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Last month the Saskatchewan Party caucus conducted a poll. 
We asked Saskatchewan people if they thought the NDP is 
doing enough to cut taxes or should it be doing more. Over 
two-thirds — 68 per cent — said the government should be 
doing more. 
 
Saskatchewan people are almost evenly split on whether the 
government should be cutting the PST, the income tax, or gas 
tax. But the message is clear — the government must do more. 
 
The income tax reductions they have delivered to date are being 
swallowed up by the higher PST costs, higher SaskEnergy bills, 
higher SaskPower bills, higher property taxes. The government 
must do more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, did the minister get that message? Will he share 
the surplus with Saskatchewan families by cutting taxes in 
tomorrow’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Canora-Pelly, in his effort to bail out the Leader of the 
Opposition, starts talking about polls. 



March 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 231 

 

I’ll tell the member where the latest poll was taken, Mr. 
Speaker. The latest poll, where the Leader of the Opposition 
was talking about taxes, was in the constituency of Saskatoon 
Riversdale. And the result of that poll, Mr. Speaker, was that 
the people of Saskatoon Riversdale resoundingly rejected the 
voodoo, doom and gloom, Stockwell-Day-inspired, snake oil 
economics of the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And while I’m on my feet, I want to say 
this too, I’m reading from the Carlyle Observer and the 
editorial of March 26 says and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 
Calvert on top of the game. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know what, Mr. Speaker, haven’t seen 
any editorials that say the Leader of the Opposition is at the top 
of his game and I don’t think we’re going to see any, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think 
we’re starting to see a clear difference between the NDP and the 
Saskatchewan Party. The NDP . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member may start over. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — And, I want to point out that difference. 
When the NDP gets a surplus, they think it’s their money. The 
Saskatchewan Party believes it’s the taxpayers’ money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — And it should go back to the taxpayers 
through tax cuts. That’s the difference, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
why the NDP are in no hurry to cut taxes. 
 
Last year’s tax cut is gone. It was swallowed up by the 
expanded PST. This year’s tax cut is also gone, swallowed up 
by skyrocketing utility rates. And tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re going to see a government that has socked hundreds of 
millions of dollars away into its bank account, while the bank 
accounts of Saskatchewan families get smaller and smaller. 
 
Mr. Minister, why won’t you give taxpayers a break? Why are 
you padding your bank account at the expense of taxpayers’ 
bank accounts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask the member to observe rule 
28 in phrasing his questions through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as usual with their 
voodoo economics, the opposition is complaining because this 
government operates at a surplus. 
 

Of course it’s confusing and perplexing to the members 
opposite because they’ve never created a surplus in their lives, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And you know, what I find really curious, 
Mr. Speaker, about the Leader of Opposition is this. As I said 
the other day, we were at a meeting of the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce on January 29. I was there, the Leader of the 
Opposition there, the member from I think it’s Indian 
Head-Wolseley was there. 
 
The Regina Chamber of Commerce talked about the tax cuts 
that we’ve had — income tax, that are continuing — that will 
have a positive effect on the economy, on jobs, opportunity, and 
growth. 
 
You know what the Leader of the Opposition did, Mr. Speaker? 
He sat there and said nothing because he didn’t want to 
contradict the chamber of commerce in the face of the facts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Last night I was in Assiniboia for a town meeting. Mr. Speaker, 
350 people showed up to let the government know what they 
think of the NDP’s plan to close long-term care beds at the 
Pioneer Lodge facility and turn it into more office space for 
some of their 800 new bureaucrats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was there, 350 local residents were there, the 
district health board was there. Guess how many NDP ministers 
were there? None. How many health department staff showed 
up there? None. That’s right, Mr. Speaker. None. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Assiniboia have a question for the 
Health minister: why is the NDP forcing seniors out of the 
Pioneer Lodge so they can build more office space for 
bureaucrats? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, our government’s top 
priority is accessible, public-funded health care. And we’re 
going to continue to build on that plan as we move into the 
future. 
 
What happens in our system now is that the districts work with 
the local communities to assess their needs and work on the 
various requirements that are there. What we know is that last 
night at the meeting, the local district administration and the 
board people talked with the community, heard their concerns; 
and this is part of a planned discussion with the people in that 
area as they assess their needs. 
 
I’m informed that the member opposite also understands that 
people aren’t being forced to go anywhere, this is a voluntary 



232 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2001 

 

process, and that this is something that is being done together 
with the community. That’s how we work — as team members 
with our community because we want to build a better health 
system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to hear the 
minister say he wants to work with the people to build a better 
system, but unfortunately he doesn’t even come down to a 
meeting to talk to the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another question for the Health minister. If 
he would have taken the time to come to Assiniboia last night, 
he would have heard from the people about what they’re 
thinking of the Pioneer Lodge and the plan to force the people 
out. They think that the NDP plan stinks. But the minister 
wouldn’t know because he wasn’t there — no Health minister, 
no Rural Revitalization minister, and no NDP MLAs (Member 
of the Legislative Assembly). So much for connecting with 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, however, my question for the minister 
is this: will the Health minister demonstrate that he’s listening 
to the people of Assiniboia by announcing today that he won’t 
force seniors out of their homes at Pioneer Lodge to free up 
space for more office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have a clear 
demonstration here of one of the difficulties with the questions 
we get from the members opposite. And that’s the fact that they 
do not listen to the answer that’s given the first time around, 
and they don’t step away from the text that’s been prepared a 
few hours ago. 
 
The local community is working together with the health 
district board and administration to define what is the 
appropriate levels of care in their community. People are not 
being forced out of this institution; they are working together at 
what are the various options to use the various facilities that are 
in that particular health district. 
 
We, on this side of the House, trust our health districts and 
those people who work there to make some of these decisions 
with the local people. And that’s why we will not micromanage, 
which is clearly the position of those people across there in their 
documents, but not in their actions. 
 
So what I would say, Mr. Speaker, is let us allow the local 
people to make the decisions that help do the things they need 
to do in their areas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not so sure who 
doesn’t understand the question or who’s not understanding the 
answers. 
 
The people of Assiniboia are the ones that are being affected by 

this decision. The people of Assiniboia will tell you that their 
people are being forced out of the long-term care home. That’s 
why I asked the minister if he would commit to not having the 
people forced out. However I don’t think the minister 
understands the question or he doesn’t care about the plan to 
clear the seniors out. 
 
So I’ll try asking the Premier a question. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier promised to reconnect with rural Saskatchewan by 
getting on a bus and driving about the province. Well 
apparently the keys are lost or he’s afraid to put the bus on the 
roads down there in case it might be wrecked. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question for the Premier is this; why is he and 
his government avoiding the people of Assiniboia while the 
district health board does the NDP’s dirty work of forcing 
seniors out of their homes to make room for more bureaucrats? 
Why is the Premier doing this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well point number one, Mr. Speaker, 
this opposition can’t have it both ways. They can’t have a 
circumstance where they say that the Government of 
Saskatchewan — in their brief to the Fyke Commission, they 
say in their brief — that the Government of Saskatchewan can’t 
be micromanaging the health care system, this decision 
shouldn’t be made in Regina. Then, Mr. Speaker, they come 
into this House and tell the Minister of Health that he should be 
micromanaging the system. 
 
The fact of the matter is this, Mr. Speaker. The district health 
board in south country is working through their process. 
They’re working with the community and they’ll make the right 
decisions for their communities and we’ll support their 
decisions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Wood River has some 
question about my bus. Well I’ll tell you this, Mr. Speaker, my 
bus started rolling — my bus started rolling — in Elphinstone, 
and then it rolled through Riversdale, and it’s coming to your 
place soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mandate of Rural Revitalization Department 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member will start 
again please. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
no surprise to me that this NDP government couldn’t spare the 
time to attend the meeting in Assiniboia last night because 
that’s their record. Over 350 people concerned over the loss of 
their long-term care home were not important enough for the 
Minister of Health to attend. 
 
They weren’t important enough for the Premier to attend or for 
him to even send a representative. Mr. Speaker, this is the same 
Premier that said he wanted to reconnect with rural 
Saskatchewan so he set up a new department. 



March 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 233 

 

Mr. Speaker, the residents of Saskatchewan have been calling 
the minister responsible for the new Department of Rural 
Revitalization and they want to know, what is the mandate of 
this department? Madam Minister, will you explain your 
mandate to the people of Saskatchewan today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask the member to observe Rule 
28 and to put his question through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I can assure the members opposite is that the office of 
Rural Revitalization has now appointed a deputy minister, 
Harvey Brooks. Harvey Brooks has vast experience not only in 
this province but across Canada in the area of rural 
development and rural policy. 
 
What I can tell the member is that the Department of Rural 
Revitalization will not have a huge bureaucracy. The mandate 
of the department will be to work with communities to promote 
rural economic development in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, today the Premier announced this new department and 
the department has been advertising for staff and they’ll have an 
office in downtown Regina. That is real rural revitalization, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people out in rural Saskatchewan want to 
know what this department is actually going to do for them. Mr. 
Speaker, will this replace SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation)? Will it replace SOCO 
(Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation)? Will it take over 
for the ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural Economy) 
Committee? What is it going to do for rural Saskatchewan? 
People, Mr. Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan are tired of this 
government dumping on them and they want to know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell us today what actually are 
you going to do for people in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I can tell the member is that the Department of Rural 
Revitalization is going to work with rural residents to focus 
government’s attention on rural economic development. The 
department is going to work with various agencies, businesses, 
Crown corporations, and other government departments to 
provide rural residents with a focus on rural economic 
development. 
 
What I can also tell the member is we are not going to do as his 
predecessors did and have a quote, “Fair Share Saskatchewan”, 
which was totally ridiculous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moratorium on Closure of Health Care Facilities 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, last year the government gave its 
commitment there would be no — I repeat, no — closures to 
hospital beds or long-term care facility beds pending the report 
of Fyke, pending a complete review of our health care system, a 
complete and total moratorium on all further closures by the 
NDP. 
 
My question for the Minister of Health: has that commitment 
been thrown out the window? Is that commitment still alive? 
Do you still stand by it? Do you still stand by your word or is it 
gone? 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask all members of the House to 
please phrase their questions according to rule 28, through the 
Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the commitment around the 
facilities not being closed during this time of discussion 
remains. We are continuing to work with the communities and 
also look at the overall situation. What we know is that we want 
to have the best, accessible, publicly funded system that we can 
have, but we also recognize that we have to do that within the 
funds that we have. 
 
That’s a major task that we’re going to be doing. But at this 
point the commitment is still there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Corporations’ Investment Plans 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, on October 24 the Leader of the 
Opposition said that the government plans to invest $500 
million — that’s half a billion dollars — outside the province of 
Saskatchewan through the province’s Crown corporations. To 
date, the NDP has refused to either confirm or deny that half 
billion dollar figure. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Crown 
Investments: is that figure correct? Is it a half billion dollars of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers’ and utility users’ money you intend 
on investing outside Saskatchewan? Is that the figure? Will you 
come clean with the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
certainly do want to point out again, Mr. Speaker, that our 
Crown corporations employ over 10,000 people in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. Our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, 
on average spend close to a billion dollars a year in this 
province employing people and buying goods and services in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with de-regulation that’s taken place in this 
province and across this country, if that member who sat as a 
member of Crown Investments Corporations Board, believes 
that the borders should be closed and allow people to come in 
and take people’s money from Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and 
not allow our Crown corporations to earn revenue from other 
provinces and other parts of the country, then that member has 
his head screwed on wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 



234 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, maybe I did have trouble with my 
head where it was screwed on, but that’s why I moved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — But I say to him, I find it incomprehensibly 
arrogant — indeed, I find it unfathomable — that this 
government refuses to tell the people of Saskatchewan if they’re 
investing half a billion of their money outside the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Do the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, have the right to 
know what’s happening to their money? I ask the Minister of 
Crown Investments: why the stonewalling? Why won’t he come 
clean with the people of Saskatchewan? Why doesn’t he think 
the people of Saskatchewan have a right to know where their 
money is going? What countries? Where? What’s the plan? Do 
the shareholders of these Crown corporations have that right or 
not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — A very interesting question, Mr. 
Speaker, from a member who sat on the Crown Investments 
Corporation Board. I find this incredible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at rates charged by other companies, 
Mr. Speaker — private utility across Canada and in Western 
Canada — rates on utilities, rates for electricity, rates for natural 
gas, I suggest that that member believes, Mr. Speaker, that we 
should sell the Crowns. It sounds to me like he’s saying we 
should sell the Crowns. 
 
No sense, Mr. Speaker. As somebody who sat on the Crown 
Investments Board, he should know, Mr. Speaker, that our 
Crown corporations need to remain vital, they need to remain 
strong, and the people of Saskatchewan want our Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crown Investments Corporation in 
Saskatchewan and our Crowns certainly, absolutely — let me 
clarify this categorically — will earn revenues outside of the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Planning and Development 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 6, The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2001 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 7 —The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 7, The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 
2001 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave 
of the Assembly to move a motion in regards to the 
reappointment of Ken Acton as member of the Public and 
Private Rights Board. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Public and Private Rights Board Appointment 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Acton has been a member of the Public and Private Rights 
Board since July 1, 1990 in his capacity as director of mediation 
services branch of the Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this arrangement has proven to be very useful. The 
primary function of both the mediation services branch and the 
Public and Private Rights Board is dispute resolutions pursuant 
to The Expropriation Procedure Act. 
 
The Public and Private Rights Board has the authority to review 
matters relating to the expropriation of land or the intention to 
acquire land by expropriating authorities in an effort to help the 
parties reach mutually acceptable solutions. 
 
Landowners may request the board to review either or both of 
the following: the route situation or design of a public 
improvement and the amount of compensation offered for the 
expropriated land. 
 
As a consequence of the similar action of the board and 
mediation services, the reappointment of Ken Acton as member 
of the board is appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As director of mediation services branch, Mr. Acton has 
extensive experience in dispute resolution. He’s recognized by 
his peers throughout Canada and the United States for the 
leadership role he’s taken in the field of dispute resolution. 
 
May I say, Mr. Speaker, in my dealings with Mr. Acton he’s a 
most impressive public servant and we’re very lucky to have 
him. And he’s from Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Acton’s experience has ensured that landowners who face 
expropriation have access to an enhanced model of dispute 
resolution. His background in administration has facilitated the 
effective administration of the board. His work with 
expropriating parties to encourage them to adopt a more 
collaborative approach has decreased the number of complaints 
received by the board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, seconded by the member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow: 
 



March 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 235 

 

That our humble address be presented to Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor, recommending that Kenneth W. 
Acton of the city of Moose Jaw, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, be reappointed as a member of the Public 
and Private Rights Board, effective April 15, 2001, for a 
term of five years, pursuant to section 6 of The 
Expropriation Procedure Act. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I’d like to move several motions regarding the 
membership of committees. 
 
Leave is granted. 
 

Substitution of Name on 
Standing Committee on Communication 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the hon. member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the name of Ms. Deb Higgins be substituted for that of 
Mr. Kim Trew on the list of members composing the 
Standing Committee on Communication. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Names on 
Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move again, 
seconded by the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the names of Mr. Ron Osika and Ms. Janice 
MacKinnon be substituted for that of Mr. Jack Hillson and 
Mr. Myron Kowalsky on a list of members comprising of 
the Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Names on 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’d move as well, 
seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the names of Mr. Ron Harper and Ms. Judy Junor be 
substituted for that of Ms. Pat Lorjé and Mr. Kim Trew on 
our list of members comprising the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Name on 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move as well, 
seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the name of Ms. Judy Junor be substituted for that of 

Mr. Myron Kowalsky on the list of members comprising 
the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Name on 
Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the name of Ms. Judy Junor be substituted for that of 
Mr. Myron Kowalsky on the list of members comprising 
the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Name on 
Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I move as well, and seconded by 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the name of Ms. Janice MacKinnon be substituted for 
that of Mr. Kim Trew on the list of members comprising 
the Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Names on the 
Special Committee on Nominating 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move as well, 
seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the names of Mr. Eldon Lautermilch and Ms. Deb 
Higgins be substituted for that of Mr. Dwain Lingenfelter 
and Mr. Lindy Kasperski on a list of members comprising 
the Special Committee on Nominating. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Name on 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move as well, 
seconded by the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the name of Mr. Warren McCall be substituted for that 
of Mr. Ron Harper on the list of members comprising the 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Name on 
Standing Committee on Education 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move as 
well, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the member Ms. Judy Junor be substituted for that of 
Mr. Myron Kowalsky on a list of members comprising the 
Standing Committee on Education. 



236 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2001 

 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Names on 
Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the names of Mr. Ron Osika and Ms. Judy Junor be 
substituted for that of Mr. Jack Hillson and Mr. Myron 
Kowalsky on a list of members comprising the Special 
Committee on Rules and Procedures. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Names on 
Continuing Select Committee 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the names of Mr. Kevin Yates and Mr. Eldon 
Lautermilch be substituted for that of Mr. Myron Kowalsky 
and Mr. Dwain Lingenfelter on a list of members 
comprising the Continuing Select Committee. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Name on 
Standing Committee on Municipal Law 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the name of Mr. Warren McCall be substituted for that 
of Mr. Kim Trew on a list of members comprising the 
Standing Committee on Municipal Law. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Name on 
Standing Committee on Agriculture 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded, by 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the name of Ms. Pat Atkinson be substituted for that 
of Mr. Dwain Lingenfelter on a list of members comprising 
the Standing Committee on Agriculture. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 

The Speaker: — Now before Orders of the Day, members, I 
wish to table in accordance with the Board of Internal Economy 
directive 22(1)(g), the members’ accountability and disclosure 
statements for the year ended March 31, 2000, and in 
accordance with directive 23(1)(c), I also table the audited 
financial statements for each caucus for the year ended March 
31, 2000. 
 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being an open and 
accountable government, we are very pleased to table the 
answer to the question. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question no. 1 is tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Jones, seconded by Mr. McCall. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
When I entered into the debate on the Throne Speech yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker, I was attempting to illustrate that the NDP’s 
characterization of the official opposition as the party of doom 
and gloom was really nothing more than a feeble attempt to 
explain away the frustration that we, that our constituents, and 
that the people of Saskatchewan feel about the way that they 
have governed this province for the better part of the last 50 
years. 
 
I talked a little bit, Mr. Speaker, about the frustration that they 
feel around the fact that there is absolutely no plan for 
improving the highway system in this province. I talked a little 
bit, Mr. Speaker, about the frustration . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, in the Speaker’s gallery is 
Winston McKay from Cumberland House who has done some 
marathon canoe paddling, Mr. Speaker, and he’s also been a 
Liberal candidate in regards to the elections in Cumberland 
constituency. 
 
So I’ll ask guests to recognize Mr. McKay. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Elphinstone 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. McCall: — In the opposite gallery, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce Messrs. Matt de Vleiger and Shane Corkery. They’re 
scions of Saskatchewan and they bring our province glory and 
honour, across this nation and around the world. And I’m glad 



March 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 237 

 

to see them here. Please welcome them today, folks. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. With leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 
take this opportunity to welcome Winston McKay to the 
legislature this afternoon. A strong advocate for Aboriginal 
people, a strong advocate for the North, and I wish him all the 
best in witnessing proceedings this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Jones, seconded by Mr. McCall. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The other issue 
that I mentioned yesterday, Mr. Speaker, was the complete 
callous disregard that this government has for local, small 
communities. The fact that in a situation in the Hudson Bay 
area, Mr. Speaker, they actually abrogated and breached an 
agreement that they had with the communities — a signed, 
partnership agreement that they had with those communities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about almost 
the virtual contempt that this government treats businesses in 
our communities with. In the constituency of Carrot River 
Valley, Mr. Speaker, there are two alfalfa dehydrating plants 
that have long track records of serving their communities, of 
being very, very successful at what they do. One is the 
Arborfield Dehy Ltd., the other is the Hudson Bay Dehydrators 
Mutual Ltd. 
 
Both — both — of these businesses, Mr. Speaker, are on the 
verge of having to close their doors. And why? Because of the 
natural gas increases over the course of the last few months 
here. Just to give you an example of the kind of situation that 
they’re facing, Mr. Speaker, in Arborfield the Dehy plant 
employees 106 employees during its peak processing time. This 
Dehy plant, Mr. Speaker, has been in operation for over 30 
years and they have been very, very successful over the course 
of those 30 years. 
 
But now just over the course of the last few months they are 
looking at closure, Mr. Speaker. And the reason they’re looking 
at closure is because their natural gas prices have increased 
astronomically. Just to illustrate: in 1998 the cost was $348,000; 
in the fiscal year 2000, it was $804,000. And they are projecting 
that for the year ended March 31, 2001, Mr. Speaker, their 

natural gas prices at that one plant alone are going to be $1.7 
million. 
 
In the case of Hudson Bay, Mr. Speaker, a plant once again 
with a long history of being very, very successful in their 
community, a plant that has provided a large degree of 
employment for the Hudson Bay area. And this plant, Mr. 
Speaker, I might add, these . . . the board of directors of this 
particular operation have made every effort over the last 
number of years to make their operation more efficient. They 
have cut, and I quote: 
 

We have cut our operational costs to a point where we 
cannot cut any further. 
 

They are now facing prices and increases that, Mr. Speaker, 
could very well drive them out of business. Once again their 
operating costs for natural gas in the year 2000 were 450,000. 
Their estimated costs for the year 2001 are 720,000. 
 
When they brought this to the attention of the Minister of 
Economic Development, Mr. Speaker, what did they get back? 
A letter that basically suggested to them that they should just 
tough it out, and I quote — the one thing in the letter that the 
minister said was: 
 

I am not in a position to suggest any quick solutions. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s very, very cold comfort for two 
businesses that are looking at the prospect of having to close 
their doors, lay all their employees off, because of these 
astronomical increases in natural gas. People are frustrated with 
that kind of approach to business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another issue that people are extremely frustrated with in this 
province is the regulatory overkill that they face every day. We 
have a regulatory regime in this province, Mr. Speaker, that 
stifles existing business and suffocates any attempt by new 
businesses to get started or to expand. We have duplicating, 
overlapping, contradicting, and repressive regulation in this 
province. 
 
I have a whole number of examples, Mr. Speaker, that I could 
relate to you. But the one I think that I know of the best is the 
one that I was involved with when I was general manager of the 
Porcupine opportunities program. And I have talked before in 
this House, Mr. Speaker, about my experience in working with 
people with disabilities in a career spanning almost 20 years. 
 
And one of the things that we were firmly committed to was 
being able to provide people with disabilities real work for real 
wages. In order to do that, Mr. Speaker, we very aggressively 
went out and we actually started businesses. 
 
We started a laundromat. We were part of the original 
SARCAN recycling program. There were a number of different 
things that we put in place in order that we could allow people 
with disabilities the dignity of work. 
 
One of the things that we partnered with the Hudson Bay rural 
development corporation to do, was to develop a wild fruit 
processing business in the northeast. We went out; we looked at 
the feasibility of such an operation. We found out that yes, it 



238 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2001 

 

was feasible. Yes, that those kinds of value-added processing 
opportunities could be undertaken in the northeast. And we 
started to work towards trying to make this a reality. 
 
It turned out, Mr. Speaker, that everything went along just fine 
up until we got to the point where we wanted to scale up off of 
the stove-top to the processing level. As soon as we went to do 
that, Mr. Speaker, all of a sudden we were faced with trying to 
find our way through a regulatory minefield. 
 
We ended up having to deal with federal and provincial 
departments of Agriculture, federal and provincial departments 
of Health, Bureau of Weights and Measures, bilingualism 
Canada. And the list goes on and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now this could very well have been an absolutely excellent 
opportunity, not only for people with disabilities, not only that 
they could be employed in a processing industry in northeast 
Saskatchewan, but, Mr. Speaker, it could very well have been a 
manufacturing opportunity for that entire corner of the 
province. 
 
But the regulatory compliance and the cost of being able to try 
and find the way through and to be able to deal with all of the 
requirements and the restrictions was prohibitive. It probably 
would be no surprise to say that at the end of the day, Mr. 
Speaker, we shelved the project. 
 
So not only did northeast Saskatchewan lose an excellent 
processing opportunity but we also lost the opportunity to be 
able to employ people with disabilities in what would have been 
some very, very quality, worthwhile jobs. 
 
So the thing that I think we have to look at, Mr. Speaker — and 
we just entered, we gave first reading to a Bill yesterday — is 
we have to look at a complete, total regulatory review in this 
province in order to make the business environment a little 
more friendly to people who want to start businesses, to people 
who want to expand businesses. And in order that people are 
not constantly frustrated because they cannot, they cannot find 
their way through the regulatory minefield. 
 
Actually it reminds me of a story, Mr. Speaker, I was told once 
by a fire inspector, a provincial fire inspector. He told me a 
story of how he went one morning into a particular place of 
business. And the owner whom he had met before and he had a 
relationship with, looked at him and the owner was vacuuming 
the floor of his business. He looked at the fire inspector as he 
was coming through the door and the fire inspector said he had 
such a look of anger on his face, it looked like he was just about 
ready to throw the vacuum cleaner at him. The fire inspector 
recognized that maybe it wasn’t a good time to go in and to 
speak with him, so he left. 
 
A couple of hours later, later in the afternoon, he returned to the 
place of business and the business owner immediately 
approached him, apologized for his demeanour earlier in the 
morning and said, you know, he said, I was just so frustrated. 
He said I had just opened my business that morning and he said 
you were already the fourth inspector that came through my 
door. 
 
And not only is this person trying to run a business and has very 

little time, but he is having to deal with these inspectors who are 
coming through the door, who are in fact taking up his time, but 
also each and every one of them has the ability, the arbitrary 
ability, to be able to close his business down. And that just was 
a little bit too much for him. He just could not cope with the 
fact that he felt that much pressure and that his business was 
subject to that kind of regulatory control. 
 
We have to, Mr. Speaker, we have to review the regulatory 
problems in this province and I think that is another reason why 
people are extremely frustrated with this government, is they 
don’t seem to be seeing anything happening in that area. 
 
The other thing that people become extremely frustrated about, 
Mr. Speaker, is a government that takes credit where credit isn’t 
due. I was appalled, Mr. Speaker, to see that in the Throne 
Speech this government took credit for a $73 million early 
childhood intervention program that had been announced 
months previous by the federal minister. These are the kinds of 
things that people are frustrated with. 
 
And not only do we have the government taking credit for a 
federal program that was announced long prior to the Throne 
Speech, but oftentimes we’ll see them stand in their places and 
we’ll see them take credit for things that people are doing in 
their own communities — for the progressive kinds of things, 
for the things that people are doing with very little government 
assistance, and in a lot of cases, with no government assistance. 
And they will stand in their place and they will take credit. That 
is extremely frustrating for people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another example of very extreme sense of frustration that I seen 
not too long ago, Mr. Speaker, was in meeting with a group of 
northern mayors, myself, the Leader of the Opposition, and a 
couple of other MLAs met with a half a dozen northern mayors 
a while ago, and there are, as has been indicated, Mr. Speaker, a 
lot of issues facing northern Saskatchewan. 
 
But in talking to those northern mayors, I was astounded at the 
bitterness that they feel towards this government and toward 
one — one — department in particular, the Department of 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management. The 
entire department permeates their everyday life to the degree 
that when they went to describe it and how they feel about that 
department, and about how they feel it controls their lives — 
and these are their words, Mr. Speaker — they described SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) as a 
colonial power. 
 
That is absolutely incredible that one government department 
would be able to exert that much control and frustrate people to 
that degree that they would describe it as a colonial power. 
 
Another area, Mr. Speaker, where I think a lot of people feel an 
extreme sense of frustration and as has been very eloquently 
addressed by a number of my colleagues, is the whole area of 
agriculture. We haven’t seen even an attempt at putting a 
long-term safety net into place since GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) was cancelled. There was a lot of lip service 
paid in previous Throne Speeches to the possibility of 
something being looked at except until this year, Mr. Speaker. 
This year agriculture in the Throne Speech didn’t even merit a 
mention of a long-term safety net. That frustrates people. 



March 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 239 

 

The other thing, Mr. Speaker, is the attitude of individual 
government members. There are numerous examples, and the 
best one I can think of right now is the response to the Throne 
Speech of the Minister of Northern Affairs. The Minister of 
Northern Affairs made some very inflammatory comments 
about us as a party and about some of us as individuals, Mr. 
Speaker. Well the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs doesn’t know 
any of us, Mr. Speaker. He has no right to make any kind of 
personal comments . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Minister of Northern Affairs. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — . . . of Northern Affairs — of any of us. 
 
His tactic just seems to simply be that whoever can make the 
ugliest accusation first, wins. And I think the Minister of 
Northern Affairs should be warned, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan do not — do not — accept that kind of behaviour 
and it will backfire on him. 
 
In summation, Mr. Speaker, what did we hear from the Throne 
Speech? Really not a lot. What it amounts to is more 
government, bigger government, and certainly more intrusive 
government. Government that is solely committed to the 
concept of keeping dependent in order that they can maintain 
control, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I indicated earlier, I spent almost 20 years working with 
people with disabilities, Mr. Speaker. And it’s through that 
experience that I learned there really is only one way that 
people can experience respect and dignity, and that is through 
independence. 
 
And that is what we believe in, Mr. Speaker, in people being 
given the ability and the right to be able to go out and 
self-determine and for themselves decide how they are going to 
spend their money, make the decisions that will make their 
businesses successful, make the decisions that will make their 
communities successful. People are frustrated at not being 
allowed to do that. They’re frustrated at government being 
allowed in the everyday aspect of their lives. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we will give credit where credit is due and 
we will respect what communities can accomplish; we will 
respect the ability of communities to be able to do good things. 
And I do want to mention a couple of those, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In Nipawin, we’ve seen over the last week or so a couple of 
highlights in the community. The first one is the very recent 
awarding to the town of Nipawin, of the Displayco Canada Ltd. 
Award for promotion and marketing, for a campaign that they 
undertook in the year 2000. 
 
This award, Mr. Speaker, is given for communities that foster a 
better environment for tourism and that work together with 
partners in order to coordinate their efforts. And the economic 
development officer from Nipawin, Sherry Michalyca, accepted 
this award on the behalf of the town of Nipawin last week at a 
conference. And I want to extend my congratulations to them 
for having done such a wonderful job in the area of tourism, and 
a job to the degree where it’s been recognized with an award of 

that calibre. 
 
Newfield Seeds in Nipawin as well just very recently, Mr. 
Speaker, was acknowledged by the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Agrologists, and they were presented the AGEX (Agricultural 
Excellence) award. And the AGEX award is designed to 
recognize organizations, agencies, or agricultural businesses 
that are committed to providing excellence in agriculture. 
 
Newfield Seeds is an organization and a business, Mr. Speaker, 
that was originally founded by a Nipawin seed grower back in 
the ’30s. They have since grown and become very, very 
successful and they have developed quite a reputation, Mr. 
Speaker, for forage and turf seed species. These are two 
examples of businesses in communities that are doing very, 
very well and there are many, many other examples of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I would have to say, given that this 
government has shown no vision, no sense of direction, and the 
best that it can do is plagiarize the hard work and the effort of 
its citizens and communities, I cannot support the Speech from 
the Throne, and would hope that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
They wouldn’t be able to either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m very pleased to be able to enter into this Throne 
Speech debate on behalf of the residents of Saskatoon 
Greystone. It’s a great privilege for me to represent the good 
people of Saskatoon Greystone constituency, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’d like to begin by congratulating you, Mr. Speaker, on your 
election. I know you will serve this Chamber with dignity, with 
integrity, and with wisdom. I also want to extend my sincere 
congratulations to the member for Regina Sherwood on his 
election as our Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve just gone through two exciting by-elections 
in this province, and the results have given our government 
renewed strength. The voters of Regina Elphinstone and 
Saskatoon Riversdale have given us a strong mandate to move 
forward on a progressive agenda. I’m proud to have the member 
for Regina Elphinstone join our government caucus and I’m 
especially proud to have our Premier lead us as the new 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Our government’s on the move and we are working to build a 
better future for our children and for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this afternoon I want to touch on six important 
areas of government policy: taxation, labour, education, 
post-secondary education, the battle against poverty in this 
province, and the environment. 
 
And first, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about taxation, 
because this year marks the beginning of an important change 
in Saskatchewan’s income tax system. And there are two 
changes that I’m particularly pleased about. The first change is 
the increase in our tax credits, Mr. Speaker. The basic 
provincial tax credit for a single person rises to $8,000, which 
means no provincial income tax will be paid on the first $8,000 
of earnings. 
 



240 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, families will also receive an extra break in terms 
of a tax credit. The provincial child tax credit will be set at 
$1,500 per child, effective this year. In addition, the seniors will 
benefit by way of an extra tax credit of $500 over and above the 
$8,000 tax credit that I made reference to earlier. 
 
So these are positive changes, Mr. Speaker, designed to help 
build a fairer tax system in our province. 
 
The second change is the one I’m the most excited about Mr. 
Speaker, and that is that the Saskatchewan flat tax introduced 
by the Progressive Conservative government in the 1980s is 
gone, Mr. Speaker. And this was an extremely unfair tax, and 
our government recognized that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fiscal dilemma that the previous government left us in 
made it difficult to eliminate this at first. But as we get our 
fiscal house in order, last year we cut the flat tax by half, and 
this year, Mr. Speaker, it’s gone completely. 
 
These two positive changes explain why over 50,000 taxpayers 
will no longer have to pay provincial income tax in our 
province. That’s an important achievement, and one that I want 
to commend the Minister of Finance on. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the important matter of 
labour standards, and the exciting announcement in the Throne 
Speech that The Labour Standards Act will be amended to 
extend maternity leave and paternity leave to 50 weeks, up from 
the current level of 30 weeks. This initiative is in conjunction 
with positive federal government changes to employment 
insurance, which extend maternity and paternity leave benefits. 
 
The changes to the provincial Labour Standards Act will ensure 
that employers hold jobs for parents during their one year of 
leave from the workplace. We believe these important changes 
will support families and enhance the first year of children’s 
lives by allowing mom or dad to spend more time at home with 
their newborn infant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my efforts to represent my constituents, I’m 
advocating two other important changes to The Labour 
Standards Act. First, Mr. Speaker, I would like to see an 
amendment to The Labour Standards Act that will provide 
every Saskatchewan resident with a statutory holiday in the 
third week of February. At the present time, there is no statutory 
holiday between January 1 — New Year’s Day — and Easter 
and I believe the time has come to put such a holiday in place. 
 
Secondly, I believe the time has come to apply The Labour 
Standards Act to industrial agriculture operations, such as hog 
barns. Workers in large hog barns should not be exempted from 
The Labour Standards Act as they are at present. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to discuss public education, which is of 
keen interest to many residents of my constituency. 
 
Last year, you will recall that our government increased funding 
for K to 12 education by 4.7 per cent, four and three-quarters 
per cent, Mr. Speaker. And we also took some important steps 
to improve teacher salaries in our province. Important school 
construction initiatives were cost shared with local school 
divisions including, in my own constituency, the completion of 

renovations for the Brunskill Elementary School. And also, in 
Saskatoon, a commitment to two new elementary schools in the 
Silverspring neighbourhood. 
 
We’ve much more to do, Mr. Speaker, and the Throne Speech 
makes references to some of our priorities. One priority that 
will be important to Saskatoon and other urban centres is 
increasing the number of community schools and extending the 
community school initiative to the high school level. This is a 
progressive move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Put our actions in context with the proposals of the official 
opposition in the September 1999 provincial election. What did 
the opposition promise for education spending during that 
election campaign, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well first of all, they said that education spending would be 
frozen, Mr. Speaker. And then, already under some criticism for 
that comment, some of them suggested that the freeze really 
meant keeping up with the provincial rate of inflation. And 
frankly, at the end of the election, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 
that anybody in the province knew which they meant. Were 
they talking about zero per cent or an increase of 1 to 2 per 
cent? But whichever they meant, Mr. Speaker, the reality is that 
our provincial government on this side of the House has made 
an investment in public education that far exceeds any of the 
commitments made by members of the official opposition. 
 
Our 4.7 per cent increase for public education is more than 
double even the best estimates that could be made of what the 
provincial . . . of what the official opposition suggested during 
the last campaign. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why — it’s our commitment to public 
services and an investment in public services — it’s one of the 
key reasons why members on this side of the House were 
elected by the people of Saskatchewan. And the members on 
the other side of the House that can only talk about tax 
increases . . . or tax cuts, but never talk about an investment in 
public services, that’s why they’re the official opposition, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, in the area of education, 
one of the most important issues that we need to address in our 
cities is the issue of children not in school. And I was pleased to 
see that the Role of the School Task Force began to examine 
this issue and offer recommendations on it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In Saskatoon I think we have an important social problem 
emerging, that all members of this Assembly need to turn their 
minds to, and that is the difficult problem of an increasing 
number of young people under 16 years of age not attending 
school. Mr. Speaker, community groups in my home city 
estimate that as many as a thousand children under age 16 are 
not attending school on a regular basis. And this has to be of 
great concern to all of us in this Assembly. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is not simply an 
education problem. It is a problem for our whole community 
and our whole province, Mr. Speaker, that every level of 
government and every community organization needs to turn its 



March 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 241 

 

mind to. And of course, one of the main reasons why children 
are not in school is because of the difficult family 
circumstances that many of them face. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to mention two things that we can do 
that will begin to address this issue. First we need to establish a 
province-wide tracking system, using Saskatchewan health card 
numbers to identify when children of school age are not in 
school. 
 
Without such a tracking system, children fall between the 
cracks. They are presumed by their last school to have moved to 
another neighbourhood or another community. They are 
presumed to be in school when in fact they are not. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, we need to mount more alternative 
education programs that are attached to our school divisions and 
that provide a small classroom setting designed to meet the 
needs of children who have left the school system. These 
classrooms may not always be in a school building. They may 
be in a different setting where students who have left school are 
comfortable coming. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we need to make this social investment, 
because the consequences of not investing in these children are 
to see many of these children move into a situation where they 
can’t obtain employment. They’re more likely to end up on 
social assistance. They are more likely to end up as victims in 
our justice system, Mr. Speaker. And we are going to end up, if 
we don’t invest in these children by way of public education, 
we’ll end up needing to fork out dollars in social welfare and in 
the prison system instead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say that what we need to do in this House is make a 
commitment that we’ll invest in every one of these children and 
that not a single one of them will fall through the cracks as has 
been the case up to now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak . . . I want to talk for a 
moment about an institution that’s very important to my 
constituents, and that’s the University of Saskatchewan. The 
university is one of our provincial jewels, Mr. Speaker. Like 
other institutions in our community, it faced the reality of 
restraint in the first half of the 1990s as our government 
struggled to deal with a $15 billion debt left behind by the PC 
(Progressive Conservative) government. 
 
I’m pleased, Mr. Speaker, that in the last three years our 
government has found the resources to invest significantly in 
our university. Operating grants to the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) have increased substantially — 5 per cent 
increase in fiscal year 1998-99; 5.18 per cent increase in fiscal 
year 1999-2000; and 4.33 per cent increase in the fiscal year 
that’s just ending. 
 
Our goal is to help strengthen the University of Saskatchewan 
and post-secondary education in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There have also been very significant capital investments on our 
campus, including renovations to the Thorvaldson Building, 
important renovations at the College of Agriculture, 

construction of the new Kinesiology Building, and of course the 
investment in the synchrotron. 
 
Construction activity on the U of S campus has been at an 
all-time high. There is more to do, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll be 
working with my government colleagues to ensure we maintain 
a strong financial commitment to post-secondary education in 
our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a great many 
students in my riding. And of course, one of the things that’s 
important to them is summer employment. And I’m therefore 
very pleased that our Premier announced last month, what is in 
effect a tripling of our financial commitment to student summer 
employment in this province. 
 
Fifteen hundred new student jobs will be created this summer 
under a provincial government initiative called the centennial 
summer student employment program. These jobs are in 
addition to the existing 700 student jobs in executive 
government and Crown corporations, for a total of 22,000 
summer jobs for Saskatchewan students. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — The program will be open to all students 16 
years of age and older who will be attending school in the fall. 
Wages will be subsidized by the province at 75 per cent and up 
to $4,000 per job. Good news for young people in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the pressing concern of poverty 
in our communities and speak about the progress being made 
and the challenges that lie ahead. Yesterday the member for 
North Battleford stated in this Assembly that Saskatchewan has 
the second highest child poverty rate in Canada. And I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that that member is in error. 
 
I have here data published last year by the Canadian Council on 
Social Development showing, most importantly, that 
Saskatchewan’s rate of child poverty is declining. And 
secondly, that Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, New 
Brunswick, and Newfoundland have a higher rate of child 
poverty than Saskatchewan. Our rate is essentially the same as 
that of British Columbia, approximately 19 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The progress Saskatchewan has made in reducing its rate of 
poverty among children has not come about by accident but 
rather by careful government planning. Social assistance 
caseloads have declined for six consecutive years as a result of 
our policies, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve seen a drop of over 
19,000 people in Saskatchewan who were relying on assistance. 
So 19,000 fewer people were relying on social assistance than 
in 1994. 
 
Rather than adopting a work fair model which is I’m certain 
what the members opposite would have done as the PC 
government of Grant Devine did, we’ve chosen instead to create 
real jobs and real training opportunities for Saskatchewan 
residents. 



242 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2001 

 

Last year 15,000 training and employment service opportunities 
for current or former social assistance recipients were put in 
place. Our government has expanded pay equity. And we’re one 
of only three provincial governments in all of Canada to 
actively invest in social housing. 
 
And three years ago, Mr. Speaker, we launched the building 
independence program to give support to low-income working 
families. And as a result, family health benefits are now 
available to 23,000 families with children, and the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement supplements the 
monthly income earned by approximately 5,900 low-income 
working families supporting children. Mr. Speaker, this is real 
progress but much remains to be done. 
 
We need to eliminate the needs for food banks in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, and be the first province in Canada to do so. And 
we need to bring the rate of child poverty to zero in this 
province and be the first province in Canada to do so. 
 
Well how can we do this, Mr. Speaker? I propose four next 
steps in the journey towards that goal. First, Mr. Speaker, I 
suggest the implementation of a disability pension in 
Saskatchewan where the monthly benefit above the Statistics 
Canada poverty line for those persons in Saskatchewan with a 
significant physical, intellectual, or emotional disability. Thirty 
per cent of those on social assistance have a significant 
disability, Mr. Speaker, and I say it’s time to take those folks up 
to the poverty line and above it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I propose that we need to move towards 
a higher minimum wage in this province. It’s time, in my 
personal judgment, for a significant increase in our minimum 
wage. 
 
Those who work 40 hours per week ought to be able to earn 
enough to at least reach a standard of living equivalent to the 
Statistics Canada poverty line, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that would mean taking the minimum wage in this province to 
7.20. 
 
Now we can’t do that, Mr. Speaker, this year or next. But I 
suggest that over a four-year period we consistently move the 
minimum wage up in a staged manner until it does reach the 
Statistics Canada poverty line. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a third initiative that I 
believe we need to make and that is we need, in my judgment, 
to target neighbourhoods where unemployment is very high, 
particularly in our large urban centres, and focus on creating 
employment opportunities right in those neighbourhoods. 
 
And we’re seeing some success in my home city of Saskatoon 
where a community development corporation by the name of 
Quint formed several years ago and has worked with our 
provincial government developing just such opportunities. But 
we need to duplicate that effort in every neighbourhood, Mr. 
Speaker, where poverty is high and unemployment is high, and 
create employment opportunities in that neighbourhood — 
opportunities like retrofitting of homes, new home construction, 
recycling, energy conservation initiatives, Mr. Speaker. Those 

kind of opportunities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, finally, I think we must recognize that while 
our primary emphasis should be on new job creation that some 
people, Mr. Speaker, will always be in circumstances where 
their needs cannot be addressed except through the income 
security systems that we have in place. And I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, and this is my personal view on behalf of my 
constituents, I think it’s time in this House that we increase the 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit; that persons on social assistance 
had their eligibility for at least partial access to bus passes 
reinstated. In other words, let’s give those on social assistance 
the ability to access transportation resources, Mr. Speaker, on a 
daily basis so they can move around the city. 
 
I believe it is time, Mr. Speaker, that the current monthly 
allowance for food, clothing, and personal items was increased. 
I think it should go from 195 up to at least 225, Mr. Speaker. So 
a reinstatement of the transportation allowance for those on 
social assistance, and an increase in the food, clothing, and 
personal allowance are, in my judgment, called for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are four suggestions that I have in terms of 
how we might address issues of poverty. 
 
I also want to say, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, on an 
ethical issue that is also in my judgment an issue around 
poverty, that I have never been a supporter of video lottery 
terminals. And it is my personal view that it is time for our 
province to phase out video lottery terminals over a five- or 
six-year period. And again, Mr. Speaker, I’m speaking in terms 
of my personal opinion and not necessarily government policy. 
It not clearly government policy, but I believe it’s what should 
be done. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to another issue that is of deep 
interest to me and that is with respect to environmental policy 
and I want to in my closing remarks address a number of issues 
related to the environment. 
 
And I want to say to begin with, Mr. Speaker, that I had the 
pleasure in campaigning during the last election on three 
personal platforms that I made a commitment to my 
constituents on, Mr. Speaker. And I just want to share that 
commitment with other members of the Assembly. 
 
I said to my constituents that I’d do my best to advance wind 
power and energy conservation within our government, and 
have our government invest in those things. But if you look at 
my election literature all members can see that commitment. I 
promised, Mr. Speaker, that I would work for a more 
environmentally sustainable forestry policy as a part of our 
government, as well as of course our government’s commitment 
to expanding forestry jobs in this province. 
 
And I also said, Mr. Speaker, that I would work for an 
environmental clean-up program as part of the Department of 
Environment. And I’m happy to say today, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to inform my constituents that progress has been made 
on each of those fronts by our provincial government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 243 

 

Mr. Prebble: — And I want to thank the Minister of SERM, 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management, and the 
Minister of Finance, and all my caucus colleagues for their 
support in this regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might first point out that you’ll note in the 
Throne Speech our government’s commitment on page 5 of that 
speech to wind power and energy conservation where the 
speech says: 
 

My government will invest in wind power as a safe 
renewable energy resource and we will develop programs 
aimed at energy conservation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say to my constituents, and they’ll 
see it in the budget tomorrow, we’re making progress on this 
front. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And Mr. Deputy Speaker, none too soon, 
because we face two major challenges. One is an increase in 
natural gas prices that is beyond the control of our government, 
Mr. Speaker, because we are simply purchasing natural gas and 
providing it to consumers of SaskEnergy at exactly the price we 
purchase it, which is a point, I might say, that is never 
acknowledged by members of the opposition. 
 
But we need to address rising energy costs and help cushion 
Saskatchewan consumers from those, and the best way to do 
that is through an energy conservation program, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And secondly, we need to address the urgent issue of climate 
change. The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change is warning all countries that unless action is 
taken many parts of the world will face very severe 
consequences. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to say a 
word about what these consequences are because in the medium 
term these will be of grave concern to all residents of Canada. 
 
(15:15) 
 
These consequences include more cyclones and tornadoes, more 
droughts and flooding, reduced crop yields in many parts of the 
world, rising sea levels and displacement of populations in 
coastal areas. The United Nations is estimating that unless CO2 
emissions are sharply reduced, 50 per cent — note this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — 50 per cent of the world’s alpine glaciers 
will disappear in the next hundred years. Scientists also worry 
there will be greater risk from diseases like malaria as 
disease-carrying mosquitoes widen their reach. 
 
So clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve got to pursue safe 
renewable energy development and energy conservation, not 
just to shield Saskatchewan consumers from higher energy 
prices — and that’s got to be a top priority — but also to play 
our role in combating climate change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And unlike the government in the United States, which is 
signalling that they’re not going to play a role in the process, we 
on this side of the House are, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, secondly I made 
reference to the fact that I promised my constituents in the last 
election that I would work with my government colleagues to 
try to implement an environmental clean-up initiative. And I’m 
pleased to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that is now being 
done. 
 
Our government in this past year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has 
invested $1.7 million in an important environmental clean-up 
initiative. Some of that money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is being 
used to clean up six large contaminated sites in the province, 
including the former Interprovincial Co-operatives Limited 
herbicide plant in Saskatoon. And another portion of the funds 
are being used to clean up gas stations that have been 
abandoned; they’re in effect called orphan sites and for which 
no one is taking responsibility. 
 
And third, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I promised my constituents that 
I would work for a more sustainable forest policy. And I’m glad 
to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the first changes in this regard 
can be seen in the very good compromise that’s being 
developed in the Weyerhaeuser forest management area, where 
we’re seeing both an increase in employment opportunities for 
people working with Weyerhaeuser, but we’re also seeing some 
other important initiatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We’re seeing a significant commitment to a protected area 
program within that forest management area, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Four areas that are being targeted for set aside. One is 
the Wapawekka Hills; one is a large area called Seager Wheeler 
which are now part of the representative areas network. 
 
And then two other areas, Mr. Speaker, on which a no-logging 
order has been issued. One is the magnificence area north of 
Dore Lake with its gorgeous beaches, amazing biodiversity, a 
very important wildlife resource there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
many unique plants. This area has a no-logging order issued for 
it and it’s targeted to be in our representative areas network, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And another area, northwest of Dore, in fact 
north of Smoothstone Lake, the Budd Lake area that is also 
targeted for no logging, and I hope will be included in the 
representative areas network. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in addition to that there is a 1 
kilometre special management zone being set up around Dore 
Lake and Smoothstone Lake where the community and 
Weyerhaeuser will work together in developing a cutting plan 
that is agreeable to all users of the forest, and that will be 
designed to protect important esthetic areas and areas that are 
biologically sensitive but at the same time will allow cutting to 
take place. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I invite anybody to 
look at that new 20-year management plan with both the job 
opportunities that are available and also the environmental 
safeguards that are there. 
 
The third one I want to mention is with respect to road 
development, because we’re asking Weyerhaeuser to narrow 
their right-of-way on their roads, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to 
phase out their use of landings for log loading so that we don’t 
fragment the forest floor and so that we allow our trees, once 
they’ve been cut, to regenerate without finding that landing 



244 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2001 

 

areas and unnecessarily wide road right-of-ways have 
compacted the forest and not allowing the regeneration that is 
required. 
 
So I think we see some very important compromises there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that protect jobs and the environment. And I 
hear the member for Cannington expressing concern about our 
replanning program, and I’m pleased to tell him, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the commitment in this agreement is for full 
reforestation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to address 
two other environmental issues that are of concern to me, and I 
want to make it clear at the outset, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
I’m now speaking on behalf of my constituents expressing my 
own opinion and not that of the government. 
 
But I think there are two other important environmental issues 
that we need to address in this province. And one of them is 
with respect to our use of pesticides, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
think it’s time for us to begin to develop a plan for reducing 
pesticide use in this province, and doing so from the point of 
view of protecting our farmers, protecting homeowners in our 
urban centres and protecting the health of Saskatchewan 
residents, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Members of the Assembly and the public need to realize that we 
are using many pesticides that have not been adequately tested 
by the Government of Canada or, for that matter, by any other 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I believe that our 
communities face a cancer risk and a risk with respect to 
reproductive orders from some of the unsafe chemicals that are 
currently in use today. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I propose that our government 
establish an office of organic agriculture and organic gardening 
that is designed to provide farmers with information about how 
they can make the transition to organic production and is 
available to advise urban dwellers about how they might make 
the transition in their own backyards to gardening methods that 
don’t involve the use of pesticides, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I also believe that we should prohibit the use of pesticides 
around provincial government buildings, municipal buildings, 
schools, daycare centres, hospitals, parks, playgrounds, and all 
other public spaces frequented by children, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say that I believe we 
need a comprehensive strategy to reduce the pollutants in 
Saskatchewan surface water, including negotiation with Alberta 
to reduce industrial pollution of its rivers; implementing stricter 
rules prohibiting aerial spraying close to important water 
bodies; and cleanup of pollution caused by all drilling activities; 
cleanup of dumpsites on or near aquifers; and fencing off where 
practical, surface water areas that are a source of critical 
drinking water and that are being polluted with livestock waste. 
I think we need to look at all these measures, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I want to make two other comments with respect to the 

environment before I close. And one is with respect to uranium 
mining, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I just want to assure my 
constituents that I continue to hold and advocate the view that it 
would be best for our province and for our world if we 
gradually phased out uranium mining in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know my views are a minority in 
the House on this matter, but I ask members opposite to respect 
them, as colleagues on this side do, I know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And I want to say that I hold this view for four important 
reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First of all because the problem 
of disposing of the high-level radioactive waste that all our 
uranium becomes has not been solved. And until it is, I believe 
we should not generate more of this waste, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We see in France and Germany right now, the massive 
opposition to a shipment of high-level radioactive waste from 
France into Germany. In fact, the German government has had 
to bring out a police force that exceeds any police presence in 
Germany and any military presence since the Second World 
War to deal with opposition to these waste shipments. And that 
should be an indication to all members of this House that the 
problem of radioactive waste disposal has not been solved, and 
that there is deep concern in many countries in the world about 
the inability to dispose of high-level radioactive wastes and a 
great desire by many peoples in this world not to generate any 
more of it. 
 
Second, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hold my view that uranium 
mining should be phased out because I believe it is a 
well-established fact that many countries that we have sold 
uranium to have used that material for the creation and 
construction of nuclear weapons, Mr. Speaker, and for the 
testing of nuclear weapons. 
 
And as long as that continues, I believe our government should 
not be part of it. And I believe that the safeguards that 
governments nationally, that the federal government claims are 
in place to prevent this from happening are, in effect, hollow 
paper safeguards that are not lived out in reality. And that the 
inspection procedure to ensure those safeguards are actually 
carried out is woefully inadequate. 
 
And third, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hold this view because I have 
watched the United States not only use our uranium for atomic 
weapons purposes in the ’60s and . . . in the ’50s and the ’60s 
when we sold uranium to them exclusively for that purpose, but 
I have watched them use our uranium in the ’70s, ’80s and ’90s 
to expand their nuclear weapons program and to use depleted 
uranium in non-nuclear weapons for non-nuclear weapons 
purposes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you can look at the Iraq war and you can see the use of 
depleted uranium by the US government in that war, and you 
can see the danger and the health hazard that that has created 
not only for people in Iraq, but for soldiers in the United States 
and for Canadian soldiers, Mr. Speaker, who are now suffering 
the health hazards of the use of depleted uranium in bullets and 
for other military purposes. 
 



March 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 245 

 

And finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say I hold this view: 
that uranium mining should be gradually phased out because I 
do not believe that in the long term Saskatchewan residents will 
be able to easily deal with the very expensive problem that I 
believe long-lived radioactive tailings that our uranium mines 
will pose, Mr. Deputy Speaker — a disposal problem that, I 
think, a hundred years from now will rival the problem around 
high-level nuclear waste today. Because if you look at 2 or 
3,000 years into the future, you’ll see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
the radioactivity associated with those tailings will be greater 
than the radioactivity associated with the high-level nuclear 
waste as it decays. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say in closing, I want to comment 
on one other environmental issue, and that is the representative 
areas network. And it’s an initiative that I’m very proud of our 
government for undertaking. And as I mentioned earlier we’re 
seeing renewed commitments to that network this year, and it’s 
my hope that between now and the centennial year in 2005 we 
might be able to target another 5 million hectares to add to that 
network. I’m very proud that our government is advancing this 
network, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think it’s one of the 
environmental initiatives that all people in Saskatchewan are 
going to be proud of as we move towards our centenary. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I’ve made it clear in my 
remarks that there’s a great deal to be offered in the Throne 
Speech. It offers a very promising future for the people of this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in a wide range of initiatives — 
economic initiatives, initiatives in health care and education and 
post-secondary education, initiatives designed to combat 
poverty, reduce poverty, and protect our environment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I’m very proud to be in this government and 
I’m very proud to have our parliament led by our new Premier, 
the member for Riversdale. 
 
I will be supporting the main motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
I will be opposing the official opposition’s amendment. Thank 
you, very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to start 
off by offering my congratulations to the two new members of 
the legislature. In addition, I would like to congratulate the 
Speaker on his election and also you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 
the election. 
 
I would like to begin my reply to the Throne Speech by offering 
the most important comments on this government’s policy that 
any MLA can offer to this Assembly. They’re of course the 
concerns and ideas of the constituents I represent. I think we 
would all agree that there is no higher opinion than those from 
the people who elected us. They are the heart and soul of our 
democracy. 
 
I must thank all the residents of Arm River constituency for 
their overwhelming support that I’ve received from them during 
my present term as MLA. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, during this past year I’ve travelled to 

many of the towns and villages around Arm River constituency. 
These have taken for form of regular scheduled meetings where 
local residents can meet with me to voice their concerns and 
questions on a general or individual basis. 
 
Several meetings in Outlook, as well as meetings in the 
communities such as Riverhurst, Central Butte, Eyebrow, 
Marquis, Holdfast, Imperial to name a few, have resulted in the 
detailed consensus of just how well the people in my 
constituency believe the present government is doing to address 
their concerns. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I very much enjoyed 
meeting with my constituents and look forward to meeting more 
of them as the year progresses. 
 
What I found throughout this past year is the statement that the 
present government is simply not addressing concerns of people 
in rural Saskatchewan or the province as a whole. So it is, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, with this important data in mind, that I 
carefully look at what the present Throne Speech has to offer 
the residents of Arm River and the province of Saskatchewan. 
Not much. 
 
For all the residents of our province, the issue of health care 
ranks as one of the foremost concerns we should address. My 
office has, and continues to receive, a high volume of calls from 
people who are having trouble receiving the proper, efficient 
and effective health care that this government should be 
providing them. 
 
In each case they are facing at least one of the several problems 
that plague the health care industry in our province. Waiting 
lists for surgeries and testing, doctor and nursing staff 
shortages, hospital bed closures, and heavily burdened 
emergency rooms have meant that people are simply not getting 
the level of service needed to treat, in some cases, maybe a 
life-threatening medical condition. 
 
As the calls for better health care continue to mount, I find it 
extremely frustrating to be met with a wall of bureaucracy that 
does little to address the immediate needs of the people I’m 
trying to help. 
 
Many health care districts continue to run deficits despite the 
large administrative staffs in place supposedly to manage these 
funds efficiently. So far, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see no real 
direction of the government to address these ongoing health 
care problems. I would hope that this government has more to 
offer the people of Saskatchewan than has been indicated in the 
present Throne Speech. 
 
Indeed, there is public concern as to whether or not the issue of 
hiring additional nursing staff to take the pressure off our 
overworked nurses is even being considered by this government 
at all. 
 
Saskatchewan residents deserve to know if this critical area of 
our health care system will be a priority in the future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as most of you know, Arm River 
constituency represents a picture of the agriculture heartland of 
this province. Travelling along Highway 11 between Regina 
and Saskatoon, one can easily see that farming remains to be 
the backbone of the Saskatchewan economy and agriculture. 



246 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2001 

 

And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is in serious trouble. 
 
As the member for Kindersley has stated here earlier, we must 
help our farmers now. 
 
My office receives many calls about the rapidly deteriorating 
farm income situation. Each call is more urgent than the last 
one as we get closer to spring seeding. You know, I have 
spoken with many long-term farmers who have stately flatted 
[CORRECT] that this is the toughest spring they’ve ever faced. 
As a farmer myself, I can directly see how low commodity 
prices are adversely affecting the bottom line. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the agriculture crisis has been deepened 
for years and we’ve seen very little from this government in the 
way of support for farm families. Again we see very little 
substance in this Throne Speech. There clearly seems to be no 
commitment to the future of farming from the present 
government. 
 
All we’ve seen so far from the Agriculture minister is the 
present, permanent cover program, which provides a total of 
$750 per eligible farmer for seeding maximum of 50 acres back 
to hay land and pasture. 
 
The farmers are telling me — and as a farmer and as the Ag 
minister’s a farmer himself knows it — you need a minimum of 
160 acres. It should be, it should be a quarter section. I don’t 
know, maybe in his area there’s still . . . he’s still farming in 
30-, 40-acre chunks, but most farmers are farming in quarter 
sections. 
 
Farmers need a more concrete assistance so they can have a 
chance at getting the 2001 crop in the ground, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Calls for more money from Ottawa must be followed 
by action; future generations of farmers are at stake. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, any discussion about the future of our 
province must also include education. The education of our 
children and our young adults must remain a primary concern if 
there is to be a bright, new future for Saskatchewan. 
 
Yet look what’s happened so far. Tuition fees at our provincial 
universities have risen 6 to 14 per cent in 2000, in many cases 
forcing students to borrow more money to get themselves 
through college. 
 
A look at our rural public schools reveals an even more 
alarming trend. School closures in smaller rural centres seem to 
be the policy that this government is intent on following. 
 
Presently, my constituency, community of Marquis is actively 
fighting to keep its school from closing. The prospect of busing 
their small children to Moose Jaw is simply not acceptable to 
the families. There’s families around the Brownlee area have 
phoned me that have 6- and 7-year-old kids that could be facing 
a bus ride of an hour and a half, one way. And I support them in 
their determination to keep their school open. 
 
Also I call on the Premier who is from . . . originally from 
Moose Jaw. He knows where Marquis is. If he believes what 
was written in this Throne Speech about expanding and 
building new schools; providing additional schools in rural, 

urban, and northern communities; he better worry about just 
keeping the ones he’s got open — not worry about building new 
ones. 
 
He knows how close Marquis is to Moose Jaw, he knows it can 
grow. And it is growing. There’s a community right there that’s 
only a few miles out, that will be a bedroom community. 
 
The people have got an action committee going trying to keep 
their local school open. They’ve called the Rural Revitalization 
minister a month and a half ago. Never got a call back — not 
from a deputy minister, not from a secretary, receptionist, 
nothing. They called the Premier’s office — didn’t get a call 
back. So they called the Deputy Premier — didn’t get a call 
back. Them calls are made over a month and a half ago. 
 
These people . . . not just about the school, they’ve also got a 
plan to show that their town is growing, the businesses they’re 
going to attract. So where is the Rural Revitalization minister 
on this, at all. 
 
You know, the Rural Revitalization minister, you know . . . and 
what do we see in rural Saskatchewan? We see a desperate farm 
committee, school closures, hospital closures, poor roads, high 
taxes, young people headed west for work. You know where’s 
the revitalization and when will it arrive? So far the only thing 
I’ve heard so far, is that the office is going to be in Regina. 
What are they going to do? Work on bringing the rural people 
to Regina? I don’t know. 
 
The Premier . . . I can remember when this present Premier was 
running, I think it was even before he was elected as Premier, 
he said he would meet and talk to the people. Well the people in 
Marquis have tried to approach him to talk to him or to have 
somebody sent out to try and keep their school open — no 
interest. And then they wonder why you know the people in 
rural Saskatchewan have disdain for the present government. 
 
You know when they come out and they say . . . they talk about 
how they want to reconnect, how they want to work with rural 
Saskatchewan, and won’t even get a phone call back from many 
of the ministers’ offices. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have so many problems and 
issues to deal with here, I don’t even know where to begin. In 
light of this, one might think that rural residents do not hold 
much hope though for the future. But the prairie spirit that built 
our province is still very much alive and well despite this 
present government. 
 
You know the same determination that carried our forefathers 
through the Depression will carry our residents through these 
tough times. But to realize our bright future we must take steps 
now necessary to make that future happen. And this present 
government isn’t going to take them steps. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, over this past year I’ve done what I think 
is one of the most important aspects as my duty as MLA of Arm 
River constituency. I have listened not only to the concerns of 
my residents, but also their ideas for constructing solutions to 
the problems we face. 
 
These ideas are offered in the most realistic way. It is in . . . 



March 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 247 

 

they tell me it’s using what we can afford in the most efficient 
way possible, something this government does not do. This is 
the way that rural Saskatchewan residents have had to be in 
order to survive the many challenging rural living conditions 
that present . . . has been presented to them. This no-nonsense 
attitude is a base on what can be good long-term solutions to 
problems we face here in Saskatchewan, if only this present 
government would apply some of them. 
 
Residents of Arm River wanted to see health care dollars spent 
more effectively with an emphasis on patient services, rather 
than top heavy administration. They want more beds for 
long-term care and increased surgical time, as well as additional 
nursing and doctor staffing. It’s how excessive administration 
funding could be reallocated. Of course, this would result in 
shorter waiting lists for surgeries and tests, and hence a more 
compassionate, caring health care system. 
 
Businesses in Arm River want to see a better infrastructure in 
place so businesses can be conducted over a truly safe and 
sound highway system. They’re simply saying that this, in 
addition to a better tax climate for small business, would ensure 
that new jobs will be created for young people. 
 
There is very little evidence in the present Throne Speech that 
indicates that existing businesses and prospective new 
businesses have any new incentives in the future to do more 
business here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, farmers in Arm River want to see an 
effective and efficient long-term farm support program. 
Simplicity above all else is what farmers have requested. The 
ability to draw what is needed to cover expenses in tough years 
balanced by an equally efficient ability to contribute to the 
funds in the good years is suggested as the best way to help the 
agriculture industry. 
 
This strategy would keep the producers of food in our province 
in good shape, with minimal support from provincial or federal 
coffers. The stability gained by such a program could only 
benefit this province’s present and future generations of 
farmers. 
 
We must begin the process of assisting our producers now. We 
must help them in the direction of this kind of program so that 
some stability arrives quickly, therefore protecting our present 
farming community. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my residents have repeatedly stated that 
the education must be maintained and improved in our rural 
areas and in our college system. To watch our kids grow and 
develop, we must also look at how we can attract new 
businesses to our province, that will provide the opportunity for 
our future graduates. 
 
Saskatchewan families want to stay together, Mr. Speaker. Sons 
and daughters need the opportunity to use Saskatchewan 
education to build Saskatchewan, not to pack up and head west, 
leaving parents to wave goodbye. 
 
With this in mind, we must look at making a broader 
commitment to lowering taxes in Saskatchewan so businesses 
will be here for future generations to come. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, another concern remains at the fore on the 
. . . excuse me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, another issue is the issue 
of RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) staffing levels 
where, many in my communities, small numbers of RCMP 
officers simply cannot provide the level of security that rural 
residents deserve to have. 
 
I have a community of Hanley and Dundurn. They’re very 
concerned that they only have three RCMP officers right now. 
They are overworked and exposed to unnecessary dangers, 
having to travel alone while doing law enforcement. There was 
five there. There was two, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that were just 
on highway patrol, and they were taken and put in the city. 
They still patrol the local . . . the Highway No. 11, but they 
have to work out of the Saskatoon detachment. Why weren’t 
they left in the town of Hanley — there would have been two 
more families there. That’s another thing the Rural 
Revitalization minister can look at if she’s interested in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see so many positive strengths in the 
residents of Arm River. And in this province that seems a 
shame that this government doesn’t have the courage to step 
forward with a bold plan to build up our province. But on 
careful review of the present Throne Speech, I do not see any 
reason to believe that this present government has a will to take 
the action required to ensure our future. 
 
Now another one is the high-speed Internet, Mr. Speaker. I had 
a business just this morning from Outlook saying that he could 
hire two additional staff if he had high-speed Internet in 
Outlook. You see he can’t understand why it’s going to take six 
years for it to come in. I mean . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
And I guess that’s maybe fast for the way this government 
works, but not in any other province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan has a great potential, and 
the key to having new businesses developed in Saskatchewan is 
a friendlier tax climate from which new businesses can thrive 
and grow. This can be accomplished in part by not continuing 
the present government policy of government-funded business 
ventures. This policy has only resulted in lost revenue from 
fiascos such as SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) and Channel Lake. 
 
Now I hear Sask Valley Potato Corp is in the process of leasing 
more land. It just bought a bunch new line of potato equipment, 
so I guess we’re going to have some fun with that this summer. 
And you’d think this government would have learned from all 
the other business ventures not to get back in the potato 
industry, but I guess they just don’t learn from their past 
mistakes. 
 
The millions of dollars that were squandered here would’ve 
gone a long way towards rebuilding our highways and other 
infrastructure, making it more attractive for new businesses who 
are ensuring the safety of our provincial motorists 
transportation industry. 
 
(15:45) 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a renewed agriculture sector 
along with new business and industry development could bring 



248 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2001 

 

vast improvements to our economic development. Future 
generations could build on this success. People could return to 
Saskatchewan, the place they still call home. And new families 
could discover Saskatchewan as a new and exciting place to 
live and prosper. 
 
All that we need are the policies to make this happen. There 
will always be a few who say that it is too late for this or that to 
be done. However I believe in the old saying, it’s never too late 
to be what you might have been. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I cannot support the Speech 
from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Good afternoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
first of all, I would like to congratulate you, as Deputy Speaker, 
and the Speaker, to the positions that you’ve been elected to. 
And I’m sure you’ll have an interesting term serving in those 
positions and we will try and make it as rewarding for you as 
we possibly can. 
 
I would like, this afternoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to take the 
House through some of the things that are unique about my 
particular constituency, because it’s different in many ways 
from any other constituency in this particular province. 
 
Generally people tend to say we have two areas. We have urban 
seats and we have rural seats. And I guess in a simplified way 
that may be true, except my particular rural seat is substantially 
different from any of the other ones. 
 
I guess the first way that it’s different, if you looked on the 
map, you’d see it’s very, very small, tucked in between the 
North and the South Saskatchewan River, starting just a little bit 
north of Highway 312 and then running to a little bit south of 
the community of Martensville. So it’s the smallest rural 
constituency and keeps getting smaller every time there’s some 
redistribution. And I think that says a lot for the people of that 
particular constituency, the constituency of Rosthern. 
 
I’m very proud of those people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a very 
innovative group. We’ve had new businesses start there. We 
have all sorts of things happening in the area of agriculture that 
I’ll be going into in a minute or two. So it is a highly vibrant 
constituency. 
 
For those people that aren’t quite sure of some of the other 
communities that are in there, the community furthest west is 
the community of Dalmeny, which is situated on the 
Yellowhead Highway. 
 
The other communities, for the most part, are situated along 
Highway 11, Highway 12, and also Highway 312. Along 
Highway 11, we have Warman, Osler, Hague, and Rosthern, 
just following that stretch through that goes through from 
Prince Albert through to Saskatoon. And on Highway 12, we 
have Martensville, Hepburn, and then we have Waldheim on 
Highway 312. Those communities, as I said, are very vibrant. 
 
The other unique thing that exists in that, we have a number of 
small hamlets, probably half a dozen to a dozen small hamlets, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that have a population of oh, 50 to 200 
people, and adds a lot to the character of the whole 
constituency. 
 
Our school buses fortunately for the most part don’t have to 
travel very long to fill up the bus. Most school routes will start 
probably about 10 to 8, to 8 o’clock, and they’ll have the kids at 
school by about 20 to 9. And I think we’re very fortunate in that 
area when you hear some of the other concerns as my colleague 
just mentioned — students that have to be on the bus for an 
hour to an hour and a half and even two hours. 
 
Agriculture in the Rosthern constituency is exciting, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We probably have more dairies in that 
particular constituency than in any other area of the province. 
And it’s nice to be able to drive home from Saskatoon to 
Rosthern in the evening and see the lights of all those dairy 
farmers that are still on. Or if you come to Regina — I left on 
the other morning at about 5 o’clock in the morning — to see 
the lights all on in the dairy barns and the work was beginning 
for the day. 
 
So we have a lot of dairy in that particular area. Also a lot of 
beef, especially in the north part of the constituency — a 
number of quite large beef operators. 
 
We have a few large hog operators and we also have a large 
number of smaller hog operators. And those, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, pretty well rang my phone off the hook a while back 
when this NDP government decided, as they usually like to do, 
to pick winners and losers. Where they look at the economy and 
they say, well we’ll put some money into this and scrap all the 
rest of them. 
 
And what I had was quite a number of small operators phone up 
and say, if we would have had a smidgeon of the help of the 
millions this government wants to pour into a few large 
operators, we could have expanded very quickly. It would have 
taken a few weeks probably and they would have had the 
production up. But instead this government said no, we’re going 
to go ahead and support one or two large ones and forget about 
the little ones; let them go under. 
 
They’ve been able to survive, partly due to the misfortunes that 
are happening in Europe — the price of hogs is very good right 
now; may even get a little better — and they may be able to 
recoup some of the loses that they experienced not very many 
years ago. 
 
So hogs is a big part of that particular constituency and it’s nice 
to see those smaller operators that might have a couple of dozen 
or just a few hundred hogs as opposed to some of the many 
thousand operators that are out there. 
 
Also in that constituency, Mr. Speaker, and I think if you drive 
through there during the daytime you’ll see a lot of the barns 
used to house various birds from egg-laying projects to meat 
projects, that we have a lot of bird operators in that constituency 
and they are doing a very fine job of keeping that constituency 
alive and well. 
 
Along with that, we have the exotics, and I think every 
constituency rurally has those sorts of things. We have the 



March 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 249 

 

bison, the elk, the whitetail, and then a lot of smaller people 
operators that will have a few alpacas and those sorts of things, 
which makes it a good constituency to live in, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
If we look at strictly the grain operators, I think due to the 
blessings of this particular land, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
probably have more variety as far as crops that are seeded in the 
Rosthern constituency than any other place in the province. 
We’ll have the wheats, we’ll have the oilseeds, we’ll have 
lentils and peas, flax — almost everything that’s grown 
elsewhere in the province will be grown in this particular 
constituency. There’s a few exceptions where it may not be the 
best but it is very good. 
 
And we’ve had some excellent operators, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that have brought the Rosthern constituency to the forefront of 
Saskatchewan as far as farming’s concerned, not just 
Saskatchewan but the world. 
 
If you know your history, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ll be very 
aware of the work that was done by Dr. Seager Wheeler 
decades ago in new types of cultivation. And it’s exciting to go 
to that particular farm which is now a historic site, and when 
they have the seeding demonstrations and the harvesting 
demonstrations that go on there, to see that on Dr. Seager 
Wheeler’s land the topsoil is deeper than it is on the land 
immediately surrounding, just because of the methods that he 
used. 
 
And I think it says a lot for his innovation and for his foresight 
into new methods of farming. Those methods are now used in 
different forms with newer equipment all across this particular 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I would like to deal with some of the concerns that exist in that 
constituency. And when I look at the Speech from the Throne, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker — and I think we all heard it and we’ve 
read parts of it on numerous times — we find there is next to 
nothing in here. 
 
And I can see the members opposite going like this — they 
want me to miss this part. But I’m not going to miss this part, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because in this particular document there 
isn’t very much. It reminds me of the old bard who said it’s full 
of sound and fury signifying nothing. 
 
And that’s very much what this Throne Speech is about. It has 
page after page that goes on. And when you say what actually is 
there, it isn’t there. It’s not there. There’s nothing there. And 
when I look particularly, as I said I was going to do, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, at my constituency and how this applies 
specifically, I want to bring a few of those things to your 
attention. 
 
One of the things is roads. And I want to commend the people 
of my constituency for having kept this in the forefront of the 
Department of Highways and government officials over the 
years. They’ve done this in a very sophisticated and dignified 
manner where they’ve met as committees and as individuals. 
And I have to call them highway activists, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because they’ve been on this for a long time. 
 

There are people who have suffered family loss on that highway 
probably 15, 20 years ago. And they’ve kept that in the 
government’s mind ever since, saying something has to happen 
with these roads. And so I’m proud of the people and I’m proud 
of the way that they have kept this up. 
 
Now apparently Highway 312 is going to have some work done 
on it this year. We’re thankful for that. But that’s out of last 
year’s budget. This government’s going to want to take credit 
for it again, but I don’t think they can. Because that was a move 
that was made there. We have to look at what’s happening this 
year in the Rosthern constituency in highways. 
 
Highway 11 particularly, needs a lot of twinning. I mentioned 
this the other day in question period. As you drive down that 
road, and having lived and driven along that road for probably 
the last 25, 30 years, I know where the accidents took place. I 
know where the injuries took place. I know where deaths 
occurred. 
 
And as I drive down that particular highway, I will see the 
crosses for many of those, but not near all of them. There’s 
many places, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when I drive by, I know 
that I went by there shortly after there was a fatal accident; there 
is no cross there. 
 
That highway is a dangerous stretch due to the high traffic that 
is there. And I’m a little concerned again for this summertime, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because the traffic due to the holiday 
season, is going to increase dramatically. And that always puts 
into place traffic that flows at two different rates of speed very 
often, and brings about accidents and some very serious 
situations. So I think that needs to be looked at. 
 
I appreciate the fact that government’s doing some work on 
Highway No. 1 because there’s some dangerous areas there, and 
also on the Yellowhead. And I hope and I believe this one must 
be next on the list because of the high traffic count that is there. 
 
A number of things about schools. Generally in rural 
Saskatchewan there’s been school closures and longer bus trips. 
In the Rosthern constituency that is not the case, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. The only thing that’s been closed are the little 
one-room schoolhouses, and those are one of the things that 
probably had to be just due to the progress of time and 
educational needs for high school and those sorts of things. 
 
However, schools in that particular constituency, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, need some serious building programs, some serious 
building programs. They are crowded, absolutely crowded, and 
that’s unusual for a rural constituency but that is the case. 
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and this is again one of those 
unusual things with the Rosthern constituency — of those 
communities I mentioned, every single one of those 
communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is growing. The population 
is increasing, and with the increase in population, we need those 
schools to accommodate the children from the families that live 
there. So we have to take some action in that area. We need 
money for building. 
 
And while I’m on the school situation, I probably have to 
mention that some of the things that this government has done 
over the past has been utterly ludicrous and create some serious 



250 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2001 

 

problems. One of the one is where they sent around someone to 
check out how safe playground equipment was, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Well that playground equipment was perfectly safe. I know, I 
spent some 20 years in the educational system, many of those in 
that constituency where I also went to school. That equipment 
was safe. But they sent around someone who thought, well, I 
have to make my job look important so I have to go ahead and 
find all the problems I probably can. So at the end of the day he 
basically said all of this equipment is unsafe. 
 
One of the things, for example, we have to have a fairly deep 
base of a very special kind of sand and gravel. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to say you have to take out all your 
playground equipment just to have an inch more or less of sand 
is ludicrous, is ludicrous because all that happens with extra 
sand — and we have a member of Saskatoon looking a little 
frustrated about this — is all the neighbourhood dogs come in 
there and the cats and they use it. So all that you have is a 
fertilizer deposit on behalf of all the pets in the community. 
Serves no purpose whatsoever. 
 
However, there is no money from this government for that 
playground equipment. They’re going to go around and say this 
is suddenly unsafe and you have to take it out. They should say, 
okay that was our decision to take away your playground 
equipment; we will replace it. No, they have to do it on their 
own. 
 
I attended on Thursday night, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an art 
display and sale in the community of Hepburn, which is one of 
those communities that had their playground equipment deemed 
unsafe by this government, and deemed, by the way, is a word 
this government likes to use. When they have no rationale for 
something, they just deem it. They started that word and the use 
of that word with the tearing up of GRIP. And they’ve loved 
that term ever since, by deeming things to be a certain way. 
 
And that particular community of Hepburn is now raising its 
own funds for that playground equipment. The scary thing is 
they’re replacing good playground equipment with probably 
also good playground equipment. And when is this government 
going to send out another happy bureaucrat to say oh, but I’ve 
suddenly decided that you can’t use this material either. So it’s 
somewhat bizarre. 
 
(16:00) 
 
I mentioned earlier of some of the agricultural situations that 
are a problem in this constituency. One is the choosing of 
winners and losers by this NDP government. Where they say if 
you’re this size of operator, you’re a winner; if you’re this size, 
you’re a loser. The question isn’t whether it’s viable, the 
question isn’t is it good for the community, is it good for those 
families — that’s never asked. This government on its own, in 
its own little ivory tower, says here’s the winner and here’s the 
loser. 
 
We also need to discuss the situation of the seniors in my 
constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m very proud of the 
people in my constituency because they’ve been leaders over 
the years in taking care of their seniors. Whether you go to the 

community of Dalmeny, all the way through the other towns to 
the community of Rosthern, I look at the senior centres that 
they have there. They are excellent. And I’m proud of the 
people for the personal sacrifice they have put into it to provide 
that well for their seniors. 
 
The other thing that I need to say a few words about, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, are the RMs and the towns which have 
suffered the offloading, have suffered the offloading by this 
government, where from time to time they said okay, we’re just 
going to stop funding this. And they’ve had to raise their own 
taxes. 
 
The infrastructure in these communities is getting old. The 
communities are growing. So you can’t say — as you can say in 
some other parts — well, this government might say if we hang 
on for 20 more years we will have killed off this community 
and then we won’t need any infrastructure. 
 
Well in my constituency, all the communities are alive and 
doing well and will continue to do so, and therefore we need 
that money for that infrastructure for the towns and the RMs. 
 
What does this government need to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
And it’s not in this Throne Speech, it’s not in this Throne 
Speech. They need to lower taxes and get out of the way, to 
lower taxes and get out of the way. This particular government 
over the past half century has killed off business, has killed off 
opportunity. 
 
And right now they have that pained look on that side again. 
They don’t want to believe this. But all they need to do, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is check some of the textbooks that some of 
them used. Now I know they’re not in use any more but I’m 
sure they can find them in their basements. And they will find 
from their era, probably some of the population numbers from 
the ’20s and the ’30s, and they’ll find they’re very similar to 
what the numbers are today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well how come? They’ve been in charge of this province for 
almost all this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Why haven’t they 
been able to accomplish something else? 
 
I’ll give you a few examples, I’ll give you a few examples of 
why this has happened. Shortly after Tommy Douglas took 
over, we had the oil rigs leave this province. They left this 
province to find oil someplace else. Now in past years this 
government said, well so what, so what, the oil will stay there. 
Well it might stay there. 
 
But now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we look carefully, if we look 
carefully at what’s happening with oil royalties, wouldn’t it 
have been good if that NDP government and the Blakeney 
government and all those other NDP governments and CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) governments had 
said, come here and look for oil in Saskatchewan. We’ll be 
good to you if you are. Look at the oil royalties we’d pull in. 
 
They say that we have some sort of envy of Alberta. No, we 
don’t have envy of Alberta. We have disgust with the NDP 
government for what they’ve done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 251 

 

Mr. Heppner: — It’s this government and the NDP and the 
CCF that have single-handedly chased people out of this 
province. They’ve chased them out of this province because the 
jobs weren’t here. 
 
And when we bring up the idea that there are things different in 
Newfoundland, in Manitoba, and yes, in Alberta, it’s not 
because we’re envious but it’s because we’re hoping this 
government will learn from some other governments. 
 
These NDP, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are so convinced that only 
good ideas can appear in their heads — that’s not true. 
 
Let me give you one example to back that up, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Some time ago, three, four years ago, our Education 
department did some checking and they found out that our math 
students in Saskatchewan weren’t doing as well as in other 
provinces. And the minister at that time — who is still a 
minister but not of Education — looked at that particular 
situation and she said, well there’s only two or three reasons 
why our math students aren’t doing as well as they should. 
Maybe the students aren’t as smart as the rest of Canada — no, 
they’re probably smarter. Maybe the teachers aren’t as good — 
no, they’re as good and probably better. That didn’t leave her 
much. 
 
You can say, well I can blame the parents but the parents are as 
good or better as any other place in Canada. 
 
Left one thing, it left the curriculum. Maybe we need to change 
the curriculum. 
 
And you know here we have a perfect demonstration of how the 
NDP in Saskatchewan think. They can never look at another 
province and say, how did they become so successful and 
maybe we can just copy it. They always think they have to go 
ahead and huddle off in their own little ivory tower and if the 
socialists dream up a dream, that must be the perfect answer. 
 
What did the Minister of Education do? Well the Minister of 
Education said, we’re going to put up a big curriculum 
committee and we’re going to create our own new curriculum 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if anyone on this side would have 
been Minister of Education at that time, we’d have solved that 
problem in about two or three minutes. We’d have looked at the 
province that had the highest score. And keeping in mind, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that the kids across Canada are about the same 
and the teachers are about the same and the parents are about 
the same and if the curriculum is wrong, just get on your little 
old phone, dial up the province that has the best results and say, 
can we buy your curriculum. And next day, it’ll be there. Very 
easy to solve. 
 
Not a socialist government in Saskatchewan. They’re going to 
try and fix it themselves. They’ve tried to fix the system since 
the ’40s, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we’ve seen where it’s got us. 
They have chased thousands and millions of people, literally, 
out of this particular province. 
 
We were bigger than Alberta. We were bigger than Manitoba. 
We were doing better than any one of those were. This building, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a testament to that. It was built for a 
province that was supposed to be big and rich and wealthy with 
a lot of population. Never happened. Fifty years of this 
particular government has brought that about, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We can be . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 
thank the member from Rosthern for allowing me the 
opportunity to introduce a guest in the gallery. 
 
I see a friend of mine who has come in to obviously take a good 
look at what’s going on. I’m sure she’ll be interested in the 
comments here today. In the government gallery is Adelle 
Oglan, who is from the Battlefords, I think actually Battleford. 
There we go, I got it right this time. And I’d like all members to 
join with me in welcoming her here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Jones, seconded by Mr. McCall. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I mentioned earlier 
on, I’d spent a decade or two in education and one of the things, 
when you have an interruption, you always have to review 
because people will have forgotten. And I can tell this group in 
front of me really isn’t ahead of any other students I’ve ever 
had, so we may have to do that. 
 
But seriously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, the people in the 
Rosthern constituency love this province. They want to stay 
here. They want their children to stay here. But those 
opportunities aren’t there. 
 
The opportunities aren’t there because this government stands 
in the way with its taxation policy, its red tape policy, and its 
policy that they always think they know better than anyone else. 
That, Mr. Speaker, is why that many people have left. 
 
They don’t have any answers. They’ve been in charge of this 
province for half a century. Surely they should have been able 
to do something with it over that time. As I said, the people of 
this particular constituency love that. 
 
And now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hear a member from Regina 
over there trying to go back to the ’80s. Well, I remember very 
well . . . I was in Elphinstone knocking on doors not long ago, 
and I had a gentlemen come up with that same lame-brained 
argument. And I asked him, why in the world over all those 



252 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2001 

 

years they had elected the person who was the premier, Mr. 
Allan Blakeney, who himself was single-handedly responsible 
for $6.8 billion of 1970 dollar debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I don’t mind a bit of good debate, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but they better look at both sides of the issue 
when they do that. 
 
Now, having said that, what I would like to say again, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the people of my constituency love this 
province. They want to stay here; they want their children to 
stay here; they want their grandchildren to stay here. 
Saskatchewan can be a much better place than it has been for 
the last half century, thanks to those NDP and CCF people. It 
must be a much better place than it has been for the last half 
century, and it will be a much better place than it has been in 
the last half century when we get rid of the NDP across the aisle 
over there in the next provincial election, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — As I said earlier on, looking at this document, 
there’s nothing in that and for that reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I will not be supporting it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I should like to begin my remarks by congratulating 
you, sir, on your election to the Chair. I think the members of 
the Assembly will be extremely well served by a person of your 
wisdom, a person of your great experience in this Assembly, 
and a person who loves his House. So we welcome you, sir, and 
we look forward to working with you in the years to come. 
 
I also want to congratulate the Deputy Speaker on his election. 
Surely his must be one of the more difficult positions. He’s 
neither fish, neither fowl; he’s neither a Speaker nor a member, 
and he has to bridge both. It’s a very difficult job, and we wish 
him well in his demanding post. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should also like to congratulate the new member 
for Riversdale on his election, the new member for Elphinstone 
on his election, and I haven’t had the opportunity and I should 
also like to congratulate the member for Wood River on his 
election, Mr. Speaker. We welcome them to the House. 
Notwithstanding ideological differences between us, there is a 
real strength, a bond between us because we do share this 
unique experience, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess it’s obvious to say that I will be supporting 
the Throne Speech. I think that it’s an excellent speech. It’s an 
excellent blueprint for this government. Mr. Speaker, it is 
visionary. It proposes to connect us to the future, which is 
surely where we need to go as opposed to wallowing in the past. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I really, really liked this Throne Speech 
because for once the Throne Speech sets out some clear, 
specific, and I think achievable targets for all of society. I think 
that’s a positive step forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to go 
into the details of the Throne Speech but I was interested to 
read the reaction . . . and some of it’s predictable. From the 
opposition, it’s predictable. 
 
But I thought that surely the most interesting juxtaposition of 
comments about the Throne Speech had to come from the 
Review in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When I look at the front page of the Review, the Review said: 
 

Government summarize vision in Throne Speech. 
 
And then it says: 
 

Government pledges to pave more highways, help rural 
Saskatchewan, build more schools. 

 
And the other subheading is: 
 

MLA Bakken denounces plan. 
 
So there you have it. The government pledges to pave more 
highways, help rural Saskatchewan, build more schools, but it’s 
a plan that’s being denounced. What can you do, Mr. Speaker? 
You just, just can’t please all of the people all of the time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I guess it’s predictable that an opposition would react in 
those ways — no matter how good the plan, no matter how 
good the economy’s doing; always something to criticize, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as they look at us they will have seen changes on 
our side. I mean it’s no small thing — and I’m not sure of the 
last time — that a party changed government midstream so to 
speak. So they will have seen considerable changes. Your 
elevation that poses a change because the old Speaker is now 
sitting with us, Mr. Speaker — the former Speaker. Sorry about 
that. 
 
But from our vantage point, Mr. Speaker, you know what we 
see — the same old faces, the same old line up, the same old 
group, Mr. Speaker. No real changes at all, Mr. Speaker — the 
same old crew. Now that’s not without lack of effort on their 
part to try and get new members on their side. 
 
After all we did go through a couple of by-elections since we 
last sat here. A by-election — one in Regina Elphinstone, the 
other in Saskatoon Riversdale — and they tried to elect 
members from their side to this House from those two 
constituencies but it didn’t work out for them. And I think that’s 
a bit troubling for them, Mr. Speaker, because generally 
speaking by-elections present the very best opportunity that an 
opposition can have to elect people from constituencies that are 
traditionally not their constituencies in terms of representing 
those people. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And surely in terms of Elphinstone and Riversdale they had the 



March 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 253 

 

very best of conditions — the very best of conditions — to elect 
their members to their side of the House and they fell short, Mr. 
Speaker. They fell short. 
 
Now why did they fall short, Mr. Speaker? I think it’s because 
it was my discussion with people on doorsteps is that the people 
of Elphinstone and Riversdale, and generally speaking the 
people in urban areas, are very concerned about what it is that 
that group stands for, Mr. Speaker. They’re very concerned 
about what the Sask Party is saying. They’re very concerned 
about what it is that a Sask Party government would do to them 
in urban areas, Mr. Speaker — very concerned about that, very 
concerned about their policies. 
 
Now I know, and that all of the members on this side know, that 
the Sask Party has been trying very hard to reassure, reassure, 
reassure urban people that they are after all reasonable people 
with reasonable approaches to today’s problems, reasonable . . . 
Just by and large have a reasonable approach and that they’re 
reasonable people and try to reassure people that way. 
 
And we see it wherever we go, the committees and banquets 
and all those things. They all come out and try to raise the flag 
as it were and to show how reasonable they are. It has a way, I 
guess, of taking the tension away from some of the policies that 
they stand for. But I’m not sure that it’s working, Mr. Speaker, 
because for every step forward they take they take two steps 
back. 
 
What do I mean by that? Well they go to the banquets and 
they’re there to show that they’re regular folks and they put on 
the white shirts and shaving lotion to go to the banquets and 
show that they’re just regular folks and all those kinds of things. 
But then they have one of their members stand up in the House 
. . . one of their members stand up in the House and say to the 
member for Regina Northeast, well the member for Regina 
Northeast represents a rotten borough and that the people in that 
constituency must be rotten because they keep electing New 
Democrats to the legislature, Mr. Speaker. One step forward, 
two steps back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that in the history of Saskatchewan 
that we have ever elected someone who was someone other than 
a CCF-NDP member to the constituency of Moosomin, I 
believe. But I would never on that account — never on that 
account — call into question, Mr. Speaker, the people of that 
constituency for exercising their right to elect who they want to 
this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: —I would never, never, Mr. Speaker, 
say that those people were rotten for electing someone whose 
political ideology I did not agree with. And the member for 
Souris-Cannington did that, Mr. Speaker, in this Legislative 
Assembly, and he still hasn’t apologized for that. 
 
So I say one step forward, two steps back, Mr. Speaker. They 
have to clean up their act if they want to attract urban votes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to . . . I’d like to, I’d like to talk for a 
minute, Mr. Speaker . . . 

The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I should . . . I’d like to talk for a minute about an issue 
that receives a great deal of attention in this House and has 
received a great deal of attention outside of the House. It 
receives attention on an ongoing basis from the Leader of the 
Opposition, their members, certainly in the by-election it was 
raised, and I’m talking of the issue of taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the opposition, the opposition is not the only 
group that has had something to say about taxes. You will 
know, Mr. Speaker, that . . . you will know, Mr. Speaker, that 
the government undertakes polling on a regular basis, polling 
that is shared with the people of Saskatchewan because those 
polling results are released to them, which is in stark contrast to 
the situation we found ourselves in in the 1980s in 
Saskatchewan, but we do release this polling information, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And in these polls, and which are also accessible to the 
opposition, the people of Saskatchewan, through those polls, are 
also asked questions about things such as taxation. 
 
And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that in April 2000, April 
2000, some polling was done. And the question was put, the 
provincial government should have frozen spending on services 
like health care and education and should have cut taxes more 
than they did. And people were asked, well do you agree or 
disagree, or are you unsure? 
 
So the question was, should the government have frozen 
spending on services like health care and education in order to 
cut taxes more? And the answer is, Mr. Speaker, the majority 
— 69 per cent of residents — disagree the provincial 
government should have frozen spending on services like health 
care and education and should have cut taxes more than they 
did. 
 
Well just to make sure, just to make sure what it is that people 
were saying to the pollsters, the question was flipped around. 
Then the question was, the provincial government should have 
left taxes at their current levels and should have spent more on 
services like health care, education, and roads. And then people 
were asked, do you agree or do you disagree? And in this case 
the majority — 70 per cent — of residents agree the provincial 
government should have left taxes at their current levels and 
should have spent more on services like health care, education, 
and roads. 
 
Now I might . . . People are asking these omnibus questions. 
Generally the second question they’re asked is: what do you 
think is the most important issue facing the province of 
Saskatchewan today? We get a range of answers. In April of 
2000, 16 per cent said that taxes were the most important issue 
facing the province of Saskatchewan today. And that’s 
understandable because there was a great deal of discussion in 
the wake of the budget that year about taxes and there was an 
extension of the sales tax to cover more items in Saskatchewan. 
So it’s understandable that 16 per cent would be concerned — 
but only 16 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Well by October that number 
was down to 14 per cent. Oh, in June before that, the number 
was down to 10 per cent. 



254 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2001 

 

So that given the fact that this party opposite, Mr. Speaker, has 
tried their very best to make taxes the number one issue — the 
number one issue of concern to the people of Saskatchewan — 
they failed and they failed miserably, Mr. Speaker, in doing 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know hardly a day goes by without them 
trying to attempt to raise it, you know — the Leader of the 
Opposition: we need lower taxes, we’ve got to have lower 
taxes, the member for Swift Current, here again today on the 
radio, the Leader of the Opposition. The opposition is calling 
for major tax cuts. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that flies in the face of public 
opinion in Saskatchewan. And then those members ask, why is 
it that we can’t get elected in urban Saskatchewan. You 
shouldn’t fly in the face of public opinion the way that you do, 
Mr. Speaker, by suggesting that you can have tax cuts, tax cuts, 
tax cuts, and only tax cuts as a means of growing the economy, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year the ink was barely dry on the budget, 
barely dry on the budget and the government’s financial plan 
for the year, including a plan for great tax cuts in Saskatchewan, 
they started saying well now we’ve got to cut the gasoline tax. 
And it just never ends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan economy has been growing — 
contrary to what they say — has been growing. And it’s been 
very healthy growth during the course of the last 10 years. 
When the economy grows, Mr. Speaker, it leads to increased 
revenues for the government. We have always taken the 
position that as the revenues increase because of the growth in 
the economy, that those additional revenues should go to lower 
taxes, improved services, and programs for the people of 
Saskatchewan, and there are services that need to be improved, 
contrary to what they say, and to lower debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We strive to seek balance. What is their approach? Their 
approach is that if you just simply cut the taxes, cut, cut, cut, cut 
the taxes, you’ll in this way so stimulate the economy, you’ll 
have such great economic growth, that that economic growth 
will then lead to increased revenues. 
 
Well where have we heard that one before, Mr. Speaker. We 
certainly heard it from Ronald Reagan in the United States in 
the 1980s, and people said then, it’s a fine theory but it’s a 
dubious, dubious thing for government to do, Mr. Speaker. 
Because very often what it does, it leads to deficits. It leads to 
deficits for government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To base your whole economic development strategy on this 
dubious theory reminds too many, Mr. Speaker, in our urban 
areas, of the very disastrous experience they had with the 
Devine government in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. It is more than 
disastrous. It was massively destabilizing for the economy in 
Saskatchewan, and put us into a situation that took us years to 
recover from, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the so-called voodoo economics that the Minister of 
Finance was talking about in question period, Mr. Speaker. Is 
there any wonder that Saskatchewan people and urban people 
— where the economy is working very well these days, Mr. 

Speaker — are nervous about their slavish adherence to a very 
dubious economic strategy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the few minutes that are remaining to me, I just 
want to, in a very similar way, just briefly talk about 
population. I think the member prior to me who spoke — again 
as many of the members did — talk about the loss of population 
in Saskatchewan. And I think that’s a serious issue and one that 
the government should be dealing with. And the government 
needs to promote economic growth, although I would point out 
I think the TD (Toronto Dominion) Bank today, said again, that 
Saskatchewan’s economic growth will lead the national average 
next year, so that we are projected to be doing reasonably well, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we should be concerned and we should continue to promote 
economic development, Mr. Speaker. But, you know, when 
they talk they remind me of another member, a former member 
of this House, Mr. Speaker, who used to make emotional 
speeches about keeping Saskatchewan children at home through 
economic development, and who highlighted a lack of 
economic activity in the province with speeches about 
Saskatchewan grandmothers who saw their grandchildren only 
at Christmas because their parents had moved away from the 
province to find jobs. 
 
Who said that, Mr. Speaker? That would be one Mr. Grant 
Devine, the former member for Estevan, Mr. Speaker, who said 
these things, who was so disturbed about the increase in 
population that was taking place under an NDP government. He 
said it was not enough; they could do better. 
 
We all know what happened. Population loss, population loss in 
the late 1980s in Saskatchewan reached crisis epidemic 
proportions, Mr. Speaker, just as it did in the latter part of the 
1960s under the Liberal right-wing Ross Thatcher government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so when they say we want to talk about population, there 
are many, many urban people who all of a sudden get very, very 
nervous when they start talking about population, Mr. Speaker. 
They say we’re going, we’re going to have . . . we have the 
solution for that. But the solutions in the past have proven to be 
disastrous because they have shown that they’re incapable, 
incapable of managing the economy. 
 
They come to government with these extreme notions about 
how to manage the economy. They’re prepared to take all kinds 
of great risks, Mr. Speaker, and in the past have driven our 
economy into the ground, Mr. Speaker. We cannot in 
Saskatchewan afford any of that kind of destabilizing approach 
to government as we’ve seen in the past. And that is why urban 
people are very, very nervous, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
population. 
 
I mean the history of Saskatchewan is that there was 
tremendous population growth up until 1936 and then a sharp 
drop until 1951. And from ’51 it increased right up until 1969 
when after a number of years of Liberal Party government, we 
saw a decline again, Mr. Speaker, only to see an NDP 
government bring it back up again. And Mr. Devine continued 
that until the latter part of his term, then it dropped off sharply 
again, Mr. Speaker. 



March 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 255 

 

That is the pattern, that is the history in Saskatchewan. We will 
continue to be challenged in Saskatchewan. But people in 
Saskatchewan are also very aware that given the opportunity 
that party opposite in government will make a far mess . . . 
worse mess of things than they ever want to see in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to make a few 
remarks. I look forward to carrying on this debate when we 
discuss the budget in the days ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I must inform the Assembly that under 
rule 14(4), it is my duty at this time to interrupt debate and put 
all questions necessary to dispose of the main motion. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Regina Sherwood: 
 

That this address, the said address be engrossed and 
presented to Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such 
members of the Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 
 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Ways and Means 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Regina Sherwood: 
 

That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 92, hereby appoints 
the Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be 
granted to Her Majesty, and to consider ways and means of 
raising the supply. 
 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
to move a motion appointing the Deputy Chair of Committees. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Rural Revitalization: 
 

That Mr. Graham Addley, member for the constituency of 
Saskatoon Sutherland, be appointed to preside as Deputy 

Chair of Committees of this Assembly. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:36. 
 
 


